The youth music initiative plays a vital role in creating career opportunities for Scotland’s talent of the future as well as the chance for Scotland’s young people—some of whom would not otherwise have had the opportunity—to participate in music making. We are already delivering a number of projects in North Lanarkshire that offer new ways for young people to engage in music making. The projects include Kodály choral instruction for all primary 5 pupils and an additional 10 specially tailored projects that allow young people to develop musical skills and experiences.

I, too, have heard talented young musicians from North Lanarkshire. Creative Scotland is about to begin a review of the operation of the successful youth music initiative. The terms of reference could include the identification of gaps in provision and knowledge of the scheme. That would allow us not only to build on the strengths of the programme but to consider changes to reach groups that perhaps have not been able to make the best use of YMI to date.

The Scottish Government has considered information from a range of sources. As “Scotland’s Future” makes clear, an independent Scotland will establish an overseas network of 70 to 90 international offices, building on Scotland’s existing capacity and our share of the UK’s international assets.

The member might not be aware of this, but the Permanent Under Secretary to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Sir Simon Fraser, told the Foreign Affairs Committee on 6 November 2012 that the UK is already co-located with Canada, Germany and France in different areas, as well as with New Zealand and Estonia. Therefore, the practical experience perhaps outweighs such legal opinions. International law is neither clear nor settled on the issue. As Professors James Crawford and Alan Boyle—the commissioned and paid for UK Government advisers in this area—said, in practice Scotland’s “status in international law and that of the remainder of the UK ... would depend on what arrangements the two governments made between themselves before and after the referendum, and on whether other states accepted their positions on such matters as continuity and succession.” My examples of the co-locations that already exist and that are expanding for the UK and other countries give a practical sense of what is possible, what is practical and what is already happening.

As our “Scotland’s Future” document makes clear, an independent Scotland will establish an overseas network of 70 to 90 international offices, building on Scotland’s existing capacity and our share of the United Kingdom’s international assets. According to figures that were published in January 2012, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office estate was valued at an estimated £1.87 billion, which included owned office buildings, residences, staff residential accommodation and other ancillary accommodation.

Iain Gray acknowledges in his question that agreement on co-operation with the UK Government would be the responsible way to move forward, and that would be perfectly possible. The “Scotland’s Future” document states that the estimated running costs for a network of offices are in the region of £90 million to £120 million. Given our population share, that is perfectly achievable. Does Iain Gray agree that, in the event of a yes vote, the best thing that the UK Government can do between September 2014 and March 2016 is ensure that paragraph 30 of the Edinburgh agreement is carried out and that we act to best effect in the mutual self-interest of the people of Scotland and in the rest of the UK? We would most definitely ensure that we have such representation. We already have representation in a number of countries, and it is clearly possible—as I said in my previous answer—for agreement to take place rationally and responsibly. Indeed, the people of Scotland would expect no less.

As Jamie McGrigor will be aware, the British Council works with a number of organisations, and we have a very productive relationship with it. As the British Council is established by trust, it is part of the responsibility and assets that we have and would continue to share, as we have set out. I was delighted to meet the British Council only recently, when we celebrated the Celtic Connections festival with the Rajasthani musicians who came to Scotland. It is small-minded to think that the British Council will somehow not want to work or continue to work with an independent Scotland as set out in “Scotland’s Future”.

Ireland, which is expanding its foreign representation now, is an example to be commended. Countries such as Ireland, Denmark, Finland, Slovakia and New Zealand usually have between 50 and 100 overseas missions and between 1,100 and 2,700 staff. I note Ireland’s proposals for greater representation, and there is no reason that an independent Scotland could not carry out its responsibilities as successfully as those other small independent nation states do.

The Scottish Government encourages partnership working in many different areas with a wide range of organisations to promote our historic locations and events. Nationally, Historic Scotland regularly works with public agencies such as VisitScotland and EventScotland and with national charities such as the National Trust for Scotland. It also works with local groups such as the heritage steering group in Linlithgow, the Arbroath abbey action group in Graeme Dey’s constituency and the Wemyss caves working group in Fife. In addition, the first ever historic environment strategy will set out collaborative ways of promoting partnership working as we move forward.

I was pleased to visit Arbroath in the summer at the invitation of the member. At that time, I had the opportunity to engage with the local action group and hear about its initial plans. I am pleased to hear how much that work has progressed in recent months. A lot of that has to do with co-operation between volunteers in the local community and national agencies such as Historic Scotland. That early preparation for the 700th anniversary, which is bringing everyone together, bodes well for the future.

The Scottish Government and its partner agencies already actively promote inward investment in the screen sector. In particular, Creative Scotland’s locations service has helped films such as “The Railway Man”, “Sunshine on Leith” and “Skyfall” to shoot on location in Scotland. The “Outlander” television series, which is currently filming in Cumbernauld, involves Scotland’s biggest-ever inward investment in screen production. In 2012-13, the Scottish public sector invested some £21 million in film and television, including almost £12 million from the Scottish Government to MG Alba and almost £8 million from Creative Scotland to the sector generally. With independence, however, we could do still more. Chapter 9 of “Scotland’s Future” sets out our intention to maintain existing fiscal incentives for screen production and to look at ways to encourage further development in the sector.

The Scottish Government is considering the report, which was commissioned by Scottish Enterprise and the film studio delivery group, into infrastructure—in particular, film studios—which has been raised repeatedly in the Parliament. However, we also need to look at other aspects. For example, Ireland gives more generous tax reliefs than are available in the United Kingdom, and it devotes 7 per cent of licence-fee resources to aid independent production. Interestingly, the Irish Government did that during a period of recession. There are infrastructure and tax measures that we could use with independence and full fiscal powers.

The Scottish Government recognises the importance of public libraries in Scotland. We work with the Scottish Library and Information Council to support libraries and to promote national libraries day 2014 in Scotland. I encourage all MSPs and communities to visit their local libraries and to attend events that are being held to mark national libraries day on 8 February.

Yes. I commend Midlothian Council on its five-day series of events to promote libraries. The services that libraries provide do not just relate to literacy and book lending. Indeed, libraries and the services that they provide lie at the heart of our communities. It is an opportunity to celebrate our libraries and to demonstrate their importance to our society.

Scotland has five world heritage sites of outstanding universal value. Four of them are designated for their cultural heritage value: the Antonine wall, heart of neolithic Orkney, New Lanark, and the old and new towns of Edinburgh. The fifth site—St Kilda—is one of the few world heritage sites to hold dual status for both its natural and cultural qualities. We hope that the Forth bridge will become the sixth Scottish world heritage site in 2015. The bridge is the current United Kingdom nomination for inscription and the dossier was submitted to UNESCO at the end of January.

The bridge’s famous beauty is already well known. In the preparations for the nomination last year, we invited the economist and world heritage expert James Rebanks to assess the potential impact on tourism. He concluded that world heritage status could significantly boost tourism and other local and national businesses. There are no baseline figures with which to compare it, but one of the reasons why the nomination was made by a consortium of partners, including VisitScotland and local business interests such as Queensferry Ambition, was to ensure that the tourism potential is recognised.

I thank members for their contributions to this important debate. There is worldwide recognition of Scotland’s commitment to democracy, the rule of law and fundamental human rights, all of which I would like to bring to bear on the debate. Scotland uses its international engagement as an opportunity to help increase respect for and understanding of human rights worldwide, not through lecturing but through pragmatic discussion with our international partners about how we can support their progress towards being states that respect and progressively realise human rights. I note that there are widespread and long-standing concerns in Tibet about freedom of religion, linguistic rights, access to employment and the right to water, all of which were ably set out by Maureen Watt. Let me be clear that the Scottish Government condemns human rights abuses, wherever they occur. Upholding basic civil and political rights is a core duty of the state, and individuals must be free to celebrate their cultural traditions and demonstrate their faith in any society. The Scottish Government is committed to engaging with the Chinese Government on human rights as part of our overall engagement. It is only through engaging with China that we can expand our relationship to bring benefits to both countries, to help bring positive change to human rights throughout China and hope to solve global challenges such as climate change and poverty. China’s five-year plan outlines ambitious plans for balanced and sustainable economic growth, promoting social equality, environmental protection and energy conservation. In developing the Scottish Government’s China strategy, I was keen that it should complement China’s plan for growth. That is why respect for human rights and the rule of law is one of the four guiding principles that we set out upfront in our China strategy, and those principles will underpin all Scotland’s dealings with China. Scotland is justly proud of its reputation for ethical business practices and knows that human rights and the rule of law are key to long-term economic success and social stability. Through adherence to the guiding principles of the China strategy, we will continue to support China’s process of modernisation and internal reform and the need to balance the demands of economic development with social justice. I was greatly saddened by the disturbing reports that at least 127 Tibetans have self-immolated, often fatally, since February 2009. Self-immolation is a dramatic and desperate gesture and we urge the Chinese Government to work with local monasteries and communities to resolve the underlying grievances that have led to these self-immolations. We call upon all parties to engage in substantive dialogue to address Tibetan concerns and relieve tension. When the Scottish Government has had human rights concerns we have raised them and will continue to do so. When the First Minister was in Beijing in 2011, he spoke in the Communist Party Central School about Adam Smith and the lessons he has to teach us about modern issues such as climate justice. We have taken practical action to support that agenda in the form of a £3 million climate justice fund and we will continue to demonstrate leadership in championing climate justice at home and abroad. On his most recent visit, the First Minister again used the philosophies of Adam Smith to argue that social progress must accompany economic progress. In a speech to the prestigious Tsinghua University, the First Minister said that the balance between the two approaches in Smith’s “The Wealth of Nations” and “The Theory of Moral Sentiments” demonstrates that the social cohesion brought about by a fairer society is crucial to building sustainable and balanced economic recovery. Maureen Watt made an important point about UNESCO heritage and I will consider what can be done in that regard. When I visited China as cabinet secretary for education, I raised the Scottish Government’s concerns about freedom of religious expression, transparency and access, and the situation in Tibet, during a meeting with China’s vice-minister of education. I did so again in my current role during a meeting with the Chinese consul general in May 2012. Part of the conversation about human rights takes place between states, but engaging with the international human rights system is also a key part of the process for any modern, responsible nation. Scotland has welcomed this scrutiny through the UN’s universal periodic review of the UK’s observance and implementation of international human rights standards in 2012. Through that process, the members of the UNHRC noted and welcomed our strengths as well as identifying areas in which there might be further progress. China has also recently gone through that very process. The fact that China submits itself to that form of international scrutiny is encouraging and I hope that it will lead to positive developments in China, as it takes on board and seeks to implement the recommendations it has accepted. All countries across the world are grappling with how they might ensure better protection of, respect for and realisation of human rights. Scotland is no different. Members will recall the launch of and debate on “Scotland’s National Action Plan for Human Rights”—our first—on 10 December, international human rights day. A key outcome of the plan is a better world, which will be delivered by ensuring that Scotland “gives effect to its international obligations at home and” abroad, and that we “respect, protect and fulfill human rights in our international action.” In Scotland and overseas the Scottish people do things differently—not merely because we can, but because we want to. We are a modern, responsible nation preparing to join the global community of nations as an equal member. The Scottish Government is committed to creating a Scotland that realises human rights and plays its part to create a world in which the human rights of all are protected, respected and realised. We want to have a different conversation here. Scotland has a good story to tell and best practice to share with the rest of the world—just as we have much to learn from others. Meeting closed at 19:05.

I last met Historic Scotland officials on Monday 20 January, on the very top of the Forth rail bridge, as we marked the submission that week of the dossier supporting the nomination of the iconic Forth bridge as a world heritage site. The Forth bridge is renowned throughout the world, and I am sure that members across the chamber will want to express support for the nomination.

I have confidence in Historic Scotland’s procedures; indeed, they are very robust. Every application is different; some, for example, relate to different types of sites. On Culloden, I reassure the member that, for the first time, we have an inventory of battle sites. We are consulting on draft legislative proposals on planning. We will ensure that under the draft proposals, which are under consideration by the Minister for Local Government and Planning, planning authorities “protect, conserve and, where appropriate, seek to enhance the key characteristics and special qualities of sites on the Inventory of Historic Battlefields.” The Hyndford situation has been called in to ministers, so I am sure that the member will understand that I cannot discuss the matter at this time.

I, too, congratulate Joan McAlpine on an excellent debate, which I was keen to speak in. I am not sure whether members are aware of this but, at the time of Burns, the landlady in the Globe inn was a certain Mrs Hyslop. Although I recently visited the Rovers Return, I have no desire for a career change at this point. I congratulate all those who are involved in the Big Burns Supper festival, including the thousands of people from local communities who have worked so hard with partners on the organising team to help build the momentum towards the festival and to make it such a huge success. I have been lucky enough to attend the festival on two occasions. The spectacular and moving light and sound lantern performance over the River Nith will stay with me for ever. What a celebration of Dumfries and its history and heritage it is. In particular, it connects thousands of young people with their community. The programme is world class. I am delighted that it has gone from strength to strength and is attracting global recognition and drawing enthusiastic audiences from near and far. As Joan McAlpine set out, the Big Burns Supper festival takes a fresh and innovative look at what celebrating Burns night is all about—music, family, food, friends, laughter and fun. Its success is evidenced by the fact that audiences have risen to nearly 20,000. Dumfries, which is the perfect setting for the festival, should be proud of an event that has also reached out to many local people through a number of related projects that are aimed at developing communities. As we heard, for the festival’s third year, the diverse programme includes Big Country, Mull Historical Society, Robert Softley and Fred MacAulay. Elaine Murray set out the range of art forms that are now part and parcel of the festival. There are other inspirational acts and cultural activities, all celebrating the life and works of Robert Burns. For younger Burns fans, I am pleased that the 2014 festival again offers a fantastic range of attractions for a family audience, including a children’s Burns supper, a tea dance and a carnival. The Big Burns Supper festival offers something for everyone and is a great example of how partners and communities from across the country are coming together to celebrate Burns and to harness the potential of his legacy to boost culture and creativity. I emphasise the continued significance of Robert Burns to Scotland, as one of our most important cultural sons, and encourage everyone here to learn about and celebrate his life and works as we bring to a close our 2013-14 winter festivals programme, and particularly as we celebrate our second year of homecoming. Events that are taking place as part of Scotland’s winter festivals programme to celebrate Burns night include “Burns: Life of a Poet” in Inverness and, in South Ayrshire, the Robert Burns humanitarian award, which is now in its 13th year. This year, we have invested £350,000 in the winter festivals to deliver 19 events across Scotland, which will give visitors a real taste of our nation’s distinct traditions and contemporary culture. A vibrant winter event programme brings together people from all over the world to celebrate Scotland’s modern culture and traditions through the best of Scottish music, arts, food and drink, innovation and entertainment. St Andrew’s day, hogmanay and Burns night all make a significant contribution to our culture and economy. Of course, the celebrations are not restricted to Scotland’s shores. It is estimated that around 50 million people across the globe can claim Scottish ancestry, and many of those Scots and Scots at heart, wherever they are in the world, will celebrate with Scottish traditions on St Andrew’s day, hogmanay and Burns night, from Beijing to Rio and Toronto to Brisbane, to name only a few places. I recommend that Hanzala Malik looks at the Scottish Government’s website, where we demonstrate how we are linking up with communities and trying to connect communities across the globe in a celebration of Burns. Why do Scots and people across the world continue to celebrate Burns in the 21st century? Robert Burns’s poetry, songs, sentiment and commentary on the condition of humankind touched people the world over, and continue to do so. I was interested to hear Chic Brodie speak about Burns in the present tense, because I think that Burns is still of us, which is why we automatically talk about him being with us in the present tense. The messages and observations in his poetry and songs are as relevant and heartfelt today as they were 250 years ago. Burns was a humanitarian and an internationalist who spoke of the universal condition. “A Man’s a Man for a’ that” resounded through the chamber at the opening of the Scottish Parliament as an anthem precisely because of that. Robert Burns embraced the nation’s unique landscape, culture and people and, importantly, the Scots language, in order to celebrate Scotland in poem and song. That is why, all over the world, Scots, people of Scots heritage and those who simply share an affinity with Burns and his homeland, come together, year after year, to honour this great man with family and friends. Alex Fergusson reflected on that in his speech. On Saturday night, I was at Camelon bowling club, and the warmth, the wit and the performances were worthy of the bard, in the spirit of which Alex Fergusson spoke. The story, poetry, art and heritage of Robert Burns is part of the attraction of Scotland, and year after year visitors flock to find out more about him. His emotional response to old Scotia, his homeland, has particular resonance this year because hogmanay 2013 also marked the start of the second year of homecoming—a year of celebrations in which we will welcome the world to our great country and celebrate the very best of Scotland’s food and drink, our unique active and natural resources and our world-renowned creativity, culture and ancestral heritage. This year, Scotland plays host to the Ryder cup, the Commonwealth games and the MTV Europe awards, which will be broadcast to nearly 700 million households through MTV’s global network of channels. Homecoming Scotland 2014 will extend the benefits and opportunities that are offered by those major events through a year-long co-ordinated programme of events that will celebrate our assets. For example, on Saturday, to celebrate homecoming Scotland, we will see the signature Celtic Connections festival hosting one of its biggest-ever concerts—Celtic Connections international Burns night, when a stellar line-up of home-grown talent and international acts will take to the stage at the Hydro in Glasgow. With such a varied and world-class events programme in 2014, alongside our existing tourism credentials, it is no surprise that Lonely Planet’s best in travel list for 2014 names Scotland as the third-best country to visit this year, citing all the events that I have mentioned. I have no doubt that 2014 will be an extraordinary year for Scotland, boosted by exceptional events such as the Big Burns Supper festival. As Burns himself wrote, “From scenes like these, old Scotia’s grandeur springs, That makes her lov’d at home, rever’d abroad”. The Big Burns Supper festival does it 21st century style, and what style it does it with. Meeting closed at 18:19.

In my role as Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs, I want to offer some final thoughts on the provisions of the Burrell Collection (Lending and Borrowing) (Scotland) Bill and the impact that it will have on the Burrell collection. As members will be aware, the Burrell collection is one of the most prominent and varied collections in Scotland. It is, without doubt, a collection of international significance in terms of the history of art and antiquities. The 9,000-strong collection was assembled by Sir William Burrell as he travelled widely around the world. As we have heard, in 1944 he gifted his remarkable collection to the city of Glasgow, along with the funds to erect a new building within which to house his treasures. Now, nearly 70 years after his bequest, the bill aims to secure the long-term sustainability of that building and to look at new ways of promoting his collections to a wider audience, thereby allowing more people to learn about and enjoy them than ever before. The bill has been considered by the committee and by Parliament in the preliminary stage debate. Throughout much of the bill’s consideration, it has been clear to me that the main concerns have been the very sensitive issue of overturning some of the express wishes of Sir William Burrell; what will happen to the items that he so carefully collected—some of which are fragile and delicate, and many of which are priceless and irreplaceable; and the increased risk of harm to those items if they are allowed to be loaned internationally to other institutions. The committee did a thorough job of considering those sensitive issues as part of its analysis of the evidence. As well as weighing up the risks and opportunities that the bill offers, the members of the committee looked back at Sir William Burrell’s lifetime and asked themselves what he might have done were he faced with the same questions today, in a world in which science and technology are markedly different to what he knew. The committee’s analysis led it to conclude that Burrell was a lender who wanted to share his collection with the people, not just in Glasgow and Scotland, but further afield through loans within Great Britain. The preliminary debate did not find any fault with the committee’s acceptance of the bill’s proposals, and we are now at the final stage of the bill’s passage. This Government believes that cultural participation can be increased by maximising the number and range of people who see collections. Encouraging visits and the enjoyment of museums is a key aim of “Going Further: The National Strategy for Scotland’s Museums and Galleries”; allowing lending from the Burrell collection is consistent with that aim. Lending from the collection and borrowing by the collection could be done only in agreement with the Burrell trustees on a case-by-case basis. A tour and lending of individual items would bring the collection to the attention of an international audience and would enable people from all over the world to see and appreciate it, thus raising its profile and putting Glasgow—and Scotland—on an international stage. This year of homecoming, when the eyes of the world are on Scotland for the Commonwealth games and the Ryder cup, is an opportunity for all Scotland’s cultural institutions to build on their already impressive international image. The proposed ability of the Burrell collection to lend and tour is a great example of that. The bill will enable the collection to promote Scotland and will enable awareness of the collection to be raised while the building is refurbished to display more of the 9,000 works of art that it holds. The committee’s report and the preliminary debate considered the risks to care and preservation that are posed by the prospect of international transportation of art works. The bill committee’s meticulous report balanced those criticisms against the benefits that could be achieved by increasing access to the collection and raising the funds to support restoration of the building. It is worth noting that the evidence suggests that damage occurs during packing and unpacking of items—something that would happen whether an item was being transported across Glasgow or to the other side of the world, or being stored away while a building was refurbished. As I have said previously, we can see from the massive success of the Scottish national portrait gallery, the national museum of Scotland and, in Glasgow, the Kelvingrove museum refurbishment and the new Riverside transport museum, what can be achieved by investing in cultural institutions and bringing our museums up to date for the 21st century: it results in soaring visitor numbers and increased customer satisfaction. Given its significance, it seems only logical that the Burrell collection should be next. The Scottish Government thanks Parliament for its consideration of the bill and supports the bill’s being passed. With that, I bring my remarks to a close, and record again my thanks to the bill committee. Private bill committees are a frequently unsung role and responsibility of Parliament, but private bills are as much a part of parliamentary democracy as bills that are introduced by committees or, indeed, by the Government. I thank the committee members for the diligence and duty that they demonstrated under the stewardship of Joan McAlpine.

I established a film delivery group to examine the possibilities for private sector-led development of screen production facilities in Scotland. Since the group was established at the end of May, Sony and Left Bank Pictures have made significant progress in converting an industrial space in Cumbernauld for screen production and have been shooting a major new television series there: “Outlander”, which is based on the novel of Jacobite Scotland by Diana Gabaldon. Scottish Enterprise, on behalf of the group, has commissioned a full consultancy study by Ekos Limited on possibilities for further expanding screen production facilities, which will inform future action.

The report will be published in the new year, when we will have an indication of proposals for the longer term. In the short term, I am pleased that the Cumbernauld facility is being used. The work that has been undertaken there to convert the Isola building is impressive. I am sure that that will be a key consideration when the report is published.

The Scottish Government regularly meets Scottish Opera to discuss a range of issues, including its delivery of Government grant objectives, its assessment of progress, reflecting independent critical opinion, and its future plans.

I am pleased to report that recruitment of a new music director is progressing well. It is an important post that will help to inform the strategic direction, which is important in relation to Liz Smith’s question. On the point about a full-time orchestra and full-time chorus, I note that there are different models in international operation. For example, Glyndebourne operates in a different way from some of the national companies in other countries that Liz Smith referred to. It is important that Scottish Opera serves the needs of Scotland. That is where the combination of both large-scale and small-scale productions comes in: we need to ensure that we have productions that can reach all parts of Scotland. The key point that Liz Smith is making is the importance of the strategic direction of Scottish Opera. In her question, she makes it clear that she expects the board to take a keen interest in that; so do I, and I will ensure that that view is communicated to Scottish Opera.

My visits to Denmark and Sweden between 8 and 9 December were aimed at deepening links with both countries and exploring areas for further co-operation. In Copenhagen, I met Danish partners in the fields of architecture and culture, including representatives from the Ministry of Culture, and shared information on Scotland’s national youth arts strategy, “Time To Shine”, and our recently launched architecture policy, “Creating Places”. I spoke to leading Danish practitioners in architecture about how we might associate our agenda for cities with the Nordic city network, and with work that they have been doing on improving liveability. In southern Sweden, I delivered a lecture to an international audience at Lund University on Scotland’s place in the European Union. The academics and students showed significant interest in and asked informed questions about the Scottish Government’s views on co-operating with the Nordic countries, Scotland’s place in the EU and the role that an independent Scotland would play in the world.

Our existing co-operation is extensive and we are keen to develop new areas. Maritime affairs, cities, social policies, energy, research and innovation, and tourism are all areas that we can build on in future. We are also looking at opportunities to co-operate with the Nordic countries on competitive funding in the EU, including on horizon 2020, which is the programme for research and innovation; on connecting Europe, which is about promoting connections in energy, transport and digital life; on supporting action on the environment and climate change; on creative Europe, as I discussed at my meetings last week; and on cross-border and transnational programmes involving students and others.

Holding the Edinburgh international culture summit 2014 will position Scotland as a world leader for international debate on the role and value of culture and further emphasise Scotland’s international profile. The 2012 summit has already enhanced awareness of Scotland’s creativity and cultural reputation, as well as of Edinburgh and its festivals, and has developed the country’s local and international profile and the potential for future international partnerships.

I am delighted that the Scottish Parliament has agreed to become one of the partners again to host the culture summit, which will take place in August 2014. There are huge opportunities, not just internationally but between partners on a bilateral basis. I was particularly interested in the relationships that we have been building with South Africa, with fantastic performances at the Edinburgh festivals. There are also opportunities for longer-term partnerships. For example, Brazil, which is hosting the next world cup and the next Olympics, is very interested in the Edinburgh international festivals and how it can develop the cultural aspects surrounding those great sporting occasions. Furthermore, with the Commonwealth games and the fantastic cultural programme that will accompany them, we really have something to offer in an exchange of knowledge and experience.

The Scottish Government supports touring exhibitions in a number of ways, including provision of indemnity cover through the Government indemnity scheme and direct financial support for our national collections, and through Scottish Government-funded grant schemes that are administered by Museums Galleries Scotland and Creative Scotland.

The celebration of the tapestry is to be commended. I have met the organisers to discuss short-term, long-term and more permanent facilities for the tapestry. Excitement has been generated throughout the country in relation to the distribution of the tapestry—quite often, sections rather than the entirety of the tapestry will have to be exhibited. In particular, the ability to use it to tell the story of an area’s local economy is something to be celebrated. The tapestry brings people in. If the member wants the best economic analysis, the question should be asked of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, as I understand that the Parliament has conducted some assessment of the benefits that arose from having roughly 30,000 people come to this building to see the tapestry. Obviously, such visitor numbers are a great boost for the local economy, and I will see whether any studies have been done on the impact of touring exhibitions on local economies. If any have been done, I will share them with the member. I encourage the member to contact the team behind the tapestry to invite it to Kirkcaldy. She will need to work with her local authority partners and others on that. Obviously, the refurbished facilities in Kirkcaldy would be ideal for such a venture, but it is not for me to decide.

I would first like to take this opportunity to congratulate the University of Edinburgh on the successful opening of the centre for cultural relations. There will be real benefits to Scotland in having a centre for cultural relations. First, its research work will help to inform the development and focus of the Scottish Government’s international work. Secondly, through its teaching activities—including a masters in international affairs—the centre will increase the number of postgraduates in Scotland with an international perspective. Thirdly, the centre will be in a strong position to undertake a programme of public events, helping policy makers, businesses, students and people around the world to better understand cultural relations.

I completely agree with that sentiment. Scotland is renowned for its culture and its education. This is a great opportunity to broadcast that and, in terms of engagement, the establishment of the centre shows that Scotland is an outward-looking nation. Those are precisely the issues that I was discussing with the French Minister of Culture when I was in Paris, and they reinforce the education agreement that was signed by the First Minister a few months ago.

The Scottish Government is in regular contact with representatives of the BBC to discuss a range of broadcasting issues in Scotland. On 26 November, the First Minister wrote personally to Lord Hall, the BBC director general, enclosing a copy of “Scotland’s Future: Your Guide to an Independent Scotland”. The Scottish Government has always been and remains ready to discuss these matters with the BBC. Obviously, those discussions would be conducted in a quite separate context from the BBC’s important role as an impartial broadcaster reporting the referendum, and I have regularly set out the distinction with the BBC. To date, the BBC has not accepted the invitation to discuss matters, on the ground that it fears that any such discussions would compromise its impartiality. Indeed, at the Salford media festival, where I recently gave a keynote address, Ian Small of the BBC specifically said that, if the BBC were to hold a position or be seen publicly to hold a position on a constitutional issue—effectively, that broadcasting is part of the referendum—that could be seen as colouring its impartiality relative to reporting on the referendum.

I am delighted that Michael McMahon recognises that the white paper, “Scotland’s Future”, is a great step forward in terms of providing the information that is available. He is quite correct in thinking that it is not unusual that people will want to pursue certain issues. We are now at the stage at which we have set out what is possible and what we in the Scottish Government would like to see in terms of a joint venture with the BBC, as well as what we would like to see in a Scottish broadcasting company that could reflect Scotland to itself and expand and improve the use of the licence fee that the Scottish viewer pays. In the constitutional context, it is important to note that, if people expect dialogue and discussion, that has to be encouraged by the United Kingdom Government. If Ed Vaizey and the Department for Culture, Media and Sport indicated a willingness to start a discussion, we would have it now.

I, too, congratulate Stewart Stevenson on securing the debate. The motion highlights the many areas in which libraries have a real impact on our lives. For that reason, I think that it is an important issue to cover. The proposal to close libraries in Moray has been a high-profile one. The council has decided to keep three of the branches open, although it is still shutting four and withdrawing one mobile service. Ultimately, it is a decision for Moray Council’s elected members, but I wrote to the council to express my concern and I urged it to reconsider. The provision of library services is a matter for local authorities and the Scottish Government has no statutory powers or duties in relation to libraries. However, I point out to Mary Scanlon that some of the budget pressures that are being reflected have come from the allocation from the Conservative and Liberal Democrat coalition in Westminster. The Scottish Government has protected local authority spending in Scotland to such an extent that it is now a higher proportion of our total budget than it was when we came into office. I also point out that the library closures in Moray Council equate to the number for the whole of Scotland in 2012-13, which perhaps gives a perspective on the issue. The Scottish Government believes that it is vital that adequate library services are provided for the good of communities across Scotland. We support the Scottish Library and Information Council to offer leadership to the sector, and through a partnership with it we have supported the development of the public library quality improvement matrix, as we heard from Fiona McLeod, to help evaluate library services and deliver quality provision that meets the needs of the communities that they serve. I remind Mary Scanlon and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities that SLIC’s responsibility is to inform and advise Government, which it does very well. Traditionally, public libraries have loaned books. Recent figures from the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy show that although loans of books are declining—down by 8.5 per cent—importantly the number of visits remains high at over 28 million per year. Libraries offer us not only books but much more besides, and I want to highlight two areas where they make a particularly significant contribution. One area is the move to an increasingly online world, to which Rhoda Grant referred. In this digital age, libraries can and do play a pivotal role in helping people to take their first steps into the digital world. The Scottish Government is committed to increasing digital participation, and we are working with partners across the public, private and third sectors to develop innovative programmes that will be responsive to people’s needs and offer, where possible, a choice of locations to best support learning requirements. Libraries play an important role in that because they provide equipment and internet access for those who do not have it, and training for those who are unsure of how to go about getting online. People without information technology skills increasingly see the library as a first point of contact. As the motion recognises, people are increasingly expected to use online services in the UK Government’s welfare system. The Scottish Government’s work with SLIC supports libraries to fully engage with the digital participation agenda. The £500,000 annual public library improvement fund has allowed digital projects to be delivered in, around and by public libraries across Scotland, ranging from beginners classes on basic IT to more advanced accredited courses that target all age groups, from the pre-school age—the cyber tots—to our older population of silver surfers. I commend SLIC for its on-going work in that area and its support for the agenda. The second area where libraries make a significant impact is the development of good literacy skills. The Scottish Government recognises that a successful country requires strong and secure literacy skills. Our literacy action plan highlights the importance of reading as a valued activity from an early age and the benefits of reading in the home. The plan’s vision is to improve literacy levels for all, from the early years through to adulthood, and support those with the lowest levels of literacy, breaking the well-evidenced link between poverty and deprivation, and poor literacy skills. That vision will require sustained commitment and continuing action at all levels of government, and support at all points of the education system and wider public services, including of course libraries. The plan’s delivery and impact is being overseen by the standing literacy commission, chaired by the chief medical for Scotland, Sir Harry Burns. In September 2012, the standing literacy commission published an interim progress report on the literacy action plan that said about libraries: “Libraries in Scotland have a key role to play in improving literacy, as well as promoting a love of reading and books.” We support a number of schemes in Scotland that are aimed at encouraging people to read. For example, there is the bookbug, the Scottish Book Trust’s early years programme; the play, talk, read campaign, which encourages parents and carers to play, talk and read more with their babies and young children; and, for the second time, book week Scotland, which was successful recently in promoting reading to all ages across Scotland. For the book week, 650 events were held across Scotland, including six in Moray, and Elgin library hosted the prize giving for the October reading challenge with the children’s writer, Eleanor Updale. I am proud to say that with SLIC’s support, all local authorities took part in the book week; projects ranged from a film night in Bridgeton in Glasgow to an evening with Christopher Brookmyre in Saltcoats; Edinburgh central library and Glasgow’s Mitchell library hosted pop-up book shops; and Kirkcaldy museum and library had an interactive murder mystery night that was based on the Ann Cleeves novel “The Glass Room”, in which performers took on the role of the main suspects. There was something for everyone, both young and old. The role of public library services in supporting literacy should not be underestimated. Where better to encourage reading than in public libraries, which remain one of the free universal services that operate at the heart of communities across Scotland? In 2012-13, they loaned almost 22 million items and provided over 8 million hours of internet access. Saturday 8 February is national libraries day, and I think that we should all look for opportunities on that day and beyond to promote the work of libraries if we want to show how much their services are valued within our communities. Interestingly, the Scottish household survey found that reading for pleasure remains the most popular cultural activity in Scotland. It is enjoyed by 63 per cent of the adult population, and a visit to the library is the third most popular type of cultural activity, at 29 per cent, after films and live music. I find it hard to believe that the experience of Moray is an exception to that experience in the rest of Scotland. Libraries loan almost 22 million items a year, as I have mentioned, and they received more than 28 million visits in 2012-13. A vibrant library service is being delivered in Scotland. We have a great deal to look forward to, with new and innovative services, but they must be there for communities to use them. As Stewart Stevenson’s motion recognises, our libraries are something to be proud of, and we should continue to support them. Meeting closed at 18:05.

It gives me great pleasure to open the debate on the results of the 2011 census in Scotland, which was carried out by the Registrar General for Scotland. Those results tell us who we are and how we work and live in Scotland today. The 2011 census marks 150 years since the National Records of Scotland—formerly the General Register Office for Scotland—took responsibility for organising the census in Scotland. The census was carried out at the same time as, but organised, processed and delivered independently from, the censuses in the rest of the United Kingdom. It was this Parliament that decided which questions we should ask all the people living in Scotland. Throughout the planning, information gathering and processing, the census has been subject to external examination, not least by the UK Statistics Authority, which has designated the census results as national statistics, confirming that they are produced using robust professional standards of quality and reliability. Detailed statistics from the census describe the characteristics of an area or community, such as how many men and women there are and their ages, ethnic group and educational level. The answers that people give help Government to develop policies and initiatives to help local authorities to plan services and to make effective use of resources that benefit the people of Scotland. They help to inform businesses and planning for a wide range of third sector and private sector bodies. Decisions are taken every day using census statistics, helping to provide services from the cradle to the grave and informing decisions on the number of places in schools, how many houses we should build and how many care homes, hospitals and fire services we need and where. Today the census is the only survey of its kind to ask everyone in Scotland the same questions at the same time. Nothing else provides the richness and range of information that the census offers. It is widely acknowledged as playing a fundamental and unique role in the provision of comprehensive and robust population statistics, and I thank all those who have worked so hard in making the 2011 census a success. To date there have been six releases of data from the 2011 census by the National Records of Scotland. That data covers population, household characteristics, ethnicity, identity, religion, language, health, housing, education and the labour market, and information on those topics is available from national level down to local level. So, what does the 2011 census tell us about the people of Scotland? First, there are more people living in Scotland than ever before, and we have a population high of 5,295,403. The population is not spread evenly across the country: in the Western Isles and Highland there are only nine people per km2, whereas in Glasgow there are more than 3,300 living in the equivalent space. Just two per cent of our population live on the more than 90 islands of Scotland. Providing services to remote rural communities and to those in densely populated areas presents different challenges for the Government and for policymakers. The census helps us to plan those services. Our household structures are changing, and understanding the type of changes helps us to plan our housing and community needs for the future. More people are living in Scotland now who are from a minority ethnic group than ever before. That change in our ethnic profile is not so surprising when the census shows that 7 per cent of people in Scotland were born outside the UK. Such migration brings an increase in the number of languages that are spoken in Scotland—178 separate languages were recorded as being spoken by 10 or more people in Scotland. Even with that linguistic diversity, only 1 per cent of people in Scotland said that they were unable to speak English well and just 0.2 per cent reported that they could not speak English at all. Although more of us come from different countries than ever before, 83 per cent of us consider ourselves Scottish. The population growth between the 2001 and 2011 censuses of almost 5 per cent was the largest increase between two censuses in 100 years. Some of that growth was due to natural increase. Between the beginning of 2002 and the end of 2011, there were 5,200 more births than deaths. It is important that academics, commentators, the media and politicians understand that having more births than deaths in a country is most significant for population direction and the dynamic of a society. Much of the population increase, however, was due to net migration to Scotland and we are proud of the warm welcome that we give migrants to Scotland, encouraging those who want to work hard to build a life here for their families. We know that migrants enrich our culture and our communities with their traditions, skills, food and languages. The census figures form the basis of our annual population figures and projections and the latest set of projections—published by the National Records of Scotland only last month, on 6 November—show that the population is expected to continue increasing, growing by 9 per cent over the next 25 years, with almost three quarters of that growth coming from net migration. There is always uncertainty when projecting into the future. That figure of 9 per cent is the principal projection, representing the best estimate based on current evidence. The reliability of projections decreases as we look further into the future. Developed countries around the world face demographic pressures and Scotland is no different. The 2011 census was the first time that the number of people aged over 65 years was greater than the number aged 15 and under. The population projections that were produced on 6 November show that between 2012 and 2037—over 25 years—the number of people over state pension age is projected to increase by 27 per cent in Scotland compared with a projected increase of 31 per cent for the UK as a whole over the same time. Scotland’s dependency ratio—the number of working age people compared with the number of dependents—is growing, although our position is not as challenging as that of the rest of the UK. As a key driver of sustainable economic growth, achieving population growth—in particular among those of working age—is arguably one of the most significant tasks facing Scotland and other advanced economies. The fact that our population is growing and ageing was underlined by last month’s Institute for Fiscal Studies report. Although highly uncertain, the IFS projections show the risks of remaining part of the UK and therefore underline the urgent need for Scotland to achieve independence to tackle that legacy of low relative growth in the economy and the population.

The projections are for between 2012 and 2037—over 25 years. As I have just stated, the number of people over state pension age in Scotland over that period is projected to increase by 27 per cent compared with a 31 per cent increase for the UK, so the figure is greater for the UK than it is for Scotland. The wording of the Labour amendment reflects the period in the census from 2001 to 2011—I acknowledge that—but it does not reflect the position going forward. That is why I have some issues with the amendment as it is presented. In Scotland, the dependency ratio—the working-age population relative to the pension age and under-16 populations—is projected to be better than the ratio in the rest of the UK until the early 2030s. That fact is acknowledged on pages 145 and 146 of the referendum white paper. The Labour amendment does not recognise the change in policy that we need. Having full powers would allow us to increase our working-age population and to support families with childcare. With independence, we will be able to grow our working-age population by ensuring that young Scots have the opportunity to build a career in Scotland and by making it easier for the highly skilled people who come to study at our universities to work here. A controlled immigration policy will be another gain. We have set out those matters on pages 267 to 274 of the white paper. There is no doubt that current United Kingdom immigration policy is heavily influenced by the priorities of the south-east of England and is based on the values of the current UK Government, which is driven by a desire to reduce the number of incoming migrants. A controlled immigration system that is based on the foundations of, and is similar to, the points and tier system but that enables us to attract highly skilled working-age people who will work and pay taxes will aid Scotland to achieve sustainable economic growth. Our immigration system will be robust and secure and will take into account Scottish values and principles of fairness and compassion. Interestingly, the European Commission has recently confirmed: “The vast majority of migrants go to the UK to work, and they actually contribute more to the welfare system than they take out, purely because they tend to be younger than the average population, and of working age”. That explodes the myth that migrants drain resources. In Scotland, we want to welcome those who have so much to offer. Boosting Scotland’s population has been a priority for successive Administrations since the re-establishment of the Scottish Parliament in 1999. The results of the census allow us all to judge how well we are doing that. The large growth between the censuses is a major achievement for our country. The census is our national stocktake. We cannot predict the future with any certainty, but the census gives us the information that we need to take decisions about Scotland today. I am proud that we have such high-quality and impartial information available to us all. I invite members to support the motion in my name. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the results of the 2011 census in Scotland, which present a detailed picture of a vibrant, diverse and dynamic nation, as set out in the six publications to date covering population, households, identity, ethnicity, religion, language, marital status, qualifications and economic status.

Will the member give way?

I will let Patricia Ferguson carry on.

Does Cameron Buchanan agree that the increase in the number of under-fives is a good thing for the population? I know that it brings policy challenges, but that increase in the number of young people and families is a good thing for the city and the country.

Does the member accept the figures produced on 6 November that show that between 2012 and 2037 the number of people of state pension age and older will increase by 27 per cent in Scotland but by 31 per cent in the UK?

In closing today’s debate, I thank parliamentary colleagues for an interesting discussion on what might, at first glance, have seemed to be dull and dry facts and figures. The richness of the debate and members’ interest in the statistics—not least in relation to their constituencies—has brought life to the subject. I say to Lewis Macdonald that independent Ireland—which was his example—has its own immigration and migration policy and is within the common travel area.

I ask Lewis Macdonald to let me develop my points; I am about to agree with him on one point. It was appropriate that he relayed the history of the census and the scrutiny that it has been given in Parliament, and Rod Campbell mentioned how innovative it is. I pay tribute to Kenny Gibson. I am not sure whether he is in the chamber, but he was one of the first members to identify in the chamber in the first session of Parliament the issue of population and the challenges that lie ahead. I was supportive—as we all were—of the measures that were taken with the fresh talent initiative. Unfortunately, however, the current UK Government has taken away that tool, which is one reason why we believe that we need the powers to make such decisions. We certainly welcomed the initiative at the time. As the debate has showed, the census figures tell us about Scotland in all its shapes, sizes and guises, and they are important in relation to the policy challenges that lie ahead of us. Hanzala Malik talked about underemployment among ethnic minorities in Glasgow. Malcolm Chisholm, in reflecting on his constituency, also set out some challenges. The information that the National Records of Scotland has released to date focuses on population and household numbers, aspects of identity and economic factors. There is more to come; the next release of information from the census on 18 December will provide insights into family structures. The answer to Cameron Buchanan’s question about how many people are married and how many are cohabiting will be in that release, as will information on living arrangements, which covers household composition and dependent children. In addition, the release will include information on the number of rooms and overcrowding. I say to Patricia Ferguson that we will learn about methods of transport that are used to get to work and study. That information will be important in setting out future transport policy, as she identified in relation to her constituency, and in planning transport infrastructure. All the information is freely available on the Scotland’s census website, together with a range of tools that help to bring the data to life. At the start of the debate, I mentioned the long history of the census in Scotland; it is one of the longest-running continuous data collections in the country, but what is the future of the census and will we have one in 2021? The 2011 census is successfully providing high-quality statistics that will be used for the next decade. As we have heard today, changes in society have resulted in an increasingly mobile population—Marco Biagi mentioned that—and people regularly move to other areas and countries. That, together with increasing complexity in social structures and a desire for results to be produced more quickly and frequently, presents challenges for the traditional census. At the same time, improvements in technology and the Government’s commitment to a digital future for Scotland mean that we need to look again at how we can best collect and provide information in the future. Many members will be aware that the UK Office for National Statistics is consulting on the issue. Two main options are proposed; namely, an online census and a census that is based on administrative data and surveys. We are also considering the best way forward for Scotland. However we decide to collect such information in 2021 and beyond, we will ensure that it continues to meet the needs of all users and that it is of high quality. Parliament’s views and wishes will, of course, be a key part of our deliberations to determine what we will do in the future. In discussing the opportunities and challenges of an ageing population, Rod Campbell made the important comment that we should not equate old age with dependency, and Malcolm Chisholm also brought something important to the debate in discussing healthy ageing. There is a great deal to be welcomed in the opportunities that a healthy older population can provide; we should remember that when we are thinking about and developing policies in the area. I repeat the point that Labour’s amendment reflects the period 2001 to 2011, but does not reflect the projections that were released on 6 November, which show that in the 25 years from 2012 to 2037 the number of people of state-pension age and above will increase by 27 per cent in Scotland but by a bigger percentage—31 per cent—in the rest of the UK. That provides challenges for Scotland and the rest of the UK. How we deal with those challenges and what we can do to tackle them will make a difference. Overall, the dependency ratio in Scotland will be relatively better than that in the rest of the UK until the early 2030s. We know now, of course, that expenditure on social protection in 2011-12 was 14.4 per cent of gross domestic product in Scotland, and that it was 15.9 per cent in the UK. Scotland is therefore in a strong position in sustaining support for social protection. We have talked about ageing, the challenges that all western demographies face, and how we might deal with them, but the younger population has also been a key part of the debate. It is significant that under-fives have increased by 6 per cent. Again, that natural increase is a strong steer for the economy and the population. It is interesting that, in my area—West Lothian—19 per cent of the population are under 15. That is a strong position, but it also provides challenges in terms of services. The average under-15 population is 16 per cent.

“Scotland’s Future: Your Guide to an Independent Scotland”, is a very good guide to some of the challenges and some of the opportunities and decisions that we can take. This debate has been an opportunity for members to reflect on the content of the census and to identify some of the challenges. We talked earlier about the challenges of schooling in Edinburgh in particular, with the growing younger population in the city. Those challenges are absolute. The challenges are not just in transport; they relate to health, younger people, universities and a wide range of other things. We need the valuable statistics from the census. Marco Biagi provided a good description of the census. He described it as the “gold standard” and the statistical equivalent of the world cup. [Interruption.]

The census is robust and credible and can provide us with a guide for health and transport, the challenges for education, and the challenges of an ageing population, which we have also reflected on, for this country and the rest of Europe. On how we can tackle those challenges, we have opportunities—the biggest of which is in growing our working-age population to ensure that we have the people who can provide the engine for economic growth in Scotland. A great number of people worked long and hard on the census, so it is important that we record our thanks to them for their work in providing it. The statistician John Rickman, who was a 19th century champion of the census, stated: “the intimate knowledge of any country must form the rational basis of legislation and diplomacy”. Our Parliament can make informed decisions only if we properly understand who we are, how we work and how we live in Scotland today. The census results provide us with that understanding. I thank all those who delivered the census for us. The best that we can do with it is to use it to make informed and wise decisions and, as Patricia Ferguson said, to reflect on what it tells us and build our evidence-based policies around that.

The parliamentary question was answered on 21 November 2013, and the delay was due to an administrative error.

There has been no breach. Paragraph 9.20 of the code states: “Private offices should where possible issue constituency letters”. On the memorial garden in memory of those who died in the Piper Alpha disaster, the date of the anniversary and the location are fixed. In terms of funding, I think that people expect this Parliament to be respectful in remembering and honouring those who died in the Piper Alpha disaster and that the contribution on behalf of the people of Scotland to the memorial garden was very appropriate. I regret that Lewis Macdonald is treating it in this way.

I, too, congratulate Richard Lyle on securing the debate. Although I was not born when President Kennedy died, I have felt the impact of his life throughout my own, and this very interesting and poignant debate has made it clear that 22 November 1963—the day on which President John Fitzgerald Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas—will forever be marked as a pivotal moment in world history. He was human and had flaws but he was also a leader who provided hope, which is the most precious currency for any political leader. I want to touch briefly on a couple of examples of JFK’s vision and his impact on Scotland and the world, because that vision is what makes his death as tragic today as it was 50 years ago. In doing so, I want to recognise and celebrate the strong bonds of friendship between Scotland and the US. Indeed, on this sad anniversary, we join our American friends in honouring the memory of their young President and a legacy that lives on to this day. JFK was as famous for his Irish roots and Boston brogue as he was for being a product of the American dream. However, as the motion states, it was here in Scotland that the 22-year-old son of the US ambassador to the UK first demonstrated his potential as a politician and leader. He made his first public speech on behalf of the US Government when he addressed the American survivors of the German U-boat attack on and sinking of the passenger ship Athenia, who were being cared for in Glasgow—as we have just heard from Willie Coffey. As US President, JFK had the vision to recognise the perils of nuclear weapons, as a number of members have said. In recognising the threat, which is as profound today as it was following the Cuban missile crisis, both he and Khrushchev realised that it was insane that the power to spark nuclear war should be controlled by two individuals. They privately began to exchange letters that reopened their earlier dialogue on the banning of nuclear testing. That was followed by the limited nuclear test ban treaty, which was signed on 5 August 1963 in Moscow, one day before the 18th anniversary of the bombing of Hiroshima. It took Kennedy two months to convince the US public and the Senate to support the treaty in a demonstration of how strongly resolute he was to do something about the peril of nuclear weapons. As US President, JFK had the vision to imagine a society in which people of all races and religions were treated equally. When he was elected in 1960, civil rights were a key issue in the US and there were high expectations of the new President. Reluctant to lose support among the southern states, having only narrowly won the election and barely holding control in Congress, instead of trying to pass legislation Kennedy appointed a large number of African Americans to high-level positions and worked to strengthen the Civil Rights Commission. On 11 June 1963, the President addressed the nation, promising to introduce major civil rights legislation following the attempt by the then governor of Alabama to block two black students from entering the University of Alabama. When I was in the US this summer, I had the privilege of meeting the current mayor of Alabama as part of this year’s civil rights anniversary celebrations. In 1963, not long after that address by JFK, 200,000 Americans gathered for the march on Washington when Martin Luther King delivered his momentous “I have a dream” speech. The march helped a comprehensive civil rights bill to clear several hurdles in Congress and win endorsement from both House and Senate Republican leaders. Unfortunately, Kennedy was assassinated on 22 November 1963, before the bill could be passed. Nevertheless, as we have heard, President Johnson was able to sign the bill into law as a tribute to his fallen predecessor. Perhaps Kennedy’s most ambitious vision was to commit to putting a man on the moon. In 1961, the Russian cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first man in space, creating the impression among Americans that the US was falling behind in the space race. Kennedy understood that to restore the faith of Americans the US Government would have not just to match but to surpass the Soviets. In a speech on 25 May 1961, before a joint session of Congress, Kennedy called for an investment of billions of dollars to achieve the goal of putting a man on the moon by the end of the decade. Sceptics questioned the ability of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to deliver that but, as we all know, on 20 July 1969 the crew of Apollo 11 realised President Kennedy’s dream—the first spaceflight to land humans on the moon. My first memory of television was watching that event. It was a tremendous point in history, and its impact is a tribute to the work of JFK. As Tavish Scott said, as well as for his vision we remember Kennedy for his powerful oratory and his ability to capture the mood of the moment. One of the finest examples of that came a few months before his death. During a visit to West Berlin, on 26 June 1963, amid the tensions of the cold war, Kennedy spoke about the United States’ support for West Germany some 22 months after the Soviet-backed East Germans had erected the Berlin wall. Although his message was aimed as much at the Soviets as at the people of West Berlin, it is best remembered for his compelling statement of empathy: “Ich bin ein Berliner”. In that simple phrase, spoken in their mother tongue, Kennedy conveyed powerfully how the United States would stand with the people of West Berlin against oppression. In closing, I want to reflect on and use some other statements made by JFK. In 1962, Kennedy ignored advice from key advisers and tried to pass a social security measure on medical care for workers over 65. In a message to Congress in February 1962, he said: “For one true measure of a nation is its success in fulfilling the promise of a better life for each of its members. Let this be the measure of our nation.” Addressing the Irish Parliament in Dublin on 28 June 1963, President Kennedy said of Ireland: “the achievement of nationhood is not an end but a beginning ... For self-determination can no longer mean isolation; and the achievement of national independence today means withdrawal from the old status only to return to the world scene with a new one.” Finally, reflecting the remarks made by James Kelly in what I thought was a fitting and very good speech, I want to end with a quote that is perhaps most appropriate for this place and this time: “So, let us not be blind to our differences—but let us also direct attention to our common interests and to the means by which those differences can be resolved.” This has been an excellent debate with excellent speeches and has been a very fitting way to mark the memory of a man who made such an impact on the world.

In my role as Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs, I want not only to offer some thoughts on the provisions in this private bill but to emphasise the significance of the Burrell collection as one of Scotland’s great cultural assets. As members will be aware, the collection is one of the most prominent and varied in Scotland and its significance to the history of art and antiquities is such that it sits alongside the works of art in our national galleries and museums. The 9,000-strong collection was assembled by Sir William Burrell as he travelled widely across the world and, in 1944, was generously gifted to the city of Glasgow along with the funds to erect a new building within which to house his treasures. Nearly 70 years after his bequest, the bill is aimed at securing the building’s long-term sustainability while looking at new ways of promoting his collection to an even wider audience and allowing more people to learn about and enjoy them than ever have before. However, to enable that to happen, the bill’s promoter, Glasgow City Council, has decided to overturn Sir William Burrell’s express wishes in entrusting his collection to the city. That has raised a number of questions about the council’s responsibilities as the collection’s custodian and the power of the dead to constrain the actions of those living in a time very different from their own. The parliamentary committee responsible for scrutinising the bill has had the unenviable task of considering those sensitive issues in its analysis of the evidence, and its members have weighed up the risks and opportunities offered by the bill and looked back at Sir William Burrell’s lifetime to ask what he might have done had he been faced with the same questions in a world where science and technology are markedly different from what he would have known. The committee’s analysis led it to conclude that Burrell was a lender who wanted to share his collection with the people not just in Glasgow and Scotland but further afield through loans within Great Britain. He wanted his works of art to be seen and appreciated. The Government shares that belief, which is why a key aim of the national strategy for Scotland’s museums and galleries is to increase cultural participation by maximising the number and range of people who see collections and visit and enjoy museums. Allowing lending from the Burrell collection is consistent with that aim and would bring the collection to the attention of an international audience and enable people from all over the world to see and appreciate it. That, in turn, would raise the collection’s profile and put Glasgow—and Scotland—on an international stage. However, like anyone who collects items that are of value, Burrell was also concerned about the protection and care afforded to his collection, particularly after his death. The committee has found that an interest in preservation shaped much of Sir William’s decision making, as, indeed, it is shaping Glasgow City Council’s decision making today. Central to the bill is the need to raise much needed resources to fund the refurbishment and repair of the Burrell building. There is no doubt in the mind of anyone who visits the collection, as I have, that it is not currently housed within a habitat that is commensurate with its status. The committee has placed great emphasis on the need to correct that, especially as the building was central to Burrell’s wishes. That is consistent with our national strategy, which aims to improve and ensure the long-term sustainability of collections through care and preservation. Some people will argue that there are risks to care and preservation posed by international travel and the transportation of art works. The bill committee’s meticulous report, for which it deserves our whole-hearted thanks, has had to balance those criticisms against the benefits that could be achieved by increasing access to the collection and raising the funds to support the restoration of the building. The Scottish Government thanks the committee for its deliberations and supports its recommendation that the bill should proceed.

Scrutiny of private bills is an important but often unrecognised function of the Parliament, and I thank the committee for its work. Like the committee’s evidence-taking sessions, this afternoon’s debate has focused on two key issues—the judgment on overturning the wishes of Sir William Burrell and the risks and opportunities of allowing a collection, particularly one that contains so many fragile items, to be transported across the world. The committee is satisfied that the evidence shows that Sir William Burrell was not a possessive collector but, instead, would have welcomed the opportunity to show his collection to as wide an audience as possible. However, he was concerned about the risks of transporting artworks internationally. We have heard that that is still a consideration for Glasgow City Council and Glasgow Life, as custodians of the collection today, as presumably it is a consideration for any institution that engages in international lending. However, we have also heard that, by introducing a strict lending code and adhering to the highest standards of conservation and care, those risks, while they can never be completely eliminated, can be minimised and mitigated. The question then becomes whether the risks are enough to prevent the collection from being accessed by a whole new international audience and to hinder efforts to raise funds for the restoration of the Burrell collection building, which itself poses a threat to the collection’s long-term preservation. The latter point has been central to the committee’s consideration of the bill. The Government has seen for itself from projects such as the refurbishment of the Scottish national portrait gallery and the national museum of Scotland what can be achieved by investing in our cultural institutions and bringing our museums up to date for the 21st century: it results in soaring visitor numbers and increased customer satisfaction. Glasgow City Council has shown initiative in that respect, too, and, over the past decade, it has been dedicated to ensuring that its cultural establishments are of a high quality. It has invested heavily in capital projects such as the Kelvingrove art gallery and museum refurbishment and the new Riverside transport museum, and I am sure that members agree that it has reaped the rewards. Given the Burrell collection’s significance, it seems only logical for it to be next. Unfortunately, we all have to accept that, financially, times are tight. Faced with a building that is not fulfilling its function, Glasgow Life has had to think carefully about where the money could come from to secure the Burrell collection’s long-term future, and it has decided that the ability to tour the collection internationally would help to raise its profile and raise much-needed resources while offering more people the chance to see and appreciate what the collection has to offer. One of our responsibilities in looking after our heritage is to ensure that the stewardship of both local and national museums is such that functions are carried out in a way that is diligent and fit for purpose in the 21st century. In supporting the committee’s recommendation and allowing the bill to proceed to the next stage, the Parliament will take the right step. We must always be vigilant and dutiful in ensuring that our artefacts, our heritage and our art have custodians who will look at all the different options and make sensitive decisions, but will also provide access to and due recognition of collections as they were first formed, and will do so in a way that is appropriate for this century.

The Glasgow 2014 cultural programme plays a central role in Scotland’s hosting of the Commonwealth games. There are two elements: the Scotland-wide culture 2014 programme, which will feature events, exhibitions and performances throughout Scotland before, during and immediately following the games, and festival 2014, which is the Glasgow-based games-time celebration. The diverse programme features many projects that will showcase the rich heritage and culture of different parts of Scotland, including greater Glasgow and West Scotland.

I regularly meet various council representatives. Only on Monday, I spoke at a conference that was hosted by VOCAL, which represents council officials from all over Scotland. With regard to programming, Creative Scotland is leading on the culture 2014 aspects, and Glasgow Life is involved in wider activities that will be based in Glasgow. In Renfrewshire, one of the most exciting programmes—the generation programme—is part of the landmark series of exhibitions celebrating 25 years of contemporary art in Scotland. Paisley art gallery and museum will look at hosting an exhibition of emerging artists, including Roddy Buchanan and Jackie Donachie. The programme focuses on the contemporary aspects of Renfrewshire’s rich heritage that will be shown as part of the celebrations.

The First Minister wrote to Theresa May on 1 November to express dismay at the decision to refuse visas and request that it be reversed. On 6 November, the Home Secretary replied to the First Minister to say that she has decided to “exercise” her “discretion and grant all five of the individuals an extension of leave outside the rules for a further 12 months”. However, she stated that she considers that to be an exception, and that she has no intention of changing the Government-authorised exchange programme. I have written to the Prime Minister today about the need for the visas to enable Chinese teachers from Tianjin to stay here for up to two years. In that way, our pupils and the teachers could derive maximum benefits from their experience. In failing to make those changes, the United Kingdom Government will seriously damage a successful Confucius Institute programme that operates across 17 local authorities. The Prime Minster has the opportunity to instruct a change of policy before his recently announced visit to China this December.

The Confucius hubs in 13 classrooms across Scotland are really important in the teaching of Mandarin Chinese. I encourage the Home Office to make a change in its policy; it is in the Prime Minister’s interests that he do so before his visit to China. On the wider issue of migration, Scotland has a large established migrant community. We welcome the contribution that new Scots are making to our economy and society. We know from recent reports that the vast majority are making a positive contribution to our economy, and we reject the negative rhetoric about migrants that we sometimes hear from the UK Government. With regard to having more powers in immigration, under independence we will have a controlled immigration system that meets our social, economic and democratic needs, and which will put Scotland and its needs at the forefront of policy making in that area.

The First Minister and I met Ambassador Barzun during his recent visit to Scotland. The United States is a key market from which to secure inward investment, for increasing Scottish exports and for attracting tourists. We are committed to the continued growth and deepening of relations with our American partners.

Yes, I do. We have a platform of effective external relations now that could, with independence, be expanded and extended to pursue a distinctive position and to develop and design an approach to world affairs that reflects Scotland’s specific values and interests.

I last met Creative Scotland formally on 10 October as part of a meeting here at Parliament to discuss Dundee’s bid to become the United Kingdom’s city of culture 2017. On Friday, I met the chief executive Janet Archer when we launched “Time To Shine”, which is Scotland’s first ever arts strategy for young people, at Edinburgh’s Festival theatre’s new studio facility.

The programmes have been many and varied. John Wilson may be familiar with Cumbernauld theatre, which provides an extensive range of educational programmes and is funded and supported as an organisation by Creative Scotland. The youth music initiative, which is a very successful programme, works across the region that John Wilson represents. I can also tell John Wilson that the five national performing companies have educational activities in all of Scotland’s local authority areas—the information that I have is that there were 97 different educational activities in North Lanarkshire and 19 in South Lanarkshire. In addition, National Museums Scotland works with the national museum of rural life in East Kilbride and with, for example, secondary 3 and 4 pupils on physics.

The Scottish Ten team used a range of digital technologies to capture the Xiaoling and Jingling tombs in 3D. The data processing is still in progress. However, the First Minister has just personally handed over the first data to the Chinese State Administration of Cultural Heritage, which will receive an accurate 3D survey data set for the tombs when the project is completed. That is one of several strands of work that emanated from the signing by the First Minister of a cultural memorandum of understanding with the Chinese Government in December 2011. The team will also produce an animated 3D fly-through digital model, which can be used for interpretation and remote access purposes by the Chinese Government and the management of the eastern Qing tombs. A fundamental condition of the international Scottish Ten project is that all data and intellectual property rights are handed over to the international partner. That means that the Chinese State Administration for Cultural Heritage can use the data to inform conservation and management strategies going forward, as well as for interpretation, education and virtual tourism.

There are several examples. On culture, I am delighted to share with Parliament that the new international exhibition that was launched to showcase the development of the cities of Edinburgh and Nanjing—which was formerly the capital of China—and is entitled “A Tale of Two Cities”, includes archives, artworks and interactive digital material and is now receiving 20,000 visitors a day. That is a great tribute in particular to the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland, which has worked in connection with the Nanjing museum. That is a very good example indeed. An example in science is that Heriot-Watt University was recently recognised as the fifth Confucius Institute in Scotland—I discussed the issues regarding teacher visas in an earlier question. Heriot-Watt University is also working with the China University of Petroleum, which is a teaching and research university in east China that focuses on engineering and is an important scientific base for petroleum and petrochemical industries. Those two examples show the importance of those discussions and of joint working so that we can learn from each other in the important areas of culture and science.

The Scottish Government makes available support for rural theatres through funding from Creative Scotland. Its arts programming guidelines state that it is keen to support activity in geographic areas and communities where there is currently more limited cultural provision and that it will give priority to applications that support that. Through Creative Scotland, we have supported programmes in rural theatres from the isle of Eigg to the Scottish Borders.

In learning about the member’s constituency, I was intrigued to hear about the Woodend Barn, which is a good example of the sort of venue that we want to support. It has received funding from Creative Scotland of more than £100,000 over the past two years, with more due over the next two years. I understand that a range of activity, from classical music to wood engraving, takes place at the centre, and I put on record my recognition for the committed board, volunteers and staff. I understand that the centre is having an atomic Doric festival towards the end of November. I am intrigued to find out what that involves and to hear about its success once it is complete.

I welcomed the President of Turkey on his arrival in Scotland, as I have done with other heads of state. The President was in Scotland to attend the British-Turkish social forum, which promotes bilateral relationships between the United Kingdom and Turkey in business, politics, research and the arts. The meeting was organised by the British Academy, not the Scottish Government. The visit provided the opportunity for a discussion of trade opportunities in particular. The opening of a Turkish consulate in Edinburgh will be a positive step in developing our relations with Turkey, as is the growing popularity of the direct Edinburgh to Istanbul flights.

We always take the appropriate opportunities to raise human rights issues. The European Union agreed to restart Turkey’s membership application on 5 November. As part of the negotiations on accession, Turkey must demonstrate that it has abided by the Copenhagen membership criteria, which include free and fair democratic elections, respect for the rule of law and protection of national minorities. Furthermore, Turkey must show that it has fully implemented the European convention on human rights, to which it has been a signatory since 1954. Previous negotiations on accession have had a positive impact on Turkey’s human rights record. We support Turkey’s application for membership. That process is the appropriate way to acknowledge the issues and improve the system, which Turkey has been striving to do, as its record since 2001 shows. The current application process is an opportunity to reinforce those measures.

The Aberdeen Exhibition and Conference Centre is a valuable asset to the Scottish economy that adds significantly to Scotland’s capacity to attract and host international conferences. If approached, I am sure that Scottish Enterprise would be pleased to discuss Aberdeen City Council’s proposal. The council has made no direct contact with my portfolio area with regards to a new performance venue in the city. In recent years, our national agency Scottish Enterprise has supported a range of major infrastructure investments to maximise the economic return for Scotland. A recent example is the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre, which now has the Hydro, providing Scotland with a state-of-the-art 12,000-spectator arena, as well as a purpose-built exhibition centre, conference centre and auditorium, all on one site. As members know, 2014 will be an incredible year for Scotland. I am sure that members will want to take the opportunity to welcome the recent news that the 2014 MTV European music awards will be coming to Glasgow and the Hydro.

Scotland is the perfect stage for entertainment provision and lots of events, and venues can also host a number of conferences. Increasingly, such conferences provide great revenue for the cities concerned. As I stated in my initial reply, the issue is really for Scottish Enterprise, and I encourage Aberdeen City Council to engage with it in talks and discussions to explore all options. I think that perhaps that is the answer that Lewis Macdonald seeks.

Officials from the Scottish Government’s tourism division, Scottish Enterprise and Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority met members of the trust on Tuesday 12 November to discuss what further assistance and advice can be offered. As I have made clear, we have used the culture budget to protect front-line cultural provision and funding for artists, which makes responding to in-year requests difficult, especially as in this case state aid issues need to be considered.

Jackie Baillie is nothing if not diligent in pressing the case for the Maid of the Loch. She also knows that I have visited her constituency on a number of occasions. I understand that at yesterday’s meeting a report was given on the appeal. I encourage people to support the appeal, as the Maid of the Loch is an important part of our heritage. I understand that some of the plans that were discussed yesterday were longer term. Perhaps as part of that longer-term planning some presentations could be made regarding what funds could be provided: the Heritage Lottery Fund is an avenue that the trust would want to pursue. I am sure that we will return to the issue in the future.

Creative Scotland, Scotland’s national agency for the promotion of the arts, has established a formal place partnership with Dumfries and Galloway. It was fitting that earlier this year—2013, the year of natural Scotland—I formally launched that place partnership in New Galloway, an area of outstanding natural beauty. I also had the pleasure of launching the environmental arts festival Scotland 2013, a flagship of the place partnership, which has been very successful.

Kirkcudbright has a rich history as an artists colony for the Glasgow boys and the Scottish colourists, and today it is a vibrant hub that attracts many artists. Government support and funding for local museums and galleries is administered by Museums Galleries Scotland, which I encourage Kirkcudbright Community Trust to meet in the first instance to discuss how best its ambitions can be supported. As the national development body, Museums Galleries Scotland is best placed to advise on the way forward, in line with its national strategy. I would be interested to know how things develop, but I suggest that that would be the appropriate first step.

The typhoon that struck the Philippines on Friday is one of the worst in history to make landfall and has caused untold destruction and devastation to the Filipino people. I know that members will join me in expressing the Scottish people’s deepest sympathy and condolences, and I have written in those terms to the ambassador and consul general of the Philippines. Following today’s launch of the Philippines typhoon appeal by the Disasters Emergency Committee, I announce that the Scottish Government will donate £600,000 to the appeal. The funds will be spent by some of our leading aid agencies working in the region to provide much-needed relief for the people who are affected, including clean water, food, shelter and medical supplies. In addition to announcing the Scottish Government’s donation, I take this opportunity to urge the people of Scotland to dig deep and help to support aid agencies that are responding to the devastation that the typhoon caused. Response teams from non-governmental organisations, which include Scottish aid workers, are already in the Philippines assessing the situation and beginning to distribute relief supplies. I pay tribute to their work.

We will keep in touch with the UK Government and the aid agencies. The conditions are desperate, and the weather is causing further difficulties in the area. The Disasters Emergency Committee is made up of representatives from different organisations, as the member is well aware, including the British Red Cross—Norman McKinley is chairing the Scottish Disasters Emergency Committee—Age UK and Save the Children. In the context of other disasters, we have found that targeted help for the groups and individuals the member mentioned is important, because they are the most vulnerable people in a very difficult situation. The member’s point is therefore well made. The disaster has resonances of the boxing day tsunami, given the degree and extent of the devastation. Because of the disparate nature of the area’s island geography, there is still a lack of knowledge about what is happening. Constant attention and vigilance is therefore required. There must be an immediate response, as well as a continuing response over the weeks and months ahead.

Devastating disasters such as we have just witnessed cannot be prevented, but there can be planning to help countries to respond and to mitigate some of the risks. We in this country are committed to climate justice. We were one of the first countries in the world, if not the first, to develop a climate justice fund. We doubled our contribution to the fund only weeks ago. It is important that there is an immediate emergency response to disasters, but Liam McArthur is quite correct to say that we must also consider the wider impact of climate change in relation to the devastating disasters that are increasingly happening.

Yes. It is important that we recognise how quickly so many respond to such incidents and, indeed, the fact that they are already there on the ground. I agree with Mr McGrigor that we should send our best wishes to all aid workers either from Scotland or from elsewhere who are seeking to bring relief in what is a very trying and difficult situation.

Jim Eadie has very appropriately mentioned the Mercy Corps and its contribution to international relief. Having had the opportunity to visit the organisation in his constituency, I know that such organisations are constantly vigilant and are constantly dealing with emergency situations. However, the member is also quite right to highlight the issue of resilience and reconstruction. The chamber might not be aware of this, but one of our most eminent architects, John McAslan, was involved in some of the housing restoration work that took place after the disaster in Haiti. We will certainly see what expertise and so on we can identify and mobilise, but it is very important that all nations work together on this. Even as we speak, the United Nations has launched an appeal and I have spoken to Commissioner Kristalina Georgieva about the humanitarian aspects of co-operation across the European Union. We have expertise to offer and I am sure that everyone will want to know that Scotland is behind the aid efforts and that we want to do whatever we can to help people in a situation that we can only imagine. We will do everything that we can to help.

I start by offering my congratulations to Dundee on being shortlisted to become 2017 United Kingdom city of culture. I know that a collaborative approach was taken, with contributions and support from a range of individuals and organisations who helped to put together such a strong bid for Dundee and for Scotland. I pay tribute to the bid team, some of whom are in the public gallery today, but I also recognise that it is the involvement of Dundonians and the embracing of culture by the entire city that make Dundee’s bid so special. I am sure that members will agree that, if given the opportunity, Dundee would showcase the 2017 city of culture programme to the world. That is clearly demonstrated by the cross-party support that I am very pleased to see in Dundee’s bid document. On behalf of the Scottish Government, I reiterate my full support and backing for Dundee’s bid. The timing of the debate is opportune as, later this week, the bid team will, alongside Swansea Bay, Leicester and Hull, make their final presentation in the bid to become the 2017 UK city of culture in the current UK city of culture, Derry/Londonderry. Earlier this month I recorded a message of support for Dundee at the Hannah Maclure gallery, which exhibits the work of artists and designers working with digital media. The gallery also hosts events to celebrate and showcase Dundee’s diverse local culture with an exhibition programme that brings new and exciting work to a local and international audience. The venue was fitting, too, because the curator of the gallery is also the curator of the Neon festival, Scotland’s only digital arts festival, which was taking place that week in Dundee. That encapsulates perfectly the real connections and flourishing partnerships that are the very essence of Dundee’s bid. Dundee’s website, we Dundee, has helped connect people to the bid, allowing them to help shape and be involved in it. The website shows the tremendous imagination and enthusiasm that people have exhibited in relation to what becoming city of culture 2017 would mean to them individually and for the city. If members have not yet seen the website, I recommend that they do. Dundee’s bid is based on the strength of the creative and cultural sectors of the city. It is focused on the vision of encouraging discovery, regeneration and transformation. It intends to deliver a robust legacy that will build youth and community engagement through cultural activities. The bid’s signature events will attract international audiences, and a series of major events throughout the year will build on the city’s existing programme of mini-festivals and events, based on Dundee’s strongest characteristics as chosen by Dundonians: the river, the light, the people and the environment. Dundee City Council has taken a lead in using culture and creativity to help to tackle wider social issues in a range of innovative ways and has a strong track record of embedding culture into Dundee and further afield. The further positive impact that being the city of culture would bring would be a fitting legacy for Dundee as it continues to use culture and creativity as a catalyst to promote regeneration—an area that the city has been a pioneer in. City of culture 2017 status offers a potential tipping point—a chance for the city to use culture to power the momentum of regeneration that has been growing in recent years. The redevelopment of the waterfront is reconnecting Dundee city centre to the River Tay. In the last two decades, Dundee has invested significantly in culture and creativity as its future direction. The famous royal research ship Discovery, Robert Falcon Scott’s Antarctic exploration vessel, which was built in Dundee, is back home and berthed in the city harbour, providing an inspirational focus. Culture and creativity are at the heart of developments in Dundee, which is delivering a large £1 billion waterfront regeneration programme. It includes the £45 million Victoria and Albert Dundee museum, which will showcase Scottish contemporary design and international exhibitions to tell the fantastic story of Scotland’s design history. The foundations in Dundee are strong: from cartoon illustration, gaming, Oor Wullie and Desperate Dan to Dundee Contemporary Arts welcoming over 300,000 people each year to a diverse and challenging programme of visual art, cinema, workshops, education and research. Dundee has variety. Discovery, Scotland’s international film festival for young audiences, has just celebrated its 10th anniversary. The Dundee Repertory Theatre is a leading Scottish cultural institution, comprising the only full-time repertory theatre company in the UK, Scotland’s contemporary dance company and a cutting edge creative learning team. The rep has won awards consistently and developed an international reputation for the breadth and quality of its work. Caird Hall is one of Scotland’s most popular city centre conference and cultural venues, which played host to the finale of the BBC Scottish proms in 2010 and 2011 and is used for a wide variety of classical and contemporary concerts, conferences and other civic events. The recently refurbished McManus—Dundee’s art gallery and museum—has won many accolades for its sensitive representation and for the quality of its refurbishment. From exhibits that relate to the life of early man in the area, stunning paintings and decorative art through to artefacts from industries past and present, the city’s collections, many of which are recognised as being of national significance, give an insight into Dundee and its people. Testament to that, following the McManus’s reopening in 2011, more than 160,000 people now visit each year. Dundee’s vision is to use culture and creativity to help to create a step change and close the circle of opportunity by using city of culture status to help to ensure that more people attend cultural events and activities. It wants to celebrate and embrace the culture of the city and its people and make it highly relevant, inclusive and accessible. There is a focus on engaging with those who are deprived, disadvantaged or disengaged through long-term projects based in each of the city’s eight local communities, which will bring together creative partners with host communities at the centre. This, for me, is the heart of the bid: people, communities, and the recognition of the fundamental importance of culture to place and the profound impact that it has on our very quality of life. Dundee understands, as we do, that culture is pivotal to our wellbeing and the bid says so much about the type of city that it wants to be. I have not yet cited the impressive economic benefits that the 2017 city of culture status may bring. The key finding outlined that if Dundee were to be the city of culture, it would benefit from tourist expenditure of up to £80 million and the creation of up to 1,000 full-time equivalent jobs. I do not focus solely on the economic benefits, however. A benefit of culture is that it invites us to reflect on who we are and gives us an understanding of what we can become as individuals, a community and—in Dundee’s case—a city. That is what delights me about Dundee’s bid. It is committed; it is bold; and it is ambitious. I move, That the Parliament endorses Dundee’s bid to become the UK City of Culture 2017 and congratulates Dundee on reaching the final stage of the competition; recognises the significant contribution that Dundee makes to Scotland’s rich cultural life and welcomes the local and national benefits that being UK City of Culture 2017 would bring while acknowledging that this accolade will strengthen the city’s growing reputation as a hub of cultural and creative excellence; agrees that the timing is right for Dundee as an international centre for the creative industries, the home of the world-renowned centre, Dundee Contemporary Arts, and the proposed £45 million V&amp;A at Dundee; considers that the city is a national success story with a huge amount to offer to locals and visitors alike and would be a deserved holder of this prestigious title; notes the cross-party support behind the bid and congratulates the team behind Dundee’s bid document, Tipping Point, on producing an excellent submission and welcomes the involvement of so many people and organisations in the process, which has seen the bid go from strength to strength, and recognises that, if successful, the city will benefit from tourist expenditure of up to £80 million and the establishment of up to 1,000 full-time equivalent jobs.

I thank everyone for their contributions, and I thank the Parliament for enabling us to have the debate this week, which is an extremely important week for the bid preparation and the delivery of the bid. The city of culture competition represents an exciting opportunity for Dundee and for Scotland to promote our cultural and creative talent, and to showcase our inspiring buildings and places to the world. The aspirations of Dundee’s bid chime with my vision for a Scotland that promotes its talent both at home and to the world. The timing is right—the city of discovery, Dundee, is on a journey on which the potential is unrivalled. It deserves the opportunity to demonstrate the creativity and cultural heartbeat of what the city has to offer. Alison Johnstone talked very well in her speech about that journey. Given where Dundee has been and is going, the city of culture bid comes at the right time for Dundee to grasp it as an opportunity and to succeed. The recently announced programme of focus years includes the year of innovation, architecture and design in 2016, and the year of history, heritage and archaeology in 2017. All that would help in the lead-up to the city of culture 2017, particularly because of the strengths and talent that Dundee has in those areas. The bid brings a wealth of opportunities to align and boost relevant activity with a view to focusing on visitors from across the globe who are keen to learn more about this country’s rich history, architecture, heritage and culture. Reflecting on my visit to the Derry/Londonderry city of culture 2013 to hear about and see that city’s experience, I know that it is not just about what happens in the year but that the lead-up to the year is really important. The showcase focus years will therefore be of benefit in the lead-up to city of culture 2017. I want to reflect, too, on the partnership to which a number of members referred, including Liz Smith. The partnership that we see in Dundee, not just for the city of culture bid but generally, is something on which Dundee should be congratulated. I know that Joe FitzPatrick and Shona Robison, as the local MSPs, are passionate in their advocacy of Dundee, but they also reflect what I think is the important unique selling point of Dundee, which is the fact that it can bring together the council, the universities, media and business. Other cities could probably take a lesson from that partnership, which has been one of the catalysts for making the bid especially strong. Alison McInnes was correct in identifying the benefits of the bid for the wider north-east, including Angus and Perth. She is right about the potential that needs to be realised for tourism in that wider area.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. This speech is about respect for Dundee, so I hope that everybody will get behind the motion at decision time. It is entirely right that through this debate the Parliament recognises the contribution that Dundee makes to the rich quality of the cultural offering that we have in Scotland and outlines clearly our support for Dundee’s bid to become the 2017 city of culture. As we have heard, Dundee lives and breathes culture and creativity. Last year alone, more than 2,400,000 people attended cultural venues in the city and over 280,000 people attended festivals. A bid centred on discovery, regeneration and transformation would be an ideal demonstrator for Dundee as a city of culture because it would show how those things can be done well in a city that is facing and overcoming challenges. Jenny Marra was right to talk about the challenges that the city faces and the opportunity that the city of culture bid gives to tackle them. I think that the bid is very strong indeed on the themes of discovery, regeneration and transformation. The city is physically being transformed before our eyes. However, the city of culture bid can ensure that there will be a spiritual and cultural change that can be the heartbeat of the city going forward. It is not just about the physical aspects but about the cultural aspects. As the Scottish culture secretary, I am excited and enthusiastic about supporting the Dundee bid, and support for it has been exhibited from across the chamber today. Recognition as 2017 city of culture would perfectly encapsulate Dundee’s philosophy and allow Dundee to build on the successes of the Derry/Londonderry city of culture this year. Dundee’s bid provides an opportunity for culture and creativity, and for helping people of all ages and backgrounds come together from communities across Scotland, the UK and further afield. The bid presents an unrivalled opportunity to help widen access and participation and to raise the quality and diversity of our cultural offerings across communities in Dundee. Dundee is a city that is proud, confident and rooted in culture and heritage. It is a city that not only cherishes its diverse heritage and traditions, but continually seeks to create further opportunities to share and to celebrate. I hope to see Dundee designated the 2017 city of culture and I am delighted that we can come together on a cross-party basis across the chamber to back the Dundee bid. Good luck, Dundee. [Applause.]

I, too, congratulate Mike MacKenzie on securing this debate and on making a fine speech. Over the past 11 years, the RIAS Andrew Doolan award for best building in Scotland has showcased and celebrated our best new Scottish architecture not only through its award-winning schemes but through the remarkable strength of each year’s associated shortlist. It is difficult to overstate the value of well-designed architecture to the kind of place that I am sure we all want Scotland to be. The quality of the buildings in which we live and work, that we use or which we simply pass each day strongly affects our perception of the quality of our lives. The quality of the architecture in our cities, towns and rural areas is at its best a great source of national pride, so it is vital that we constantly aim to improve the quality of Scotland’s built environment. Awards for architectural design are immensely valuable to that aim as they display the highest quality of work and act as a spur to excellence. The award for the best building in Scotland, which we now know as the RIAS Andrew Doolan award, was founded by Andrew Doolan in 2002. We have much for which to thank him, both in his vision and his generosity. Andrew Doolan was an excellent architect and outstanding entrepreneur, and his own excellent design work won a number of RIAS regeneration of Scotland and Civic Trust awards. One of his earliest projects, Ingram Square in Glasgow, was the first substantial renovation in the merchant city, and many will agree that his visionary work there acted as a catalyst for the regeneration of Glasgow city centre. Like the RIAS and this Government, Andrew Doolan believed in the importance of nurturing and celebrating good design and raising the profile of new Scottish architecture at home and abroad, and his benevolence and drive, together with the RIAS’s highly commendable work, have given this award its prominence and prestige. Since 2005, following Andrew Doolan’s death in the previous year, the Scottish Government has contributed funding to the award and event, along with the Doolan family. With a cash prize of £25,000, it is the largest architecture prize in the UK. The scale of the award raises its profile greatly and tells the world of the importance that Scotland places on its built environment. It also tells developers of the importance that the Government places on high-quality design. I agree with both Patricia Ferguson and Mike MacKenzie. Patricia Ferguson is right to say that Scotland values its architecture and that our architecture is highly regarded internationally. However, Mike MacKenzie is also right to say that we all have a responsibility to ensure that the importance of architecture is understood generally and popularly. The projects on this year’s Doolan award shortlist are astonishingly varied, with project costs ranging from no budget at all for the Ghost of Water Row in Govan, to over £30 million for the Sir Duncan Rice library to which Stewart Stevenson referred. The projects demonstrate that creative excellence is not related to budget and show the difference that can be made to individual lives and the success of communities and places when the immense potential of good design as a multiplier of value is recognised and supported by enlightened clients. To the congratulations from across the chamber today, I add my personal congratulations to the firms that are on the shortlist. It is vital that there is a wide understanding of the value of good building design. In 2008, we increased the Scottish Government’s contribution to the Doolan award from £15,000 to £25,000. The additional Scottish Government contribution enables touring exhibitions of the shortlisted schemes to be created by the RIAS, and the exhibitions travel to places that are easily accessible to the public. It is particularly important to me that we build greater public interest in Scotland’s new architecture. The Doolan award helps to generate a public and professional debate about quality and the exceptional place that we want the Scotland of the future to be. Earlier this year I launched “Creating Places - A policy statement on architecture and place for Scotland”, to which Joan McAlpine referred and in which there is a commitment to continue to support the Doolan award. I advise Annabel Goldie that the new policy is endorsed by the planning minister, which addresses her points about the importance of bringing architecture and planning together. Within the new policy, I have also made a commitment to support the RIAS festival of architecture in 2016, and I thoroughly commend the RIAS on that initiative. The festival will be a celebration of Scotland’s great architecture and will raise awareness of the impact of good design on our lives. It will provide an exciting opportunity for Scotland to promote our creative talent in architecture and to showcase our inspiring buildings and places. I very much share the aspirations of the RIAS for the promotion of Scotland’s architectural talent both at home and to the world. To tie in with the RIAS festival, we recently announced the designation of 2016 as a Scottish Government focus year on the theme of innovation, architecture and design. I say to Jean Urquhart that that focus year will provide a great opportunity for the promotion of the educational aspects that she wants to see. The focus year will encompass Scotland’s heritage and modern attributes in relation to architecture, engineering, renewables, fashion and textiles, science, technology and more. The theme also recognises the wealth of excellent opportunities to promote innovative architectural design in Scotland, many examples of which will be found among the projects that are shortlisted for, as well as the winners of, the RIAS Andrew Doolan award. It is entirely right that the Parliament has today recognised the contribution that Scottish and international architects continue to make to the quality of the built environment of our country. Our best new architecture, such as that which is celebrated through the RIAS Andrew Doolan award, helps to support the development of a confident country with a strong cultural identity and a dynamic international image. The award promotes Scotland as a creative and innovative place with a valuable contribution to make to the world. I therefore thank the RIAS and the many project teams that have featured in the Doolan award for their tireless efforts to help to build a better and more prosperous future for Scotland. I look forward to tonight’s award ceremony, at which I will, once again, have the pleasure of announcing the winner in the golden envelope. I say to Stewart Stevenson that I do not yet know this year’s winner; however, given that the shortlist displays great quality, ingenuity and innovation, I am certain that the winner will be worthy of the Doolan legacy. 13:19 Meeting suspended until 14:30. 14:30 On resuming—

I, too, give my best wishes to Fiona McLeod. She is clearly passionate about Westerton. I thank Fiona McLeod for lodging the motion, Joan McAlpine for so ably introducing the debate and all members who have contributed to it. Scotland’s conservation areas are important social and cultural assets that reflect our long-standing tradition of town planning and place making. In this country, we have an internationally celebrated heritage of castles and country houses, of historic cities and towns. We have many important individual historic places, but we have also specialised in building entire new towns and creating new communities. That stretches back to the medieval burghs of David I, to our Georgian new towns and to the 19th century tenements. In places as far apart as Edinburgh, Inverary, New Lanark and St Andrews, we can celebrate places that are valued for their interest as set pieces of urban design, which were built with a clear vision in mind. That tradition carried right through to the 20th century. In Westerton garden suburb, we see a brand-new type of development for Scotland that was based not on an ensemble of tenements and terraces but on small-scale picturesque ideas and principles closely associated with the arts and crafts movement in architecture around the turn of the 20th century. The multipane windows, half-timbered roofs and roughcast walls were all a world—though only a train journey—away from the tenements that working people had been used to. Instead, the new residents were offered quiet leafy streets, which were a feature linked closely with the emerging garden city movement. The architect for the Westerton garden suburb, J A W Grant, consulted Raymond Unwin, who was one of the key figures in the garden city movement that was flourishing against the backdrop of long-standing concerns about the housing conditions of working people. This was a new way of thinking about housing, both in the form and layout of the village and in its ownership. The Glasgow Garden Suburb Tenants society was a pioneering co-ownership scheme—developed long before the idea was popularised in the 1970s or again more recently—to help people into the property market. It is entirely right that we should celebrate the 100th anniversary of Westerton, which was Scotland’s first garden suburb. Westerton made a clear link between our housing and our health and happiness and is a marvellous example of the garden suburb movement. The suburb was created prior to the important housing legislation of 1919 that provided for the building of council houses. In fact, the style, materials and layout of Westerton became the basis for the pioneering housing schemes that the Glasgow Corporation laid out at Knightswood, Riddrie and Bellahouston. In that sense, Westerton proved to be a test bed for the new social housing. Celebration of places such as Westerton garden suburb is important not only for those who live locally, but for all of us, as it provides the opportunity to recognise the important social and cultural role that the built environment plays in our lives. Following the First Minister’s recent announcement of the themes for future focus years, Hanzala Malik will be pleased to know that, in 2016, we will have a further opportunity to celebrate places such as Westerton garden suburb—alongside some of Scotland’s many other great achievements in the built environment—as that year is set to focus on innovation, architecture and design. That should be not only a celebration of our famous and high-profile architecture, but an opportunity to recognise the value of our everyday places. Those are the places where we spend much of our time and they are of real significance to us as individuals and communities. They are the places that reflect who we are and how we live. Places such as Westerton garden suburb will continue to play an important role during 2017, when the focus year will celebrate history and heritage. I am pleased that the young people of Westerton have been able to take part in activities that were organised with the input of Architecture and Design Scotland and which allowed them to creatively learn about the ideas that informed the planning and design of the place where they live. We can still learn from Westerton today. For example, we can learn about the importance of making real connections between the design of a place and the community that it supports; the need to take a long-term view and the pioneering involvement of residents in the management of the estate; and the importance of green space and the creation of walkable neighbourhoods. Those are just a few of the lessons that continue positively to influence our thinking on housing settlements today. Parallels can be drawn between Westerton and many of our recent Scottish sustainable communities initiative exemplar projects, which aim to be the conservation areas of the future. That is why I was pleased to launch Scotland’s first historic environment strategy for consultation earlier in the summer. It sets out a vision for Scotland’s historic environment that is rooted in the values that that environment provides to communities and individuals such as those in Westerton, as well as in the foundation that the environment sets for people’s sense of place by being the backdrop to where they live, work and play. Likewise, in “Creating Places”, the revised architecture policy for Scotland, we make it clear that place is not only the physical environment but the people who live and work there and the activities that are supported. It is clear from the enthusiasm with which the community has celebrated its centenary that Westerton is a truly successful place from which strong social bonds have emerged. I was intrigued to hear about the penny farthing, which must have been of great entertainment for many. The foundation stone for the new village was laid on 19 April 1913, and I am delighted that Westerton continues to thrive today. The Glasgow Garden Suburb Tenants prospectus of 1913 stated that the Westerton project was founded on “a sound commercial basis and merits the support of every public spirited citizen who is desirous of seeing a system of housing arise in our midst which makes for better health and improved moral and social conditions.” It went on to state the ambition to create a place where “the worker finds a home in beautiful and healthful surroundings, where ... his family enjoy better health and in consequence become better citizens.” Those ambitions have stood the test of time and, alongside the physical place that they created, are worthy of celebration 100 years on. The banners and fun activities related to the centenary celebrations are a wonderful testament to the power of place and of community. The founders of this great place would have been rightly proud. I add my congratulations on 100 years of Westerton garden suburb. Meeting closed at 17:28.

The youth music initiative is creating career pathways for Scotland’s young talent as well as creating enhanced access opportunities. Many would never have participated in music without it. The youth music initiative continues to operate a successful partnership between Fèisean nan Gàidheal, Fèis Rois and Highland Council that delivers 12 weeks per year of introduction to traditional music in all 188 primary schools in the area. That provision does not duplicate or interfere with existing music provision in schools. Discussions are due to take place between Scotland sings, the big, big sing and Creative Scotland to ensure that young people who participate in youth music initiative projects across Scotland have the opportunity to engage with Scotland sings.

Our intention is to review the youth music initiative. The terms have still to be agreed on, but the review is likely to focus on sustaining participation—particularly among the age group that Rob Gibson mentioned—and on how we can identify and share best practice. Given the fèisean movement’s great success in engaging young people in particular, it will be able to contribute to that exercise and is something from which the rest of Scotland can learn.

Edinburgh’s festivals are Scotland’s world-class cultural brand, with an international reputation and appeal unmatched by any other cultural event on the globe. When the festivals forum undertook an impact study in 2011, it found that the festivals generated £261 million of economic impact for Scotland and 5,242 full-time jobs in Edinburgh. The positive results of this year’s festivals—for instance, the fringe saw a 4.6 per cent increase in the number of tickets issued, the book festival’s ticket sales were up nearly 6 per cent on 2012, and the tattoo had another sell-out—mean that it is very likely that the economic impacts of 2011 will have been surpassed.

This year, we had a fantastic summer for the festivals and for tourist numbers. Looking forward to 2014, when we will host the second year of homecoming, the Ryder cup and the Commonwealth games, we have a great opportunity to build on the success of the festivals, which will again take centre stage. Many of the additional events have cultural elements to them. In terms of the income that is generated from the second year of homecoming alone, we are forecasting that there should be an increase of £44 million in the return on investment in events and marketing activity.

Through Creative Scotland, the Scottish Government is doing much to support the film and television industry in Scotland. That includes supporting the local industry, as well as attracting international productions to Scotland. A good example of an indigenous production that was supported by Creative Scotland is the recently premiered film “Sunshine on Leith”, which was set and shot in Edinburgh. An example of inward investment is the new television series “Outlander”, which starts shooting soon in Cumbernauld. It involves the biggest inward investment in film and television that has ever been secured in Scotland. I have established a working group that includes Creative Scotland, Scottish Enterprise, Scottish Development International and the Scottish Government to explore further opportunities to develop film and television production facilities in Scotland.

The delivery group that I set up is currently considering a report evaluating possible sites for a film studio and will meet to consider the next steps in October or November. In investing in a film studio, we must take on board the needs and requirements of the film industry. Some of those requirements and needs may be different between companies. We are considering a range of factors to take the project forward, but I will update Parliament as we progress.

I am pleased that we get the opportunity to answer the question. The widespread public enthusiasm for “The Great Tapestry of Scotland” is evident from the runaway success of the exhibition that was held in the Parliament over the past month. In the first three days alone, more than 9,000 visitors came to see it. The tapestry is one of the largest community projects running in Scotland. It tells Scotland’s story in a uniquely exciting and accessible way. I hope that as many people as possible have the opportunity to see it when it goes on tour shortly. The tapestry project team has been busy working with partners exploring possible venues throughout the country and Historic Scotland has well-developed plans for temporary exhibitions of selected panels of the tapestry at various of its sites starting later this year. I have also asked Historic Scotland and Museums Galleries Scotland to discuss opportunities with the tapestry project team.

It is a fantastic project. More than 1,000 people were involved in it and it is a genuine community arts project. It tells an important story from thousands of years ago to the current day. The tapestry group will have its own views on the reach of the tapestry. One of the reasons why I have asked Museums Galleries Scotland to get involved is that it has a network of accredited museums the length and breadth of Scotland. The two local MSPs for Angus have already contacted Angus Council to discuss taking the tapestry there. However, there may be other areas that could be well represented. The experts on the area are in Museums Galleries Scotland. They can advise different local groups on networking and connecting to the different museums that are available locally. They can also find ways to support the tour, not least on issues such as transportation, lighting and security. The member is correct. There is part of every part of Scotland in the tapestry and we should all support trying to ensure that all of Scotland gets to see it.

I am not responsible for the tapestry. I suggest that Nigel Don contact the Great Scottish Tapestry Charitable Trust, which will determine the initial tour venues. I understand that there is a view that, because the tapestry is such a large piece of work, not everywhere will be able to identify a venue. It is 140m long. I understand that there are already discussions about taking parts of the tapestry to different parts of Scotland. I make it clear that the Government can be supportive but is not responsible for where the tapestry goes on tour. I encourage Nigel Don to engage with the trust to get advice as to how his local community can make the most of the tapestry.

Later this year, the Scottish Government will publish a white paper on independence, which will set out a positive prospectus for an independent Scotland, including for broadcasting.

I have been supportive of the BBC. I have commented in the chamber on cuts that are taking place and their impact on BBC Scotland, and I have clearly supported BBC staff in particular. I remind Neil Bibby that BBC licence fee income from Scotland is £320 million but, in 2012-13, only £102 million of that was due to be spent in Scotland. In current proposals under the union, that figure will reduce to £86 million in 2016-17. As for the BBC’s position after its charter renewal—or possible charter renewal—in 2016, I remind Neil Bibby, who is associated with the better together campaign, that two Conservative bills in the Westminster Parliament would decriminalise non-payment of the licence fee and privatise the BBC. He is associated with that campaign, which gives the Conservatives permission to continue to be involved in broadcasting, and Jackson Carlaw of the Conservatives wants to abolish the licence fee and have the BBC make its own way. If Neil Bibby can forecast where the BBC would be under the union in 2016, he is a better person than anybody in the chamber.

The whole point of having a broadcasting system that is built on BBC Scotland’s staff and assets is to ensure that we invest in productions and commissions in Scotland. For example, for its £290 million of expenditure, RTÉ has four distinct television services, four national radio services, an online presence and other services such as children’s broadcasting and an orchestra. Value for money and—importantly—job security for not only BBC staff but commissioners of TV production in Scotland can be best served by the people of Scotland and as put forward by the SNP.

Creative Scotland supports Scotland’s film industry in a number of ways. The film and television funding programme supports emerging and established film and television talent that is capable of creating distinctive and engaging work that promotes Scotland’s creativity. In the financial year 2013-14, it has an allocation of £4 million. Other forms of support include the locations service, the promotion of Scotland’s film industry at film festivals and events, the provision of advice to film-makers and liaison with other film bodies across the United Kingdom. Creative Scotland contributed funding to four films that made their debut at the Toronto international film festival earlier this month. “Sunshine on Leith”, “The Railway Man”, “Under the Skin” and “Starred Up” each received £300,000 from Creative Scotland.

Jean Urquhart gives the example of Norway and Denmark, which have much to offer in lessons learned through their indigenous film and television production. Another aspect is good writing. Film and television producers say that there must be a good story to tell to ensure the quality of a production. We are talking not just about film and television facilities but about the whole stream that leads up to a final production. Tax credits are a supportive measure in different countries. We welcome the United Kingdom Government’s recent announcement about that, on which we have pressed it for many years. Investment streams can come in different shapes and forms. We are also looking at the support that can be given in colleges and universities to develop careers. We are using the tools that we currently have but we will look to other countries to learn lessons from them. Indeed, when I was in Canada, I spoke to British Columbia, for example, about what support it provided for the film industry, so we are constantly looking at different examples.

The Scottish Government provides funding for learning opportunities such as digital photography, digital archive and heritage classes, silver surfer sessions and intergenerational learning programmes. We can demonstrate that those are of particular interest and appeal to older people and that that approach is proving successful. Since 2009, the Scottish household survey shows an 11.9 per cent increase in people who are 65-plus using the internet for personal use. Although that is encouraging, we know that there is still work to be done in that area and we will continue to work in partnership to find innovative ways to encourage people of all ages to gain the economic, social and cultural benefits of being online.

I went through a number of the different programmes that are available for older people. In terms of the statistics, I am quite happy to update the member on the latest Ofcom figures because there has been an improvement in general participation in Scotland. There are interesting exercises on participation, for example with housing associations in Glasgow, trying to ensure that all the tenants in one place can have access, as that can be easier. As regards library use, members will be familiar with the fact that many libraries are converting their facilities to ensure that access to digital classes can take place. We have been helping the Scottish library and information services to try in particular to support such access. Libraries are familiar places to older people and they provide easy access to learning how to use computers and access the internet.

I last formally met Janet Archer, chief executive officer of Creative Scotland, on 8 August, although we have met informally since. We discussed a range of issues including her new role, progress on corporate planning and creative industries, organisational structures, and plans for the Creative Scotland reception event.

I supported the release of Creative Scotland’s annual plan, which came out in May and set out its proposals for the next year. I am in the process of setting out my letter of guidance for Creative Scotland, as I do for a variety of different public sector organisations. In that letter, I will set out publicly the priorities that I am giving to Creative Scotland. I plan to issue that letter of guidance to Creative Scotland in the near future and a copy of the letter will be put in the Scottish Parliament information centre so that all members will be able to access it.

The Scottish Government shares the concerns that I am sure all members have about the humanitarian crises enveloping Syria as millions are forced to flee their homes to escape the conflict. That is why we announced that we would be doubling our contribution to the Disasters Emergency Committee appeal for Syria by donating a further £100,000. The funds will be spent by some of our leading aid agencies that are working in the region to provide relief for those affected.

The UK Government has provided considerable funds for humanitarian aid, but it has made it clear that it does not plan to ease the asylum rules for refugees from Syria. The First Minister urged the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs in a letter of 14 September to prioritise applications from Syrians who are entering the UK and seeking asylum from the current atrocities. The Scottish Government supports the Refugee Council’s representations to the UK Government and has offered to play its part in providing a welcoming and safe home for Syrian refugees.

First, I acknowledge the UK Government’s significant contribution to the humanitarian aid effort. The Disasters Emergency Committee, to which our funding has gone, works in a co-ordinated way and liaises with other agencies in the area and in the UK, which is very important indeed. However, I encourage Jamie McGrigor to urge the UK Government to think about the consequences for those in the refugee camps, and those Syrians who are already in Scotland and are concerned about whether they have leave to remain or will have to return. It is very important that all agencies in Government think about priorities with regard to the refugees, and in particular raise concerns with the UK Government on the need to ensure that it prioritises applications from Syrians who are seeking refugee status.

I would like to start with a quote from “A Herbal” by the late Seamus Heaney: As between clear blue and cloud, Between haystack and sunset sky, Between oak tree and slated roof, I had my existence. I was there. Me in place and the place in me. Those words capture brilliantly the sense of place that characterises our relationship with our historic environment. As with all great poets, Seamus Heaney cuts to the heart of the matter and conveys succinctly the inseparability of place and being. A few hundred yards from this place, the funeral of John Bellany, Scotland’s greatest artist, is taking place today. As Scotland’s culture secretary, I would like to pay tribute to him and his art, which was inspired in many ways by place—his place—his beloved Port Seton. It is the relationship between people and place that underpins this Government’s approach to the historic environment. Indeed, in my Talbot Rice memorial lecture in June, I set out the value that this Government and this nation place on culture and heritage in and of themselves, because they bind and connect our past, our present and our future; tell the stories about where we have come from and who we are; and help us to reflect on who we could be. I also made it clear that the Scottish Government already accepts the case for the role of Government in supporting the cultural sector, including our rich historic environment. I know that such sectors can deliver, because I see it in action. For this Government, the case has been made. We do not measure the worth of culture and heritage solely in pounds and pence, as they do so much more—they are part of who we are as individuals and as a nation. The historic environment is part of our everyday lives. It provides us all with a sense of place and cultural identity, it contributes to our individual and collective wellbeing, and it enhances regional and local distinctiveness. It literally connects people to place. Over the summer, I have seen the breadth and depth of Scotland’s rich historic environment first hand, from JM Barrie’s birthplace in Kirriemuir, which is cared for by the National Trust for Scotland, to Arbroath abbey, which played a hugely important role in our history and continues to welcome visitors from around the world. I also had the opportunity to meet members of the Arbroath abbey action group, and I would like to thank them for their hard work in seeking to promote the abbey around the globe. That is an issue that we might return to when Liz Smith’s amendment is discussed. I welcome Liz Smith to her new role. Recently, I also had the pleasure of visiting the 100-year-old picture house in Campbeltown, which received a building repair grant last year as part of a package that will fund an extensive restoration programme. The picture house is a well-used and much-loved building in the town, and I am delighted that Historic Scotland has been able to play a key role in conserving it for future generations. As part of today’s debate, I am pleased to announce £1.7 million of investment in a number of projects across Scotland: Scapa Flow visitor centre and museum; Duart castle on Mull; statues on the Kelvin way in Glasgow; Saltcoats town hall; and the former Rosebank distillery at Camelon. Those building repair grants scheme awards will help the owners to meet the costs of conserving the historic character of those important buildings. I have seen the impact of such grants. Only last week, I visited Rosslyn chapel to mark the removal of the scaffolding. A grant of £1.6 million from Historic Scotland contributed to necessary repairs to the fabric of the iconic building.

I hear what the member says—I think that she makes an extremely important point. A great deal of investment has to take place in the pre-1919 buildings. That is a key aspect that we are trying to support, particularly through skills and conservation training. The member is correct to identify that, although public sector investment and support are provided, the majority of historic buildings are in private hands. We must find better ways to ensure that we address impacts such as those of climate change. I will come on to those matters later in my speech. As well as being a unique asset that is valuable in its own right, our historic environment generates wider social and economic benefits. For example, one in five of all school visits is to a historic site, while organisations such as Archaeology Scotland, Historic Scotland, the NTS and the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland promote understanding to learners of all ages. Together, the NTS and Historic Scotland welcome around 200,000 learners each year through free educational visits to properties in care. Returning to Sarah Boyack’s point, the care and maintenance of the historic environment is an important factor in the economic viability of Scotland’s construction industry, with an estimated £600 million spent on pre-1919 buildings each year. That investment and expenditure supports employment across Scotland and has been an important part in retaining a base, made up of a range of local businesses across the country, in the traditional skills required to repair and maintain the historic environment. We need to continue to ensure that that continues and thrives. The historic environment also makes a vital contribution to our tourism industry. Evidence indicates that 16 million tourists visited historic environment attractions in 2011, representing more than one in three of recorded visits to all Scottish attractions. Our historic environment is a unique economic asset that contributes in excess of £2 billion to Scotland’s economy and supports in excess of 60,000 full-time equivalent employees. Our built heritage also gives character and definition to many of our cities, towns and villages. For that reason, it is an important component in place-making and provides a basis on which to regenerate town centres or act as a guide for new development. Rather than see the historic environment as a constraint, our best new architecture draws inspiration from the past. The redevelopment of the national museum of Scotland has shown how successfully new and old can be brought together, and it has become Scotland’s most visited tourist attraction since reopening. Our historic environment is facing considerable challenges. The current financial constraints—I am sure that we will hear more about that from Patricia Ferguson—cut across both the public and the private sectors, and they impact on all of us. We know that finances are tight. The impacts of climate change on the historic environment are also wide ranging and potentially devastating.

I am sure that Sandra White welcomed the investment in the statues on the Kelvin walkway. As the member well knows, a substantial investment was announced in cultural terms for the Commonwealth games. It was announced in July not just for Glasgow but for across the country. However, I am sure that he will welcome the announcement that I have already made about historic investment for the statues in Glasgow. I now return to the issue of climate change and how that can have potentially damaging effects. Rising sea levels and increased storm events endanger historic landscapes, structures, buildings and archaeology in the coastal zone. Some of Scotland’s most special and internationally recognised sites, such as parts of the heart of neolithic Orkney world heritage site, are among those most at risk. I believe that it is our role as a Government to create the conditions in which our historic environment can best address those issues and continue to flourish in its own right. That is why I commissioned a fundamental review of historic environment policies in 2012. The programme board for the review and the three associated workstreams, which carried out the work, comprised more than 60 individuals representing a wide range of organisations in the historic environment, including the NTS, RCAHMS, the Built Environment Forum Scotland and the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland. That effective collaboration demonstrates the genuine enthusiasm and passion that exists in individuals and organisations across Scotland for our history and heritage. During the review, it became apparent that Scotland needed its first cohesive, overarching strategy for its historic environment to set out a common vision and provide clear direction for all parts of the sector. In order to address that need, a strategy was developed in close partnership with colleagues from across the historic environment sector, and its content was informed and shaped by the review carried out in 2012. The document that emerged from that process is Scotland’s first-ever overarching strategy for the historic environment and it belongs not to Government but to the people of Scotland. I take this opportunity to thank all who contributed to the review process and the development of the draft strategy. The strategy is a high-level document that sets out a vision and a definition, and it is underpinned by three key aims: first, to investigate and record our historic environment and to continue to develop our knowledge, understanding and interpretation of our past and how best to conserve, sustain and present it; secondly, to care for and protect the historic environment in order to both enjoy and benefit from it and to conserve and enhance it for the benefit of future generations; and thirdly, to share and celebrate the richness and significance of the fascinating and inspirational diversity of our heritage. Working collectively across the public, private and third sectors, and maximising the potential of our volunteers to deliver those aims, will deliver huge benefits for our historic environment. It is important to take a holistic approach to the management of caring for and protecting our historic environment, and to acknowledge the close links between the cultural and natural elements of the environment and our sense of place. The historic environment has a key role in regeneration; indeed, the recent report on town centres also indicates how we must look at care and protection. On-going maintenance, as we have heard, must ensure that we have stronger and safer communities, maintaining that sense of place. Sustainability will very much be part and parcel of the approach, particularly towards the 500,000 traditionally constructed domestic buildings built before 1919—a matter that we have touched on in the debate. Sharing and celebrating our historic environment is important, and we have a collective opportunity to identify how best to do that—I take on board the points made in Liz Smith’s amendment and I look forward to hearing more from her in that regard. How we share and celebrate is a matter of active citizenship and the volunteering, which I will come on to later. We must engage with everybody. It is not just a case of engaging with the official experts because they are frequently not the experts; the experts are as much those people who know about, are informed by and live in the local community. Audience engagement is important, too. Investigating and recording is hugely important to our heritage, archives and records. A great deal of activity has been undertaken or is under way in investigating and recording the historic environment through a range of different bodies. It is not the intention of the strategy to reinvent the wheel; rather, it is to champion the common endeavour and to seek ways, perhaps through the successful model of the research framework for archaeology, to harness and collate information and knowledge to ensure its best use and effectiveness. The draft strategy was subject to public consultation between 8 May and 31 July. Initial feedback indicates that the majority of respondents, including key organisations such as the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, support the need for a strategy and its overarching aims. Today’s debate is an opportunity for MSPs to contribute to the development of the strategy. It is important to stress that the strategy will not impose additional burdens on the sector. It is a framework that will help to ensure that decisions are taken in an informed way and at the right level, and it will enable the sector to prioritise its activities collectively. The strategy is driving positive change. For example, in line with priorities identified in the draft document, we have established a collaborative group, comprising the Scottish Government, Historic Scotland, COSLA and local authority representatives, which has been tasked to consider how the historic environment can best be managed within the planning and other regulatory systems. Similarly, we have established a heritage tourism group to consider how best to make full use of our heritage assets. We are also in the early stages of setting up a learning and volunteering group to ensure that we capture the value of the historic environment to people’s quality of life—through enhancing volunteering activity, for example. Those are early steps, but the collaboration and partnership working that lie at the heart of each of the groups bode well for the future of our historic environment and improving the overall resilience of the sector in face of the challenges ahead. Delivering the strategy will require the commitment and enthusiasm of all in the historic environment, from academics and professionals with specialist knowledge and skills, through all aspects of local and national government, to individuals and communities taking an interest in their local historic environment. For example, local authorities play a key role in supporting our historic environment through the planning system, community development and cultural services, including museums and archives. They will continue to be a key partner in delivering the strategy. In short, we need to adopt a team Scotland approach, wisely advocated in George Reid’s review of the National Trust for Scotland, which was published in 2010. We cannot work in isolation if we are to achieve the best for our historic environment, and for Scotland, today. As I have said, this is Scotland’s strategy—we need to collectively own and deliver the strategy. The strategy sets out a framework that will help to deliver positive outcomes for our historic environment. We as a Government need to ensure that we play our part in the delivery of the strategy. That includes ensuring that the historic environment is better factored in to other public policy debates, such as the regeneration of town centres, through to capturing the excellent work of our national collections. That also includes my proposals to merge Historic Scotland and RCAHMS. Through my role as Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs, I am very familiar with both organisations’ work and I have long been impressed by the professionalism and expertise that the staff demonstrate. The functions of both organisations are hugely important in helping us to care for, protect and manage our rich historic environment. Indeed, the value that the Scottish Government places on the functions of both organisations underpins our approach to the merger. The merger is necessary now to ensure that the functions of both Historic Scotland and RCAHMS can be preserved and sustained for the future. The remit for the business case for the merger was to focus on sustainability, and not savings, as a key driver. I will expect the new body to deliver more effectively as a single organisation, and to play a greater enabling role in supporting other organisations that play a major role in looking after the historic environment. Successful delivery will safeguard the long-term sustainability of the functions, secure the skills and expertise of staff and build the resilience of the sector. As part of this year’s programme for government, we intend to introduce legislation to facilitate the merger in early 2014, and I look forward to debating the detail of that bill with parliamentary colleagues. Our new strategy sets out a vision for the historic environment that can be shared, owned and delivered across the sector. It provides a framework for the sector to work in partnership to deliver significant and sustainable benefits for our historic environment, and it represents the Government’s ambition for culture and heritage. It points the way forward to a brighter future for our heritage—and for the people of Scotland, whose lives are enriched in so many ways by our unique historic environment. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the work carried out by organisations across Scotland’s historic environment sector, including charitable bodies and local government, to develop the first ever Historic Environment Strategy for Scotland; further welcomes views from all members to inform the strategy and ensure that it will deliver the best outcomes for Scotland’s precious and unique historic environment, and recognises the importance of collaborative working in the sector to enable Scotland’s rich heritage to continue to contribute to its economy, society and communities so that future generations can enjoy and benefit from its built heritage.

I am sure that, as the bill passes through Parliament, we will have plenty opportunities in committee and in the chamber to debate some of these issues, but will the member acknowledge the fact that the vast majority of organisations support the merger, including the National Trust for Scotland?

I cannot talk about the budget tomorrow, but I can reassure the member that over the last period, between 2011-12 and 2013-14, expenditure on properties and care, for example, in terms of the conservation aspects of Historic Scotland’s budget, went from £11.5 million to £14 million. The investment in the conservation aspects in the grants has been protected during a very tight settlement over the last period.

Only last night in Linlithgow, I heard a fantastic presentation by one of our local historians, Bruce Jamieson, about Linlithgow’s connection to James IV. In referring to James IV’s investment, Liz Smith omitted to mention Linlithgow palace—I am lucky to be the MSP who represents Linlithgow—whose visitor numbers have increased by a massive 36 per cent compared with last year.

On the merger, there is some way to travel in terms of parliamentary scrutiny, but it is important that we put the staff first. Over a long period, the staff have been working together in relation to operational activity to learn about each other and to provide that support. That will be an important part of our consideration. We need to have public accountability, but we must also remember that many of the staff are just getting on with the job and are developing joint working as we speak.

The member makes an important point. We have supported long-distance travel for visits from places that are an hour and a half’s travel from some of our key areas. However, local engagement is really important. I was at Rosslyn chapel just last week, on the first day the local primary school engaged as part of the new idea of guided tours provided by the school. We have had those at Linlithgow palace for many years. Direct engagement can be done at local level, which sometimes has to be led by people in this Parliament—by the likes of Graeme Dey or other MSPs in the area.

I am delighted to have accepted an invitation from David Torrance MSP to visit Wemyss caves. That visit will happen in the next couple of weeks. The issue has to be taken forward with an understanding that it is the collective responsibility of a lot of agencies, and I am glad that the member appreciates that.

The member makes a really important point. Indeed, that is one of the reasons why the Scottish Government has funded a position in COSLA to assist work on the historic environment and to take forward exactly the kind of joint working that will be essential if we are to address some of the issues that she has raised.

That is an important point, which relates to the Labour amendment. However, does Graeme Pearson acknowledge that Historic Scotland has also had growth in commercial income? I made clear when I intervened on Patricia Ferguson that investment in conservation has increased rather than reduced over the period to which Mr Pearson referred. It is important that we constantly invest, but we must look at things in the round, as I made clear to the Education and Culture Committee in its budget scrutiny last year.

Obviously, a variety of events took place and will take place to mark Flodden. Unfortunately, the clan society failed to invite the Scottish Government to its event. I am sure that there was some mistake, and I understand that the society is going to address that. The society clearly has a great opportunity to contact us, and it frequently does so, not least in relation to the funding that it requires for next year’s events.

The member is perhaps overcritical of the strategy. It addresses the importance of community, volunteering, education and partnership at a local level. I refer the member to page 36 of the document, which specifically identifies that. However, part of the reason for the debate is to enable us to hear people’s impressions of the document and, if that is the member’s view, it is important that she has the opportunity to express it.

I thank my parliamentary colleagues for such a stimulating discussion. It is clearly an issue very close to our hearts. We have heard impassioned views about different places, particularly in people’s constituencies. The motion specifically addresses the recent consultation on the historic environment strategy. However, we have also been consulting on the merger and it is understandable that members want to raise issues about the merger within the wider context of the strategy. We have deliberately carried out the consultations simultaneously to allow people that scope and context. I will try to address some of the issues that have been raised about the merger. If I cannot answer them all at this stage, I most certainly will as the bill progresses. I will try to address a number of the points raised in the debate and if I cannot do so now I will get back to members individually. The Parliament has existed for more than 14 years and whenever we have a debate about the historic environment, what comes out loud and clear is the importance that is attached to our past and how we celebrate it and take it forward. This afternoon’s debate has demonstrated that passion again. A number of areas and iconic sites have been mentioned, including Inveraray, which was referred to by Jamie McGrigor. He will be pleased to learn that when I visited Inveraray I was shown not only the investment to date in the town, but the grants and provision that will transform Inveraray. I was delighted to see that investment and the plans for future investment. We heard about Kilsyth from Jamie Hepburn. I am not sure whether I can make a potato reference, but I am sure that one might emerge at some point. We also heard about Bothwell, Angus, the Wemyss caves, the Globe Inn, Langside, our cities and Skara Brae. We also heard references to fireplaces, forts and baths from Fiona McLeod, so I thought that the prize for ingenuity of location and passion for the environment might need to go to her, but no, Rob Gibson got the Loch Ness monster in there, so congratulations to him. I want to come back to Rob Gibson’s speech because it was an important one, but I note that he touched on definitions and what is tangible and what is intangible. Some issues have arisen and questions have been asked about the definition of the historic environment in particular. The historic environment inspires us, it provides us with deep roots, it is part of our cultural identity and it helps to define Scotland on the world stage. It is one of the links between the past and the present and it gives us the powerful sense of place that Jayne Baxter mentioned, which defines who we are and also helps to attract visitors to our country. We take pride in it. It is at the core of who we are as a people and it is a real reflection of the essence of our identity. It is no wonder, therefore, that in the period 2008 to 2012 we have seen the membership of Historic Scotland rise by 34 per cent, the membership of the National Trust for Scotland, which is already vast, rise by 2 per cent and the membership of the Historic Houses Association rise by 35 per cent. I understand that visits to historic sites now account for more than a third of all visits to Scottish attractions. I was pleased to visit Abbotsford recently to see the results of a major investment there. The Scottish Government contributed £2.5 million to the project. The public will again be able to visit and appreciate the impressive home of one of Scotland’s literary giants and to view the significant historical collections that are housed there. Before I close the debate I will address a number of comments that were made this afternoon. There were some specific questions about the merger. The initial options appraisal addressed the issues around RCAHMS and the sustainability of its functions. I reassure members that the outline business case considered the merits and value of the functions of both Historic Scotland and RCAHMS. A number of points were made about the definition and whether it is too broad. That raises a point about working with different organisations and groups. The demand for the new definition and also its breadth came from the sector and it has strong support, but having heard the points that were raised during the debate, I think that that is something to reflect on as we develop the draft strategy into the final strategy. On the merger, some points were made about whether there are potential conflicts of interest. In setting out the bill, it will be important to determine which powers will be maintained with ministers to ensure that there is clarity, particularly around grant giving. There is strong interest in that among the different organisations. The theme of climate change came through strongly from both Claire Baker and Sarah Boyack. I say to Claire Baker that Historic Scotland is continuing to deliver on its climate change action plan. If it is something that she feels strongly about, I encourage her to look at the progress on its plan to date and the activity there. It is really important that we take that forward. Some comments were made on joint working, and Rhoda Grant made some significant points on archaeology. In my opening speech, I pointed to the work of the Scottish archaeological research framework, which has brought together and shared resources and professionalism and is an example that other parts of the historic environment skills base can use. There is an important point about how we share resources across the country, and collaboration and co-operation between agencies and local authorities is key. I will keep a close eye on the points that Rhoda Grant made about archaeology in particular. Jamie Hepburn spoke about how the strategy can link in with other areas and what it means for local communities, and a lot of other comments were made on the connection with communities, whether they were about access, management or celebration. The proposed community empowerment and renewal bill, the town centres review and community development trusts present good opportunities to ensure that we do not take a top-down approach to the management of our historic environment but provide resources and mechanisms that ensure that local communities can engage. Graeme Pearson made important points about governance in relation to the merger and the proposed bill in that regard. A transition advisory board has been established to ensure that the interests of staff, in particular, are properly considered during the process. Sustainability is key. The strategy is quite hard in addressing issues to do with climate change and financing; it must also be visionary, so that rather than be defensive about the issue we ensure that we deliver sustainability through investment, as I am determined to do. Perhaps the Parliament could think carefully about whether the role of the historic environment should be debated not just in the Education and Culture Committee but in all committees, whether their remit is to consider climate change, capital infrastructure or whatever, so that points that members raised can be addressed. Members asked whether the strategy and the proposed new body will generate damaging competition between sectors. We cannot remain in territory in which we see things in terms of competition; there must be collaboration. There is already an element of competition between different sites, but the strong gains will be made by linking things, whether we are talking about Stirling castle—I hope that Liz Smith will visit the castle, and I thought that Fiona McLeod produced a masterful demolition of the revisionist view of James IV when she promoted James V’s palace. The promotion of Stirling castle and Bannockburn by the local authority, Historic Scotland and the National Trust is a good example of what we can do if, instead of competing, we promote attractions in a wider area, thereby giving people an incentive to stay there. Rob Gibson made an important point when he talked about linking people and place and telling the stories. The built, tangible environment is there because of a story of people and place, and its interpretation will be done best when there is collaboration, whether we are talking about the Bruce trail, which Joan McAlpine mentioned, or the industrial stories that are told at, for example, the National Mining Museum. We should heed what George Reid said in his assessment of the National Trust: we need a team Scotland approach. I am trying hard, through the strategy and the proposed bill, to put us in a place in which we can take forward such an approach, but that cannot happen in isolation. If we are to tell the stories, collaboration is important. It is about linking people and the local stories about which people are passionate. I can get in my potato reference now, for Jamie Hepburn. We heard from Bruce Jamieson last night about the Linlithgow connections to Flodden. James IV lost his life at the battle, but so did the head chef and the gardener at Linlithgow palace. We should remember that not just the “flooers o’ the forest”, however important they were, but ordinary people lost their lives. It can be the local historians and volunteers who know best how to connect the stories of people and place. On that note, I congratulate Duncan Campbell, of Colinton, who I was pleased to learn has won the 2013 my place civic champion award. He has made an outstanding contribution to the promotion and protection of Colinton’s heritage—his work is an example of the importance of volunteers. Liz Smith’s amendment relates to the strategy’s international dimension. She will be pleased to know that only today we announced the programme for the forthcoming focus years, which will provide opportunities for people to engage with our rich heritage. In particular, Scotland’s year of innovation, architecture and design in 2016 will celebrate our heritage and modern successes in relation to engineering and architecture, and the year of history, heritage and archaeology in 2017 will celebrate Scotland’s historic environment and past. I am excited about the strategy. I welcome members’ constructive contributions to the debate—I see that the Presiding Officer wants me to close. I will be delighted to take forward all the points that members made. I was not able to respond to all the points, but I will do so at the earliest opportunity.

The Scottish Government, through its public agencies, provides a range of support for the creative industries. Creative Scotland, Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise, Skills Development Scotland and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, together with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, belong to the Scottish creative industries partnership. Local authorities have a crucial role to play, and I was glad to discuss assistance for creative industries with them only yesterday at a meeting with the COSLA sports, art and culture working group. The delivery group that I recently established across public sector agencies is working with potential investors on developing proposals for film and television production facilities. Last month, Rockstar North, the internationally recognised video game development studio, was awarded a research and development grant of just over £1 million.

Yes. The media industry in Inverclyde is clearly thriving. The new tax relief for high-end television looks set to create new opportunities. The type of training that Stuart McMillan describes RIG Arts giving provides an opportunity to tackle social inclusion as well as providing skills. It is a practical example of how we can help young people in particular. I would be very interested to find out first hand what RIG Arts has been doing.

Developments involve discussions with private businesses. Therefore, on the grounds of commercial confidentiality, it is difficult for me to say much more. However, we want a sustainable, thriving film industry that serves all of Scotland. We will need to look at the infrastructure not only in Glasgow but throughout Scotland, including Inverclyde, whether that is facilities, skills or training. I discussed that holistic view with film-makers and producers only this week in the meetings and discussions that have been taking place as part of the Edinburgh international film festival.

I congratulate Richard Lyle on securing the debate, and I commend the excellent speeches that we have heard. The motion concludes: “by commemorating this war ‘we will remember them’.” It is clear from the debate that we are all committed to ensuring that the sacrifice of so many people is truly recognised and respected. The first world war was global in its impact. It involved the major powers and their colonies in fighting across fronts in western and eastern Europe, Gallipoli, Palestine, Mesopotamia, Africa and the far east, and it claimed the lives of more than 16 million people across the globe. Richard Lyle talked about the scale of the losses and Alex Johnstone reflected on the youth of many who died. Almost a million British lives were lost. Scottish communities bore tremendous losses—it has been estimated that more than a quarter of the Scots who fought in the first world war were killed. It is also estimated that Scotland lost about 100,000 men, in 10 Scottish regiments, out of a British total of 745,000 losses. We must never forget our long and distinguished military history. I will be proud to attend the West Lothian armed forces day in Livingston on Saturday, to recognise the debt that we owe to our service personnel. Remembrance is a key feature of our commemorations of the first world war. In March, I appointed the Scottish commemorations panel to advise on how we in Scotland mark the centenary of the war. On 23 May, the First Minister announced the key dates for Scottish commemoration, endorsing recommendations of the panel. The dates mark significant Scottish military involvement and tragic domestic incidents. The tone that is adopted will be crucial. Our commemorations, especially those that mark the centenary of the outbreak of war, must be sensitively handled and relevant to all parts of Scotland and the Scots diaspora. Scotland’s programme will align with that of the UK Government. It is fitting that the UK-wide commemorations will begin on the morning of 4 August 2014 in Glasgow. There will be a special service for Commonwealth leaders at Glasgow cathedral, followed by a wreath-laying service at the city’s cenotaph. Hanzala Malik mentioned the Commonwealth relationship. The following weekend, Scotland will mark the outbreak of the war with a drumhead service in Edinburgh. The multifaith service will replicate services that were conducted on the front line, at which neatly piled drums draped with flags were used in place of an altar. More details about the service—and indeed about all the events that are planned—will follow in due course. There will be recognition of Scotland’s significant military contribution in relation to four key dates. On 25 April 2015, Scotland will remember those who stood alongside our ANZAC comrades at Gallipoli. On 25 September 2015 we will turn our attention to what historians call Scotland’s battle—the battle of Loos, where 30,000 Scots served and Scots made up half the casualties. It was appropriate that Kenny Gibson talked in such personal and human terms about the losses of the Mochrie family of Kilbirnie. On 31 May 2015, we will commemorate the battle of Jutland. Although Britain lost more ships and men, Germany never again during the war seriously challenged British control of the North Sea. On 9 April 2017 we will focus on the battle of Arras, which saw the largest concentration of Scots to fight together during the war. We will also remember two domestic incidents, to reflect the war’s broad impact on Scotland. On 22 May 2015 we will commemorate the train crash at Quintinshill, near Gretna. The Leith-based 7th battalion Royal Scots Territorial Force was on its way to Liverpool and Gallipoli, and it lost 214 officers and men, with 246 people, mainly soldiers, being injured. The Quintinshill crash remains the worst British rail disaster. On new year’s day 2019, Scotland will also mark the loss of HMS Iolaire. The Iolaire was carrying many naval personnel returning home to Lewis from the Kyle of Lochalsh when she struck rocks half a mile from Stornoway, with the loss of 204 of the 285 men on board. The end of the war will of course be marked in November 2018. We will reflect on the sacrifice of those who fought, those who lost loved ones, and those whose lives were changed for ever by the nature of war. One of the objectives of the commemoration is to reflect on the domestic impact of the war in Scotland. Our commemorations will allow for a spirit of open inquiry as we seek to understand and remember, for example, the role of women, as highlighted by Jim Eadie, the people who disagreed with the war, and the range of social impacts that the war had on all our lives. We will not just commemorate the war with national events. The First Minister announced on 14 January the establishment of a £1 million fund to enable war memorials to be restored. There are more than 5,000 war memorials in Scotland, with one in virtually every village and community across the country. The fund will help us bring our memorials up to standard and ensure that they are at the heart of our four-year commemorations as we remember the sacrifice made by our local communities. I was delighted to learn recently that the Commonwealth War Graves Commission plans to restore 12 graves in Motherwell’s Globe cemetery, which is of course part of Mr Lyle’s constituency area. I encourage support for public subscription for the new memorials such as the one proposed for Arras, which Mr Lyle referred to.

I would encourage Hanzala Malik to visit our Scottish national war memorial at Edinburgh castle. Education will be a key focus of our commemorations. That is why the First Minister announced the fund for battlefields. On 20 May, he announced that a £1 million fund would be available for visits by every secondary school in Scotland. That would provide a subsidy of £2,000 per school and enable 20,000 students to visit the first world war battlefields during the next six years. It is vital that we help the next generation understand and explain to their friends the true significance of the conflict for Scotland and the wider world. A range of activities are planned to support the centenary across Scotland. It is right that those are happening independently, so that our local communities feel free to commemorate as they see fit and in very personal ways. A wide range of exhibitions are planned, and there will be school projects and a huge amount of activity to support genealogy and the sharing of family and community history. Tomorrow, the University of Edinburgh will launch its virtual history archive called “Scotland’s war”, which will provide an important resource. There is no shortage of fine work being carried out to create a fitting legacy from the centenary. I am pleased also that the Heritage Lottery Fund has recently launched its centenary grants programme, enabling communities to explore their first world war heritage and deepen their understanding of the impact of the conflict. I am sure that this Parliament will revisit the commemorations in years to come. It is our responsibility and our duty to remember. We will remember them. 13:08 Meeting suspended. 14:15 On resuming—

I congratulate Christine Grahame on securing the debate and on her continuing efforts to mount an exhibition in Parliament around the Flodden objects from the College of Arms in London. What today’s speeches lacked in quantity they made up for in quality—we have had three very fine speeches. As Christine Grahame said, James IV was one of Scotland’s greatest kings. His achievements were remarkable, and she was right to set them out. However, of course, his reign ended in disaster. It had all started so well. Just 11 years earlier, the treaty of perpetual peace had been signed between Scotland and England and, the following year, on 8 August 1503, James married his child bride, Margaret Tudor, across the road from the Parliament, in Holyrood Abbey. The thistle and the rose were finally at peace. Yet, on a dreich autumnal day in 1513, thousands of the flower of Scotland were scythed down. The immediate impact of the battle of Flodden was horrendous. The head of state—the king—was dead, along with many of the country’s governing elite. The army was decimated, with thousands of foot soldiers slaughtered. It is hard to imagine, but the nation was rocked to its core. Writing in 1530, Sir David Lyndsay, the Scots poet and parliamentarian, reflected: “I never read in tragedy nor story, At one journey so many nobles slain, For the defence and love of their sovereign.” Then there was the human impact. Hardly a family in the land was left unaffected by the battle’s aftermath—not even the royal family. Queen Margaret, with her 17-month-old son, was waiting in Linlithgow palace for news of her husband. It took five days to come. To protect her son, she immediately went to Stirling castle, where, 12 days after his father’s death, the child was crowned King James V. Five hundred years on, this is not forgotten history; these are real events, with real and lasting consequences for Scotland’s future both then and now. Throughout this centenary year, there has been a resurgence of interest, and a wide range of events are taking place on both sides of the border to commemorate the battle of Flodden. Many are community-inspired initiatives that have been brought together under the remembering Flodden project. The old red telephone box in Branxton, near the battlefield, has been turned into the world’s smallest visitor centre, and tours of the battlefield will mark the anniversary on 9 September. The Flodden 500 archaeology project has brought together professional archaeologists and local community enthusiasts to understand the battlefield site better, and the Flodden 1513 ecomuseum is working with Historic Scotland and other partners to create web links with many associated historical sites. As part of its 40th birthday celebrations, the Scottish Chamber Orchestra has commissioned three new pieces, one of which was composed by Sally Beamish specifically to commemorate the battle. During an evening focused on war and music, aptly entitled “The Pity of War”, the piece will premiere during the orchestra’s 2013-14 season at venues throughout Scotland from this October through to May next year. The same tragic loss of life was marked in a very different manner in the Borders just last week, when the common riding in Selkirk also remembered the time in 1513 when 80 of the town’s men left to fight for King James and only one returned. Throughout this summer, Historic Scotland’s living history events will remember Flodden. The popular annual jousting event at Linlithgow palace will this year recall that the knights jousting in the summer of 1513 lost their lives a few weeks later at Flodden. At Edinburgh castle, the story of the optimistic prelude to the battle will be told, including the army mustering on the Meadows and the state-of-the-art artillery being brought out from the castle’s gun house. The programme will culminate in a weekend-long event on 21-22 September at Stirling castle, relating the defeated army’s return and the crowning of the infant King James V. Also, Iona Leishman, the former artist in residence, will exhibit new paintings in the chapel royal that were inspired by the events around the battle. Destruction is in the nature of war, and few artefacts from Flodden survive intact. Mystery and family traditions surround those that do. The Keith heraldic standard was gifted to the Faculty of Advocates in Edinburgh, in 1808, by a descendant of Black John Skirving, the Earl’s standard bearer. The story goes that Black John survived the battle but was taken prisoner and saved the banner by stuffing it inside his clothes. Although doubts have recently been cast on the authenticity of the College of Arms objects—similar uncertainty must attached to the Keith standard—the stories that surround them are marvellous and very much part of the traditions that are associated with the battle. I commend Christine Grahame for her successful efforts to secure the loan of the Flodden objects from the College of Arms in London. Many things that are now lost were, no doubt, taken from the battlefield in the days that followed the battle, not least the mutilated corpse of the king. It was not treated well. Taken to Sheen monastery in Surrey, the decapitated body now lies buried somewhere in the ruins under a modern golf course, while the head, which was buried unceremoniously in St Michael’s church in London, is now under an office block. The remains of Richard III, the last English king to die in battle, were discovered recently under a Leicester car park, but there seems little likelihood that the remains of the last king of Scots to die in battle will ever return home. The Flodden commemorations demonstrate what can be achieved if people unite behind a common purpose. Preparations are well under way across the country to commemorate, starting next year, the first centenary of the first world war—another conflict in which the flower of Scotland paid a heavy price. Here again, I see meaningful and imaginative collaborations being developed across the entire cultural sector. Those and this year’s Flodden-related events show the huge passion and commitment that so many have for our historic environment in its widest and fullest sense. I thank Christine Grahame for lodging the motion and allowing us to debate an important part of Scotland’s history and the telling of Scotland’s tale. Meeting closed at 12:55.

I understand that Creative Scotland is producing a forward plan for the next three to five years to replace its initial corporate plan. All non-departmental public bodies are required to have such plans. I expect the plan to include actions to take forward the Scottish Government’s vision for culture and heritage, as set out in my recent Talbot Rice lecture and my forthcoming letter of guidance.

Ken Macintosh has quoted my answer to a question that was asked after my lecture, which has been very well received by the sector. I draw his attention to the statement that was made by the board of Creative Scotland on 7 December 2012, and the action plan that it published in March that addresses his concern. He might be aware that a considerable amount of work and consultation have been done during the past year, in which one of the issues has been continuity and certainty of resourcing. If he has kept abreast of developments during the past year, he will know that the board has already taken steps to change funding streams in order give some certainty and continuity, which addresses his point. We are well on the way to making improvements.

In my lecture, I made it clear that I do not think that the culture and heritage sector has to make any new economic case for support and funding. We know the vital role that it plays in those areas and we are taking a commonsense approach in ensuring that we are ambitious for our cultural sector, which needs to have confidence in our approach. Implementation of the administration of the developments of Creative Scotland and its processes as they roll out will be addressed. We need to be confident in our cultural sector. We have a great cultural sector in Scotland that has fantastic artists and writers who need space and confidence to be able to get on with what they are good at. It would be a strong message from Parliament if I had its support when I am taking that message out on behalf of us all.

The First Minister and I continue to have serious concerns regarding the impact of reductions in the BBC Scotland budget, and we have repeatedly made that clear to the BBC. Our concern is shared by parties across this Parliament as demonstrated by the unanimous report of the Education and Culture Committee on broadcasting published on 9 May 2013. On 1 May, First Minister met the new director general of the BBC, Lord Hall, and raised concerns regarding the impact of the budget cuts. The discussions were positive, and I look forward to the dialogue continuing. In particular, I welcome the BBC’s announcement on 21 May of a new £5 million investment package that will help to create a wide range of new content for Scottish audiences in the run-up to next year’s independence referendum. It also confirmed that further investment will follow for the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth games.

On the first question, no, I am not satisfied. I also share the concerns expressed in the Education and Culture Committee report. Paragraph 37 says: “When asked about the current level of local news reporting in Scotland, Mr Thompson”— the previous director general of the BBC— “acknowledged that insufficient coverage of different regions of Scotland was a concern expressed to the BBC by the public in Scotland.” Paragraph 41 says: “We note Mr Thompson’s comments in response to insufficient coverage of different regions of Scotland. We would welcome an update from the BBC on the detail of its plans to ensure that coverage of different regions in Scotland is improved.” I concur with that all-party report. In relation to the digitalisation question, the UK Government has not, as yet, made any decision on the digital radio switchover, which might have a knock-on impact on some of the points in the second part of the member’s question.

It would not be appropriate for the Scottish Government to intervene in the operational and editorial decisions of broadcasters, including the BBC, or in specific human resource decisions. I welcome the £5 million investment by the BBC in relation to the referendum. However, it would be unfortunate if the BBC lost expertise at the precise moment when the country and, indeed, the world need to hear our story.

The Scottish Government has consistently argued that major events of national interest to Scotland must be made available live on free-to-air television. The Scottish Government and its partners in delivering the Ryder cup at Gleneagles and the Glasgow Commonwealth games in 2014 will play a major role in staging two of the world’s greatest events here in Scotland, with guaranteed highlights on free-to-air terrestrial television.

Dear, oh dear—how sad. I thought that the fact that people in Scotland want to see their national team playing is something that we would want to support. I am fully aware of responsibilities in relation to contracts. The member will be aware that the Scottish Football Association has just announced a deal for rights for the period 2014 to 2018. We have already made clear in other areas of broadcasting our intention to honour existing contracts. However, when those contracts come up for renewal at a future point—post 2018—we would obviously look at the market conditions and have discussions on opportunities with the relevant sports bodies at that time. I have heard glass-half-full arguments, but Mr Pentland seems to take a glass-half-empty approach to the opportunities for the young people of Scotland to benefit from watching their national team. I think that we should all get behind the Scottish team, particularly following its great result recently against Croatia.

The Government has regular contact with the Commission and other member states concerning a range of issues in order to govern in the best interests of the people of Scotland. The Minister for Environment and Climate Change, Paul Wheelhouse, attended the environment council yesterday, and the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, Richard Lochhead, is meeting Commissioner Potocnik at the Royal Highland Show today. The meeting will cover a range of issues including common agricultural policy reform and biodiversity.

Obviously, the Scottish Government is disappointed by the cuts to the connecting Europe facility that arose from the negotiations on the multi-annual financial framework. The funding was cut from £9.2 billion to £1 billion. We think that that will make the fulfilment of our world-class 2020 digital connectivity ambitions more challenging, but we will persist in our digital participation agenda. The member might be pleased to know that the most recent Office of Communications report shows a 7 per cent increase in broadband take-up, which brings Scotland into line with the situation in Wales and Northern Ireland. There is clearly some way to go on that, but we will persist with the digital agenda, not least with regard to connectivity but also with regard to participation. We will ensure that we use every avenue to take that forward, when we can.

When I travel internationally, one of the most challenging questions that I am asked involves people’s concerns about what the future will hold under the union and whether there will be a future for the UK as part of the EU. Those concerns have arisen not as a result of anything that this Government has said; they have arisen precisely as a result of the points that have been made by two senior UK cabinet ministers. If we want Scotland to have a secure future—if we want jobs to be protected and our key sectors to be promoted across Europe—it is absolutely essential that we are positive contributors to the European Union. I do not think that the current position that some members of the UK Government are taking is helping that in any way.

As the member will be aware, the Scottish Government is not a member of the Nordic Council and has therefore not attended any meetings of that interparliamentary body, nor of its intergovernmental equivalent, the Nordic Council of Ministers. The Nordic Council held its 50th anniversary overseas conference in the Scottish Parliament on 19 November 2002.

The Scottish Government has regular contact with the Nordic countries on a number of policies of common interest, including regional development, through the northern periphery and North Sea programmes, and knowledge exchange, through the Nordic horizons group, which the Scottish Government supports and funds. Those are examples of the improving engagement strategy between Scotland and the five Nordic countries, which will also be extended to include the three Baltic countries of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Currently, there is no mechanism for the Scottish Government to have observer status at the Nordic Council, although it is possible for MEPs from any member state to perform that role. We are taking forward our engagement with the Nordic countries in a variety of ways—I reassure the member on that point.

The Scottish Government thinks that the commemoration programme should allow for a spirit of open inquiry, as we seek to remember and understand the broad impact that the first world war had on all parts of Scotland and beyond. I have appointed the Scottish commemorations panel to advise on the development of the commemorative programme. One objective for the commemoration is to reflect the domestic impact of the war in Scotland, which, as the member observed in her question, encompasses a broad range of views about the war.

The Scottish Government has made it clear that in our programme we want to ensure that commemoration is key. We must remember, we must learn, and we should never, ever, forget the tragedy of war.

In recent weeks, to support film and television content development, Creative Scotland’s £4 million film and television funding programme for 2013-14 has opened for applications. On infrastructure, I followed up meetings that I had in February with the chief executive of Scottish Enterprise and the board of Creative Scotland with a meeting with Iain Smith, who is the chair of the British Film Commission, and a further meeting with Creative Scotland and Scottish Enterprise. A delivery group has been established involving the Scottish Government, those agencies and Scottish Development International to take forward work on live opportunities for film and television production from the private sector, which I cannot share in detail with the Parliament at this stage. I attended the European culture and audiovisual council in Brussels on Friday 17 May, where there were a number of discussions of relevance to the film and television sector, including the implications of the proposed transatlantic trade and investment partnership between the United States of America and the European Union.

We have many advantages in relation to the sector, particularly on skills, but Patricia Ferguson is right to identify our need for a film studio complex, particularly one with an effective sound studio. For commercial confidentiality reasons, I cannot go into any details on progress on the discussions, but I reassure the member that the delivery group of all the different public agencies is in active discussions with a range of organisations. I hope that those discussions will give an opportunity for positive news in the area at some point in the future. I undertake to keep Patricia Ferguson regularly informed. She has taken a regular and keen interest in the area. She is right that the tax relief changes create a great opportunity for us to capitalise on not only film production but the potential for television series production. The regular employment that that could bring to the industry is a great opportunity for Scotland’s economy as well as for the industry.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am delighted to be here for the final stage of the bill. I begin by recognising the support that members of all parties have offered the National Trust for Scotland during its modernisation programme, specifically in respect of the bill. I know that that solidarity reflects the esteem and affection that are felt for the trust throughout the country. I put on record my thanks to the National Trust for Scotland (Governance etc) Bill Committee for its diligent work in taking on the responsibilities in relation to the bill. I do not need to remind members of the vital role that the trust plays in our national life. No matter how familiar we are with the trust, it is easy to underestimate the sheer scale of its work. It is not just the physical scale, impressive as that is. What always impresses me is the human scale: the visitors in their millions; the 314,000 members—slightly more than the number that the committee convener mentioned, but perhaps that reflects the growth in membership while the bill has progressed through Parliament; the hundreds of volunteers; the 1,000 staff; and those who support the trust’s work through legacies or donations. I hope that members have not been too busy to watch the BBC’s superb series on the wildlife of the Hebrides. Recently, we saw one of the iconic images of Scotland: St Kilda and its teeming bird cliffs. It is interesting to reflect that the trust has more than twice as many members as there are gannets on St Kilda—and we know that there are a lot of gannets on St Kilda. Through its inspiration, dedication and sheer hard work, the trust is in it for the long term and for everyone who loves Scotland and its superb heritage and landscape. It rightly receives support from Government for many of its activities, which range from state-of-the-art visitor centres to traditional farming practices, but the resources that we provide are far outweighed by those that are brought by its members, volunteers and other supporters. As members know—and as Fiona McLeod set out—the trust is completing a programme of reform. Operational and financial sustainability is central to that, and the bill will contribute significantly to enabling the trust to develop a modern and business-like approach across all its operations. The trust is not alone in needing vision and a sustainable business model to deliver benefits to the nation, as that need applies across the whole heritage sector. That is why I have just launched a public consultation on proposals to establish a high-level strategy for Scotland’s historic environment and on provisions to create a new lead body to carry out the roles that are appropriate to national Government in that area. The trust has already been involved in discussions on those matters. It was quick to welcome the public consultation and to affirm its willingness to continue to work as a partner in developing an inclusive strategy to get the best out of our diverse heritage landscape, and I welcome that positive approach. The trust’s knowledge and experience complement that of Government and its agencies. Many bodies are working for the good of Scotland and, for them all, growing together must surely be a better strategy than working in isolation. We are committed to working with the trust to ensure the continuation of its distinctive role as a key player in sustaining our heritage. I am quite clear that the trust acknowledges its responsibility to the nation, which I think is an important part of the trust’s role and responsibility. Our aim is a collaborative sector in which healthy competition drives all players towards higher standards and to a greater realisation of the potential benefits that our heritage can deliver—in economic, educational, cultural and social terms. The final stage consideration of the bill today offers Parliament a valuable opportunity to reaffirm the value of partnership working between Government and the third sector. The Government believes in developing and maintaining partnerships and in creating new synergies across Scotland. We need a strong and well managed National Trust for Scotland as a key player in delivering our vision for the conservation of Scotland’s rich cultural and natural heritage, environmental awareness and education. We need the trust to continue in its role as a significant contributor of economic benefit to the nation and to local communities, particularly in remote and rural areas. I affirm my and the Government’s full support for the bill, and I ask members to join me in speeding its passage towards completion.

I thank members for their involvement in the debate and their comments. Although I said that the bill committee was diligent in its actions, it was perhaps not as diligent as it might have been—just because we have reached the closing stages of the bill’s consideration, that does not mean that committee members should not ensure that they visit National Trust for Scotland properties on a regular basis. I certainly welcome the invitation to visit Pollok house. James Dornan’s speech served as a highly effective reminder that people feel passionately about the places that surround them. Their stories are about people—perhaps people who worked the land or who served in the houses—and about wealth creation in Scotland and understanding how our nation has developed. I put on record the Scottish Government’s full support for the proposals. We look forward to continuing our excellent working relationship with the trust as we move forward at this exciting time. We have heard a great deal about the role that Sir George Reid’s review played in getting us to where we are now, but I would also like to put on record our thanks to Sir Kenneth Calman and Kate Mavor—who, respectively, are the trust’s chair and chief executive—for their current leadership and their work in driving forward the change agenda. The work of the trust links with a remarkable cross-section of the Government’s work: it is important to the culture and heritage agenda, to the natural environment agenda, to local communities and to the economy. In addition, the trust’s positive, collaborative and forward-looking approach is an example to many other charities that are involved in the field. It encourages them to work in partnership with not just the Government but one another and other organisations. When it comes to heritage, that is more important than ever. The debate has provided us with an opportunity to appreciate the challenges that the trust has faced in recent years. With the quotes that she used, Patricia Ferguson set out clearly how challenging the position that the trust was in was for staff, trustees and others. We should recognise how positively the trust has responded. Its modernisation and refocusing have been determined, efficient and effective, and I know that its return to good health has been welcomed by everyone in the chamber. I can think of no better way to mark that than by approving the bill’s passage to the statute book, which will help to secure a sustainable future for a body that, as we have heard, is part of our national heritage in its own right. The needs of our heritage are many. Resources will be scarcer than we would wish. Even in these challenging economic times, we must renew our drive to ensure that all organisations in this area benefit from collaboration and co-operation. As I said, the Government is consulting on a strategy to ensure that we work with our partners on the highest priorities. We are committed to ensuring that that process allows the trust’s work in the historic environment sphere to be situated in the firmest possible policy context, while guaranteeing the organisation’s independence as a vital partner and a critical friend. All the many bodies and individuals who care so much about our incomparable heritage will have to work hard together to sustain our heritage in the future. The coming years will be a period when many opportunities will present themselves. We recognise that the trust will be a key partner and a key leader in enabling Scotland to take full advantage of those opportunities. We need a National Trust that is vibrant, efficient and effective; that is independent in governance and spirit, yet which contributes as a key player and works as a partner of government and communities at a national and a local level; and which helps to conserve and to unlock social, cultural and economic benefits to the benefit of all. By passing the bill, we will help to ensure that the trust can continue on its course as a leading conservation charity that has a modern governance structure, is sustainably managed, and is fit to serve the people of Scotland and respond to the challenges and opportunities of the 21st century. Presiding Officer, as somebody who is originally from Ayrshire, I am sure that you would join me in recognising Culzean castle in particular as an excellent example of the NTS’s work on the natural environment and the built environment. It is another shining example of the fantastic work that the National Trust contributes to Scotland.

The Scottish Government regularly meets Creative Scotland, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and VOCAL Scotland to discuss issues and share information in relation to culture and cultural services in a local authority context. The Scottish Government has not had recent discussions with Aberdeen City Council about cultural issues, although my officials met council officials in November when their United Kingdom city of culture bid was raised.

The threat of library closures in Aberdeen is deeply disappointing, as it might be in other areas such as Moray. I remind those in the chamber that local councils’ only statutory duty in culture is in relation to libraries: they have to make sure that there is adequate provision for all. On the role of libraries, libraries are great success stories across Scotland. They are modernising and finding ways to get new readers and to engage with the local community. I would encourage Aberdeen City Council to rethink its policy, if there is the opportunity, and to do what other local authorities are doing to embrace libraries as a great asset for our communities.

I have never met Willie Young and it is difficult to agree with somebody you have never met. It is important that we respect local authorities’ decision making on libraries for a local authority area. However, it is quite clear that libraries are the only statutory responsibility that local authorities have in this area and I take a keen interest in that. We are developing book week Scotland—we launched the second year of that recently. It is important that people stand by their libraries, whether in Aberdeen, Moray or anywhere else.

I am delighted that the quality and range of and enthusiasm and opportunities for culture in Aberdeen and in Dundee have been recognised by both cities in putting forward bids to be city of culture. I am delighted that they will be able to progress that and we look forward to seeing whether they make the shortlist in June this year and the announcement that will be made in November. I am absolutely convinced that should either of them be nominated as a city of culture, we will all join in the celebrations and will build on that to make sure that we have a great year in 2017.

The links between Scotland and Poland are varied and long-standing. The Scottish Government promotes social, cultural and business links with Poland in a number of ways. Last year, I met the Polish Minister of Culture and Natural Heritage at the Edinburgh culture summit for discussions and joined the minister in attending a performance of “Macbeth” at the Edinburgh international festival by a Polish theatre company that was supported by the Polish cultural institute. The race, religion and refugee integration equality fund provides funding to projects that support Polish nationals who have come to work and live in Scotland, including funding specifically for a Polish volunteer recruitment project at Motherwell and Wishaw citizens advice bureau. Scottish Development International actively supports businesses to explore trade opportunities in the Polish market, including supporting a visit to Warsaw last year when the delegation met industry representatives from the food and drink and information and communication technology sectors.

The research is very interesting indeed and I agree with the member on the opportunities for entrepreneurs from different communities. Clearly, if opportunities are not being taken up, we must look at the services that are provided to those in communities such as the Polish community who are setting up new businesses. That would be a useful area to explore with the business gateway and local authorities to see how local communities can best be supported.

The Scottish Government supports work to recognise and promote achievements by individuals, projects, communities and places locally through grant funding to Creative Scotland—Scotland’s national agency for the arts, screen and creative industries. Creative Scotland recognises and promotes Scotland’s cultural activity through its investment programme, which supports artists and organisations across Scotland. For example, in Dumbarton, Ross Birrell was awarded £10,000 through Creative Scotland’s professional development programme for the development of a music and poetry-based film installation, and Scott McWatt was awarded £4,500 through Creative Scotland’s quality production programme to produce his second indie-folk album. Both, of course, are constituents in the member’s area.

I visited the heroes centre, in which the proposal is meant to be developed, in July last year and was very impressed by it. It showed a great deal of energy and was a way of putting a spotlight on our local heroes. It is important that we also look at the cultural programme around the Commonwealth games, when we will be supporting our sporting heroes. My colleague Humza Yousaf will take forward the Commonwealth games aspects of the cultural area, which will involve ensuring that all of Scotland, including Helensburgh, can benefit. I think that the idea that was mentioned is very good.

I am very pleased to support that passionate endorsement of Lanarkshire. The celebrating Lanarkshire 2013 initiative, which allows communities to celebrate past achievements and cultural endeavours, sounds like a great one. On marking and celebrating the bicentenary of the birth of Dr David Livingstone, the member is quite right to say that his impact has been not just local or in Scotland. Tomorrow evening, I will be in Brussels, where I will host an event that will include a lecture on Dr David Livingstone. That is also an opportunity to spread the word about achievements not just here but in Europe and elsewhere abroad.

The First Minister carried out an extensive programme of targeted business engagements with top companies in the United States and developed both new and existing relationships. Those meetings covered 220 new jobs, 34 safeguarded jobs and more than £12 million of new investment. The First Minister addressed an audience of more than 300 top US-based business leaders at the New York St Andrew’s Society’s business networking dinner, delivered a speech at the Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs, and gave a public lecture at Princeton University. In Washington DC, he delivered an address at the Brookings Institution. Keith Brown’s programme in Canada provided for significant engagement with business in both Halifax and Toronto, and he spoke at a number of networking events, including the Scottish Development International-led trade mission event in Toronto, to support Scottish companies that are seeking to expand their activities in Canada. Mr Brown’s programme also focused on air route development and included a meeting with Air Canada to recognise its forthcoming direct flights from Toronto to Edinburgh. It will commence a thrice-weekly service on Canada day this July. A full report on Scotland week 2013 will be available shortly.

Scotland week 2013 was not only supported by ministers, of course; it was well supported by the Scottish Parliament. I congratulate the Presiding Officer on announcing that the US National Conference of State Legislatures conference will take place here between 10 and 12 July. It is quite correct to identify the huge opportunity that the Scottish Parliament has afforded us to ensure that we can connect as a country with legislatures around the world, and I look forward to the very interesting programme that I know the Parliament is putting forward. I am sure that the Presiding Officer can speak for herself in promoting that great opportunity. Stewart Maxwell is right to draw members’ attention to the very important announcement that the Presiding Officer made during Scotland week 2013.

As well as attracting visitors and inward investment, creative and cultural activity helps to support and shape our communities and places, and fosters and reinforces people’s sense of identity and community cohesion. Creative Scotland’s creative place awards, which are now in their second year, provide inspiration for people throughout Scotland as well as our visitors by encouraging and celebrating the exceptional creative programmes in towns, villages and communities across the country and supporting the development of projects that might not otherwise get recognition.

I am delighted to congratulate Huntly on that award, which it was successful in winning in January of this year. The member might not be aware that I have already accepted an invitation to visit Deveron Arts during the summer recess to see its work at first hand. I look forward to the member joining me on that visit so that we can find out more about the exciting work that it is doing in promoting Huntly in his constituency.

The member will know that I have repeatedly called for an effective business plan to be presented that would allow Scotland to take the opportunities that are available. I am highly enthusiastic about the film industry in Scotland and the opportunities that a film studio would afford. I understand and share the frustration that exists at the lack of movement. For that to be addressed, the industry will require to put forward some firm proposals, but I and the Government’s agencies stand ready to help to support a film studio, should a proposal be made that can be supported by public money and for which there is an effective business plan.

I am pleased to open this debate on the implications for Scotland of the royal charter on the self-regulation of the press. I will move the motion in my name, which, importantly, is supported by the leaders of the other four parties in this Parliament. The motion has been signed by Johann Lamont, Ruth Davidson, Willie Rennie and Patrick Harvie, as well as by the First Minister. Let us remember the serious concerns about the operation of some of the press and the hurt, the anger, the anguish and the violation felt by the victims of press abuse. Nobody—not even the press—thinks that the status quo is acceptable. The issue is how press regulation, and recognition of press regulation, is carried out. In Scotland, we need to recognise that the majority of the press, particularly the regional press, was not involved in malpractice, so any system should be proportionate, but even the regional press in Scotland wants to see a new system. As press regulation is devolved, we need to consider in this Parliament our way forward and, as the Scottish Government has made clear from the outset, we want to do so consensually. I thank the leaders of parties from across the chamber and the cross-party membership of the Education and Culture Committee for their constructive input and co-operation in that process. Events are moving on and on Thursday the Newspaper Society and other press organisations produced their own draft royal charter. Indications from my discussions with the Advocate General are that the United Kingdom Government remains unwavering in wanting to present its own version of the charter to the Privy Council, which will now meet on 15 May with draft papers circulated tomorrow, so this debate and motion remain pertinent and timely. If the press impasse remains, and if the recognition panel has no-one to recognise, it will report to both Parliaments and stronger statutory measures may then be the only option. In the meantime we should deal with what is before us: namely, do we agree to a royal charter as the mechanism to give legal effect to recognising a new regulator and, if we do, do we agree to that being made compliant to Scottish devolved responsibilities and Scots law and circumstances? The bulk of our proposed amendments would have to apply to any royal charter to give it proper effect in Scotland, and the counter-proposals of the press that were announced on Thursday, as they stand, would leave Scotland without a press regulation system that takes Scots law into account. I think that there is consensus on the following points, based on the Leveson proposals, which themselves were broadly welcomed: that there needs to be a voluntary regulatory body, established by the press itself; that there should be a recognition process so that the criteria needed to deliver Leveson’s recommendations can be implemented; that the recognition process, including the recognition panel, and the appointments body setting up that panel, should all be independent of Government; and, importantly, that freedom of the press is a precious cornerstone of democracy and although politicians may not like what is written, the press must have the freedom to question, challenge and comment. There has been less consensus around statutory underpinning although, in practice, it is recognised that there is some need for statute. Indeed, the UK Government has passed clauses in two bills at Westminster on entrenchment and incentives. That statutory underpinning of those issues is something that the Parliament will need to consider in terms of Scots law, although it is not essential at this point. The expert group that was chaired by Lord McCluskey gave thought to statute, and I thank the group for its contribution. As the First Minister said when the report was published: “Lord McCluskey’s Group has delivered an extremely thorough piece of work looking at how the proposals made by Lord Justice Leveson could be applied in the context of Scots law, including draft legislation. The report is admirably clear.” We are indebted to the group for its hard, unpaid work over three months to master the 1,987-page Leveson report and to work out how to apply it in Scotland. It is an important piece of work. The group made a strong recommendation about compulsory universal jurisdiction, which—as we have seen—was not met with agreement. It also cut across the voluntary basis that many of us saw as the starting point for membership. The group presented a system that could work under Scots law but made assumptions about the ability to achieve either political consensus or press agreement around that. It may be that, if a voluntary approach fails, we will need to look at alternatives—I shall say more about that later—but that is not where we are now. We are presented with the question of the draft royal charter that is before us.

That area was raised in the McCluskey report, which went into further territory than even the Leveson report did. Should we end up in that territory, that will need to be discussed. However, we are not in that territory yet, and it is problematic how we would deal with that situation. We are not in that territory; we are being presented with a draft royal charter and that is where we must direct our remarks and thinking at this stage. The expert group’s report was published on Friday 15 March. At that time, there seemed little prospect of cross-party agreement at Westminster. However, on Monday 18 March, a draft royal charter was agreed and we were then presented with the question of how we respond. That is why I welcomed the Education and Culture Committee’s examination of the charter. I appreciate the fact that the committee had very limited time, but it conducted a good examination of the areas that we asked it to look at.

The remit—which was set out clearly—asked for an examination of Leveson’s recommendations. Interestingly, it also asked that, should developments take place elsewhere, the committee should consider them. Unfortunately, the committee did not have the time to do that and chose to report on 15 March instead of examining the royal charter in any detail. That is set out in the report. I think that a compulsory system is more extensive than the remit that was provided and, as I said, cut across the voluntary aspect of membership. I think that there is concern about how that idea relates to the original remit, but I welcome the useful work that was done. The charter route was not recommended by Leveson, as the expert panel pointed out, although it has the same legal effect. Although it was not the first choice of the victims group hacked off, that group has agreed the compromise text of 18 March. We could have ignored the charter route and set up a completely different system, but the consensus among the committee and the party leaders is that it is possible to make the charter compliant with Scots law and that we should take the opportunity to apply it to Scotland. That is what is recommended, on a cross-party basis, to Parliament today. Given that press regulation is devolved in Scotland, the 18 March charter was drawn up in terms of England and Wales, so it would require some amendments—mainly technical—to fit Scots law and devolved responsibilities. We are in discussion with the UK Government on amending the charter in that way. The UK Government appreciates the need to make the charter fit for Scotland and to recognise the role of the Scottish Parliament, so we will liaise with it with a view to seeing whether we can arrive at a jointly agreed text. The motion explicitly ensures that there will be further consultation with the Parliament, should there be any material move away from the current text. More broadly, press regulation is within the Parliament’s devolved competence, so although we believe that participation in a royal charter is the appropriate way forward, it is open to the Parliament to return to the subject at a later date. There was one policy issue that, with the agreement of the other party leaders, we raised with the UK Government as being worthy of further consideration, but which it has indicated it does not agree should appear in the charter; I refer to coverage of the recently deceased. The Leveson inquiry heard moving evidence on the issue from James and Margaret Watson, as did the committee only last week. Paragraph 8 of schedule 3 to the charter sets out minimum requirements for the standards code of a new regulator. We suggested that it might be amended to include an additional criterion of appropriate taste and decency in reporting and commenting on the recently deceased, where the only public interest in them is in the manner or circumstances of their death. That last phrase is important. There is no intention to prevent comment on, say, Robert Maxwell or Baroness Thatcher. Our proposal is about people who are of public interest because of how they died, not those who are of interest because of their actions during life.

That goes into areas of defamation law. I, too, had a very helpful meeting with the Watsons last week. The issue here is what is in the code. I want to be able to pursue the issue in the code, if at all possible. I think that the legal issues are better dealt with in consultations, a number of which—as the member knows—the Government has carried out. Another avenue is provided by Sheriff Principal Taylor’s review of litigation. Although the Press Complaints Commission’s current code of editorial practice contains provision about not being unduly intrusive with relations of the recently deceased, it does not contain any direct protection for the recently deceased themselves. We believe that a new standards code should contain such protection. Inserting a reference to that in the royal charter would have been a means to that end. We will pursue the issue by other means. I am encouraged by the fact that the Press Complaints Commission’s chair, Lord Hunt, recently stressed its importance in the House of Lords, and I have written to him about the matter in relation to the code as it develops. The royal charter is primarily about establishing a recognition mechanism for a new regulator. The other half of the Leveson equation is about establishing incentives for membership of that body. The expert group considered that incentives were unlikely to work, hence its idea of universal jurisdiction. I am more optimistic. The expert group’s secretariat drew up a helpful paper that looked at a range of options for incentives, which we will continue to discuss with the press. We are looking at whether we can continue to support the press by considering whether public information notices might be placed only with members of the press regulatory body. The royal charter provides for an inexpensive arbitral system that could and should be an incentive. The Arbitration (Scotland) Act 2010 gives us a modern legislative background from which to work. In keeping with that act, arbitration would be voluntary and would take place only between a person who had been directly affected by the press and the press—there would be no third-party arbitration, although third parties have some new, limited scope to have complaints considered by the regulatory body—but without the possibility of damages arising, which can happen in arbitration. The draft royal charter obliges the recognition body to alert the Parliament if it cannot recognise a regulator, or if that regulator does not cover all publications. I found all of the Education and Culture Committee’s advice helpful, but I quote a particularly key passage: “The Committee was interested to note the evidence concerning Ireland, suggesting that near universal participation in the voluntary code was, in part at least, a result of the potential threat of legislation should this not happen. The Committee therefore expects participation by the press, failing which, legislation becomes not only inevitable but should be put in place without further inquiry given the thorough and comprehensive work of Leveson and the Expert Group. The public will expect nothing less of the Parliament.” The committee’s advice encourages us to take forward voluntary press regulation by royal charter, although it suggests what should be done if a voluntary approach should fail. I began by setting out how we have sought consensus. That has been useful and I am grateful for the co-operation that we have had from other parties, the party leaders and the cross-party Education and Culture Committee. The Scottish Government has always said that it would be for the press to self-organise a voluntary press regulation body, but the manner in which the remainder of the Leveson recommendations are given effect should reflect Scots law. I have set out for members where we have got to in our deliberations and the thinking that has informed that. No doubt individuals and parties in the Parliament will want to stress particular points, but by presenting this motion, signed by all the parties, we have shown agreement on how we can move on at this stage. I will continue my discussions with the UK Government and I undertake to keep the Parliament informed. I urge the Parliament to support the motion and to continue the cross-party agreement on this issue. I move, That the Parliament notes the publication on 29 November 2012 of Lord Justice Leveson’s report, An inquiry into the culture, practices and ethics of the press; further notes the subsequent production of the draft Royal Charter on self-regulation of the press on 18 March 2013; agrees to Scottish participation in the Royal Charter, subject to its amendment to reflect properly Scotland’s devolved responsibilities, Scots law and Scottish circumstances; further agrees to consider possible incentives for membership of a new regulatory body for the press, and asks the Scottish Government to proceed on this basis, recognising that, in the event of a material change to the text of the Royal Charter, the Parliament will be consulted again.

The member makes an important point. When I met Mrs Watson, she stressed that although her name has been associated with the issue, there are many other cases. I know from my constituency case load of other circumstances. It is important to put on record our recognition of the need and demand, not just regarding one isolated case. Unfortunately, the problem has recurred in less well-known cases.

I agree with what the member says about the importance of the regional press in Scotland. Clearly the subscriptions to a self-regulated body would be decided on and made by the press and, in the circumstances, perhaps graduated subscription rates would be applied if the regional press needed them. However, that is not a matter for the Government; it is for the press to decide that.

The member makes important points, but it is important to distinguish between standards and criminal behaviour. Part 2 of the Leveson inquiry report addresses some of the issues in relation to criminal activity, and it is with sincere regret that I say that some of the criminal activity was not prosecuted as quickly and promptly as it should have been. It is important that, in our discussions, we concentrate on the issue of standards rather than necessarily on the problems with criminal activity, which quite rightly must be dealt with by the courts.

I reiterate that the indication is that the UK Government does not accept the proposal that something on coverage of circumstances of deaths be included in the code. That will not stop us trying to pursue the issue in communications with the newspaper industry. The industry has indicated that it thinks that the editors’ code currently covers the issue; there is room to pursue that. Similarly, in relation to some of the technical aspects, it is helpful to get the committee’s support for what we are pursuing. We have had indications from the UK Government that it acknowledges the role of the Scottish Parliament in that regard. It is important that the Scottish context is recognised. I am very keen to continue having dialogue. I cannot come to Parliament today to say that the UK Government has agreed X, Y and Z completely, but I have liaised with the Advocate General in recent days and will continue to liaise with Maria Miller, the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, and the UK Government. It will be important to me, as the cabinet secretary for this Government representing the interests of this Parliament, to know that I have the support of the committee and of members in on-going discussions with the UK Government. I thank Liam McArthur for his comments.

This was an important area that the committee considered, as well. It is important that we go through what is proposed in the charter in relation to arbitration. It should be remembered that the proposal from the press would have an arbitration system. Arbitration must be voluntary—in the Arbitration (Scotland) Act 2010, that is part of the premise. It must also operate fairly. Paragraph 22(c) of schedule 3 of the royal charter talks about a process that “contains transparent arrangements for claims to be struck out, for legitimate reasons (including on frivolous or vexatious grounds)”. That is a fear of some of the local press, and that is in the charter as presented. Paragraph 22(g) of schedule 3 goes on to talk about a process that “overall, is inexpensive for all parties.” If we believe in arbitration as a system to go forward with as a country—which I think we do, in legal terms—we should also recognise its importance for this system. Regardless of where we get to, we will need an arbitration system. Nevertheless, I hear what Bob Doris says. That is why I want to continue the discussions with the newspaper industry. I want to ensure that the system that we have in Scotland is effective for all parties, is voluntary and enables us to make sure that those burdens that are being suggested do not impose themselves on our local and regional press.

I am pleased to close the debate on the implications for Scotland of the royal charter on the self-regulation of the press. I am glad that we have been able to debate a motion that is supported by the leaders of all the parties in the Parliament. I am grateful for their support and for the constructive discussion that we have had since the Leveson inquiry report was published. Because of that, we have had a largely consensual as well as constructive debate. Members have made pertinent points and suggestions and I will try to reply to as many of them as I can. We benefited from strong speeches, particularly from Graeme Dey, with his journalistic background, who added an important point about the importance of the protections that journalists have. Patrick Harvie was correct to identify that the press wants whistleblowing to be removed from the on-going debate. Graeme Pearson’s valuable contribution drew on his 30-year police career. It was important to hear from Stewart Maxwell, the committee’s convener, whom I thank for setting out what the committee has managed to do in addressing some of the issues. The question that we should ask is whether the royal charter really delivers the Leveson proposals. Our view, which the hacked off campaign shares, is that it does. There are differences, but they are few. There are two main ones. First, Lord Justice Leveson recommended that fines should be up to a maximum of £1 million or 1 per cent of the publisher’s turnover—whichever is lower. The charter refers to 1 per cent of the publication’s turnover, not the turnover of the publisher as a whole. That is a concession in the direction of the press, although it can be justified on the grounds that a publication’s turnover reflects its circulation and that having a link between circulation and the fine arguably reflects the damage that might be caused by malpractice, which will relate to circulation size. Secondly, the charter places a lot of responsibility for agreeing the standards code, which we have talked about, with the code committee, which will have a majority of journalists and editors. The board of the regulatory body will have a veto over the standards code. Both those differences from the original recommendations favour the press. A number of members mentioned the regulator’s complaints-handling and arbitration functions. It might be helpful to set out that Lord Justice Leveson saw the regulator’s three key functions as standards enforcement, complaints handling and arbitration. Standards enforcement is about ensuring that newspapers operate to the appropriate standards. The current Press Complaints Commission can consider individual complaints but lacks the ability to investigate systemic problems in individual papers or companies or in the press as a whole. The new regulator will have the power to do that. As its name implies, the Press Complaints Commission already handles complaints, and Lord Justice Leveson acknowledged that it does that quite well. The new regulator will have some powers to consider third-party complaints. That is a welcome development, which Patrick Harvie brought out when he spoke. The function of arbitration is new; it offers an inexpensive and swift way of resolving disputes that might otherwise have gone to court. I repeat that it is voluntary and involves only parties that are directly affected—there is no third-party arbitration. Particularly in relation to the points that were made about the local press, it is important to stress that the arbitration service is intended to offer an alternative to the courts that is attractive to the press—including the local press—and complainants through being less expensive and quicker than going to court. Arbitration will be voluntary, and the aim is to achieve a system that the press positively wants to use. There is a distinction between complaints and arbitration. Complaints are about activities that are against the code but do not give rise to legal action as defamation does. Arbitration is a quicker and less expensive way of dealing with matters such as defamation that could alternatively be pursued in the courts. I set out in an intervention on Bob Doris the points, which are in the charter, that the process must be inexpensive and that frivolous or vexatious cases can be struck out. I also reiterate that there must be a high bar for arbitration. Arbitration will be available only when a case meets the criteria for being pursued in the civil courts. Arbitration is not about dealing with complaints against the standards code in a more expensive way; rather, it is about dealing in a less expensive and more efficient way with breaches of civil law that might otherwise have gone to court. The availability of an arbitration service is one of the incentives that we should consider further as we deliberate on the matter. It is true that one of the incentives that Lord Justice Leveson suggested was protection against exemplary damages. However, as Patricia Ferguson pointed out, that would not really work in Scots law, because we have not had exemplary or punitive damages since 1907—that was well set out in the expert group’s report—and the Scottish Government is not attracted to the idea of reintroducing them into Scots law for the sole purpose of then exempting the press from them. A range of other incentives are available. One possible incentive is that, when public information notices are required to be published in print, they should be in the regulated press, to recognise its standing. However, Bob Doris should remember that there is a strong drive from local government to relieve local authorities of the requirement to place notices in local papers. That has been continually requested of us. A number of members raised the Watsons’ case, including Liam McArthur, Clare Adamson and Paul Martin, who has supported the Watsons as their local MSP. It is disappointing that the UK Government seems to be reluctant to open up the text of the royal charter. However, any reference in the charter would simply be a means of trying to get a provision into the code. As I said earlier, I have written to Lord Hunt, the chair of the Press Complaints Commission, to ensure that that is taken account of as plans develop. As we have indicated, he has taken a strong interest in the case. Patrick Harvie raised the issue of whether comments by private individuals might get caught up in the regulation of the press. The expert group’s remit and definition drew on a definition from the Department for Culture, Media and Sport that has since been refined, including in the Crime and Courts Act 2013, so that only publishers that are commercial businesses with 10 or more employees and whose publications are written by different authors and are subject to editorial control qualify. Individual blogs and social media are not caught. That might also address Stewart Stevenson’s concern.

Liz Smith and Helen Eadie emphasised the importance of enforcing the criminal law. I very much agree with that, and the First Minister stressed that in his evidence to the Leveson inquiry and when he spoke in our debate on 4 December 2012. Enforcement of the criminal law is vital but is not enough. Lord McCluskey eloquently pointed out to the committee that some of the issues in the cases of the Watsons, the McCanns and J K Rowling were not necessarily matters for criminal law but should, nevertheless, have been subject to some means of remedy. That is why we need effective regulation of the press. I am grateful for the speeches that have been made today, just as we have been grateful for the contributions of the party leaders and the Education and Culture Committee. They have brought us to a place where the Parliament can unite in seeking to use the royal charter to establish a voluntary self-regulatory system for the press that is fit for Scotland and—most important—for the victims of press malpractice. On the basis of the debate, we will take forward our discussions with the UK Government. I assume that members are aware that the First Minister and the Lord Advocate are privy counsellors. We will continue to work with the press and the UK Government on implementation. United support from the Scottish Parliament will help to deliver a strong message, and I hope that we will secure support from across the Parliament for the important motion that we have presented to it.

I was keen to speak in the debate not only to support the bill but because I wished to emphasise the vital role that the National Trust for Scotland plays in our national life and to place on the record the regard and affection in which it is held by many of us. In order to give a sense of that, it would be useful to consider some facts. The trust is the third-largest landowner in Scotland, with 76,000 hectares, and the owner of 270 listed buildings. It is responsible for 46 Munros, seven national nature reserves, 45 sites of special scientific interest and the United Kingdom’s only mixed world heritage site, at St Kilda. Like its predecessors, the Government has worked closely with the trust in supporting, for example, the splendid Robert Burns birthplace museum and the exciting new visitor facilities that are currently under development at Bannockburn. However, we recognise that the main support for the trust in its work of caring for many of our national treasures comes from more than 300,000 devoted members, its many volunteers, its imaginative fundraising activities and the income from its trading activities. When the trust encountered difficulties a few years ago, I sensed a collective intake of breath right across Scotland. If its future could be in jeopardy, what other treasured institutions might be at risk? The painstaking review of the trust’s activities, structures and governance that followed, which was undertaken by George Reid, charted a course to safety along which the trust has travelled. It has faced hard decisions along the way. The Reid review identified the complexity of the trust’s governance arrangements as a serious obstacle to progress. The report stated that “they prevent the Trust tackling issues and setting strategic direction.” The review recommended a number of changes, almost all of which have been given effect by administrative action. The trust’s five-year strategy was launched in September 2011 with the aim of guiding it away from this period of difficulty. Five strategic priorities were identified in it: the portfolio and its conservation; the promotion of Scotland’s heritage; financial sustainability; visitor enjoyment; and investment in our people. I am pleased to have seen the hard work that has been undertaken since the introduction of the strategy to deliver on those priorities and am thoroughly encouraged by the direction in which the trust is now moving. The bill deals with the last few changes that were recommended by the Reid review. Legislative action is needed to complete the modernisation of the trust’s governance. As the convener of the committee has already mentioned, the changes are relatively minor, but they can be seen as another fundamental step on the continuing journey that the trust is on. As members will be aware, the Government plans to consult shortly on proposals to establish and further develop a high-level strategy for Scotland’s historic environment and on provisions to create a single new lead body to carry out the roles that are appropriate to national Government in the area. In the preparatory work for that consultation, which was undertaken with a wide range of stakeholders, the National Trust for Scotland’s role as an independent partner in our diverse heritage landscape was widely recognised. The trust provides an informed and inspiring voice on heritage issues. The range and depth of its experience offer strengths that complement and expand on what can be achieved by Government and its agencies. We detail in the proposals plans to bring together Historic Scotland and the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland into a single body, so we will take great care to ensure the continuation of the trust’s important and distinctive role as a key player in a team Scotland approach, an idea that the trust has been instrumental in developing. In many respects, the bill offers us an opportunity to emphasise the value of partnership working between Government and the third sector, and between Parliament and the third sector. The trust is a conservation charity that defines its mission as being to work for the good of Scotland, and it is a significant partner in delivering a considerable number of Scottish Government policy objectives. A new emphasis has been placed on developing and maintaining partnerships and creating new synergies across Scotland, which can only be beneficial to all parties concerned. The trust will contribute significantly to the much anticipated year of homecoming in 2014 and, as I have said, it has been a central part of two of Scotland’s major cultural projects over recent years: the Robert Burns birthplace museum and the Bannockburn visitor centre. A strong and well managed National Trust for Scotland is a key part of delivering the Scottish Government’s vision for the conservation of Scotland’s rich cultural and natural heritage, environmental awareness and education. The trust is also a significant contributor to economic benefit for the nation and local communities, particularly in remote and rural areas. I therefore stand before members this afternoon fully in support of the bill.

The Scottish Government fully supports the proposals and looks forward to continuing its excellent relationship with the National Trust as we move towards an exciting time. The trust’s work links with a considerable cross-section of the Government’s work, from culture to rural affairs to education, and many opportunities will present themselves in the coming years. We recognise that the trust will be a key partner in enabling Scotland to take full advantage of opportunities. Discussion about the bill has served to highlight the National Trust’s importance to Scotland—to its culture and heritage, its environment, its local communities and its economy. We have been given an opportunity to appreciate the problems that the trust faced in recent years and the positive way in which it responded. The trust’s actions have been efficient and effective and should be welcomed by all members. Challenges there were and challenges remain. The needs of our heritage are many, and resources will always be scarcer than we would wish them to be. Scotland needs a National Trust that is vibrant, efficient and effective. It needs the trust to be independent while being a key player in team Scotland, working as a partner of Government and communities at national and local level, to help to conserve Scotland’s incomparable historic and natural heritage and to unlock the social and economic benefits that can and should be derived from that heritage. The changes that the bill will implement are necessary in enabling that ambition to be achieved. George Reid appreciated that in his review, and trust members appreciated that by overwhelmingly approving the measures. Perhaps most relevant today, the Cabinet sub-committee on legislation appreciated that, too. The bill committee’s meticulous report, for which it deserves our whole-hearted thanks, confirms that it is appropriate that our Parliament takes forward the legislative means to complete the reforms that the Reid review recommended. In doing so, we will enable the trust to continue on its course as a leading conservation charity, with a modern governance structure that is fit for the challenges of the 21st century. I agree, and the Government agrees, that the bill should proceed. The trust deserves nothing less than our full support in its most valuable work for Scotland and for the peoples of Scotland.

The Scottish Government is a strong supporter of the unique culture of the Highlands and Islands. Along with our national agencies and other partners, we have been working to sustain and celebrate the heritage and cultural life of the Highlands and Islands and promote the area. We are particularly keen to support our Gaelic heritage, which is why Creative Scotland provides regular funding to Fèis Rois to support its important work in the area. This year as we celebrate the year of natural Scotland, we have a further opportunity to spotlight, celebrate and promote the outstanding natural beauty and landscapes of the region to our people and our visitors. The programme for the year comprises more than 40 potential flagship events including the Hebridean Celtic festival in the Western Isles. In addition, Creative Scotland has provided more than £100,000 as part of the year of natural Scotland open fund to support cultural projects in the Highlands and islands. Of course, Historic Scotland is investing in a major representation of Iona abbey, 1,450 years since St Columbus first settled on Iona.

On the latter point, the council’s only statutory responsibility is in relation to libraries, as the member might well know. It is deeply disappointing that Moray Council has taken that step, and it is in contrast to the actions of many other local authorities. Indeed, only last week I visited East Ayrshire Council, which really embraces culture in every aspect, and Moray Council would do well to learn from the experience of East Ayrshire Council. Moray Council is an autonomous body, as the member well knows. A flat cash financial settlement was provided for local authorities and across Scotland, and it is quite clear that many local authorities are doing what East Ayrshire Council is doing. The Scottish Government has worked hard to protect local government and cultural spend and it is deeply disappointing that councillors in Moray have done otherwise. I hope that they will revisit their decision but, at the end of the day, as I reported to the Education and Culture Committee in Parliament, national Government cannot be the funder of last resort in decisions that have been made by autonomous local authorities. Those councillors will have to face their own electorate on that.

Education and culture clearly go hand in hand, and the Government has provided its creative education toolkit. I reiterate the importance of music, drama and arts in our education system. Last night I attended a fantastic performance at my local school, Linlithgow academy. The spring concert saw hundreds of youngsters performing and celebrating their creativity, arts and culture. Tribute should be paid to the principal teacher of music in that school, and to all the teachers across Scotland who keep alive the burning spirit and enthusiasm for arts and culture.

Computer games are a sub-sector of the creative industries—one of the seven growth sectors of our economic strategy. We are working with our partner organisations to review our approach to developing support for the creative industries sector. That work includes the development of a skills investment plan, led by Skills Development Scotland. We expect the skills investment plan to address the results of the British Academy of Film and Television Arts career pathways survey that was published in November 2012, which identified clear gender issues in the industry. The skills investment plan development process will also help to support and encourage new recruits and to develop skills in the sector.

I hope that I have given the member reassurance on that with my previous answer regarding the skills investment development process that is taking place. It is important that we encourage more young women into science—including computing science—and engineering at schools so that they are in a position to be encouraged to go into the games industry. Decisions about career courses at Abertay university will be made while young women are at school. Therefore, I hope that the work that Angela Constance, our Minister for Youth Employment, is taking forward with regard to careerwise and the science, technology, engineering and mathematics support that she is providing for young women, with the announcement of £250,000 to encourage girls to consider careers in science—including computing science—and engineering will be of assistance in that regard.

Ever since the BBC published its proposals for handling its reduced budget as a result of the licence fee settlement that was negotiated behind closed doors over 48 hours by the United Kingdom Government, the Scottish Government has consistently stood up for BBC jobs in Scotland and for high-quality news and current affairs coverage by BBC Scotland. The First Minister and I have repeatedly expressed our concerns over budget decisions, job losses and the potential impact on quality to the director of BBC Scotland, the chair of the BBC trust and respective directors general of the BBC. Only last week, on 18 March, I met the deputy chair of the BBC trust, Diane Coyle, and the BBC trust member for Scotland, Bill Matthews, and once more reiterated my concerns. I am pleased to learn that some progress has been made with regard to protecting jobs at BBC Scotland, with the NUJ announcing on Thursday 21 March that it had reached an agreement with BBC Scotland management to delay the termination date into April for at-risk staff. I am pleased that the BBC and the NUJ have reached that interim agreement, but I strongly urge both parties to continue their discussions and reach a constructive resolution.

As I said, the First Minister and I have repeatedly requested assurances from the BBC on coverage, particularly with regard to quality in news and current affairs. That should apply to all parts of Scotland and I am conscious of the sheer geographical size of the Highlands and Islands and the importance of providing that coverage. Clearly, the BBC had a licence fee freeze imposed on it by the United Kingdom Government, but there is no escaping the fact that BBC Scotland made a choice to front-load its cuts in the first year of the new licence fee period. At this important period in Scotland’s history, it is important that we get the quality of news coverage that the people of Scotland deserve. That should be borne in mind during the BBC management’s decision making.

It is important that we have quality news and current affairs coverage in all branches of the media. It is disappointing that job losses are being announced across the Scottish media at this important time in Scotland’s history. It is important that we work with different publications. I am conscious of the independence of newspapers—they are clear in stating that to us. However, I have deep concerns about the announcements, which are disappointing.

Creative Scotland has lead responsibility for the promotion of film making in Scotland. Creative Scotland administers a fund for film and broadcasting and has allocated funding to Film City Glasgow to examine the feasibility of a film studio project, with substantial funds earmarked for further development opportunities. Additionally, Creative Scotland is working with Scottish Enterprise to explore film studio projects. Last year, the First Minister hosted a film investors evening to attract further inward private investment into film. The Scottish Government also provides funding to the Edinburgh international film festival, through the expo fund.

Clearly, this is a matter for the City of Edinburgh Council. I have concerns about the announcement—I think that it is short-sighted and sends the wrong signals. In terms of the revenue that can be generated from film making, I encourage the City of Edinburgh Council and Marketing Edinburgh to take up Creative Scotland’s offer for discussions on the issue to see whether there is a way forward.

The Scottish Government is in regular contact with Creative Scotland about a range of activities, including film and television production. On Thursday 21 March, I attended a Creative Scotland board meeting at which film and television issues were discussed. At that meeting, I was briefed on Creative Scotland’s recently commenced film review. I also had a meeting with Scottish Enterprise about the creative industries last week at which opportunities for film were discussed.

It is interesting that the film industry has provided positive feedback on the support to date. However, Patricia Ferguson is absolutely right to identify the importance of continuing support with the appointment of the new chief executive. That is precisely what I discussed with Scottish Enterprise last week. We need to ensure that there is good connectivity between its work on business development for some of the high-growth sectors and the indigenous film industry to ensure that we have links with Creative Scotland.

I note the member’s particular enthusiasm for the project. Book week Scotland in 2012 was Scotland’s first national celebration of reading. It took place between 30 November and 9 December 2012. It was a manifesto commitment that was managed by Creative Scotland and delivered by the Scottish Book Trust. Book week Scotland 2012 raised the profile of books and reading through a wide variety of events and activities for all ages throughout Scotland, including in public libraries. Plans for book week Scotland in 2013 are currently in development and will be announced shortly.

I agree with that. Indeed, I am pleased to have the support of the Scottish Library and Information Council. On the reach of book week Scotland 2012, we had authors throughout Scotland, and there was a real enthusiasm for reading and for our literature. It is a great way to celebrate our literature and our heritage. It is also a great opportunity, particularly on St Andrew’s day, to recognise that rich culture.

The Scottish Government believes that culture, particularly the performing arts, can be a powerful way to raise awareness of social issues. That is why in 2012-13, together with Creative Scotland and our national performing companies, we have funded a wide range of projects and organisations that have sought to use the arts to address inequality and intolerance. That funding includes an investment of £116,000 by the Scottish Government in the Citizens Theatre for the production of “Divided City” in Christina McKelvie’s constituency. “Divided City” is a drama-based exploration of division and exclusion within communities that considers issues such as sectarianism and immigration. The play, which is the product of workshops within the area, was performed in Hamilton in February and very well received.

I indeed congratulate those young people and encourage all members to attend the parliamentary premiere. It is an excellent initiative that uses arts and culture to address hard-hitting issues and ensure that young people are able not only to tell their own stories but to reflect on that experience and change people’s views and opinions.

First, I thank the expert group chaired by Lord McCluskey for its swift work, its clearly drafted report and its interesting recommendations. The report was published only on Friday afternoon and, in the past 24 hours, there have been further major developments at Westminster. We now want to work towards not simply a Scottish Government response to these matters but one that continues the involvement of other parties in the Parliament. For that reason, we intend to continue the meetings between party leaders that started towards the end of last year. In particular, we expect that a meeting between party leaders here and the United Kingdom Government can be arranged quickly, as we had always intended would happen once the UK Government position was agreed. We will examine and will want to discuss with the UK Government the implications of the royal charter proposition. We also want to involve the Parliament as a whole, so we intend to seek an opportunity to bring the matter before the chamber after the Easter recess.

I agree with those points. The report that Lord Justice Leveson produced was indeed a balanced report that had to balance the interests of many different areas. The importance of victims must never be forgotten. We were appalled by the evidence that we saw, but we must remember that it did not involve all journalists or all publications. When it comes to supporting a genuinely independent self-regulatory system, we need to find a way forward, and I think that the best way to find that way forward is through consensus. That is one of the reasons why the party leaders have met Hacked Off, as a representative of victims, and, last week, newspaper representatives.

I strongly believe in a free press. I agree with the recommendations by Lord Justice Leveson that there should be an independent self-regulatory system, but we need to have checks and balances in that system. That is why we must examine what the implications of the royal charter are, because some of the issues to do with incentives and arbitration that are important to the Leveson recommendations must be considered in the context of Scots law. I have had agreement from Maria Miller and the Advocate General for Scotland that once the UK Government achieved an agreed position, we could examine what the implications are, in particular for Scots law.

The member is correct to identify that the advisers provided some advice or information in that area. I point out that the terms of reference for the expert group said that any developments in press regulation elsewhere in the UK that arose from the Leveson inquiry should be considered. However, the member is correct to identify that the exemplary charges and exemplary damages do not apply in Scotland. That is why we must look at other areas. Jim Eadie is also correct to identify the need for public consultation. That would be something for the Parliament to decide on, but we should think about whether, in a short period of time, there might be an opportunity to do as he suggests.

The point for the here and now, as we have heard from other members, is that we should look for a consensus to ensure that a self-regulatory system is established, rather than resorting to any other means. On compulsion, I think that that is the problem with what has emerged from the McCluskey report in particular in relation to the jurisdiction issues. We must consider how we can have checks and balances to allow a voluntary membership, self-regulatory press system to operate. The member is correct to consider that we do not necessarily know at this stage what the implications of the royal charter are, and there are obviously different options for going forward. However, I would rather deal with the positives of what we can achieve, which is why I appeal for the co-operation of the member and others in trying to agree a consensual position. However, notwithstanding any of that, Jim Eadie’s original point about the importance of the experience of victims and having checks and balances must be paramount.

Clearly, we are quite limited by the timescale. Indeed, the Prime Minister indicated that he would want to take a royal charter to the Privy Council in May. However, if Clare Adamson’s view—I think that Patrick Harvie indicated this as well—is that we need an opportunity to examine the proposed royal charter, then I think that it would be preferable if the appropriate committee could hold some evidence sessions, however pressured the timescale might be, so that we can look at what checks and balances can be achieved using Scots law and at the implications of the royal charter.

The Scottish Government attends regular meetings of the board of Creative Scotland as an observer, most recently on 28 February 2013 when strategic matters were discussed. I am next due to meet the board on 21 March.

I know that the member has regularly raised issues about film and television, which is a sector that I am keen to support. I am more than happy to ensure that the points that she has made are raised in my discussions with Creative Scotland, and I am looking forward to positive news about progress in that area. The action plan that Creative Scotland produced only last week sets out a review of funding streams more generally. I will ask specifically what that will mean for film and television in particular.

As outlined in my answer to Patricia Ferguson, part of the action plan relates to a review of funding models to enable as many organisations as possible and appropriate to benefit from stable multiyear arrangements, which includes an end to the plans for strategic commissioning. Changing the perceived funding hierarchy will be helpful and that stability will be important for a number of organisations. In relation to the Byre theatre, important discussions must take place with Fife Council and the new Fife Cultural Trust in particular. I will encourage—as I did at the meeting that Rod Campbell attended—those discussions to take place. I thank Rod Campbell and all the Fife MSPs who attended that meeting for their positive suggestions and constructive support.

Planning for homecoming Scotland 2014—

Planning for homecoming Scotland 2014 is progressing well. We have announced that the Scottish Government is providing VisitScotland with a core budget of £5.5 million to support the year, which will be set around the five themes of ancestry, food and drink, and an active, creative and natural Scotland. The homecoming Scotland 2014 programme is due to be launched next month. Thereafter activity will ramp up significantly, boosted by global marketing and public relations campaigns, which will be led by VisitScotland. Activity currently taking place to prepare for homecoming Scotland 2014 includes development of the model for engaging Scotland’s communities in the year, exploration of educational aspects linked with curriculum for excellence, and the launch and on-going enhancement of a toolkit to help businesses harness the significant opportunities that the year offers.

I know that Stuart McMillan has consistently argued for marine infrastructure, particularly in the west of Scotland, and that he is particularly interested in marine and cruising activity in the Greenock area. Discussions on that are going on between Greenock cruise terminal and Scottish Enterprise. Stuart McMillan’s more general point, about the importance of the impact of homecoming 2014 for businesses, is well made. We have carried out a lot of investment, particularly in my portfolio, in the culture and heritage aspects of what Scotland has to offer. The impact is extensive, not just on our built heritage but on our marine heritage, in bringing people to Scotland to use our waterways, in Loch Lomond or on the west coast. I am sure that Stuart McMillan’s request about consequentials has been heard by the relevant finance minister. His point is well made.

This is the first time that we have debated Europe since David Cameron’s decision to have a referendum on EU membership and to open the exit door from the EU in a bid not to lose home county seats to the UK Independence Party. We recognise that independence goes hand in hand with interdependence, and the announcement two weeks ago that the EU will establish a transatlantic trade and investment partnership with the USA is proof of that. We must ask ourselves whether we want to be part of a progressive union that represents the largest free trade area in the world or cling to the politics of United Kingdom Conservative narrow nationalism. Does Scotland really want to abandon hard-fought-for workers’ rights? We face many of the same challenges as the rest of the EU: promoting economic growth; tackling global warming; improving energy security; and promoting a healthier and fairer society. We are already working with partners in the EU to tackle them. Earlier this month, it was announced that BioCity in Scotland, working with the University of Dundee and the Scottish Universities Life Sciences Alliance, would be the site of a major screening centre for the discovery of new drugs, under the EU’s innovative medicines initiative. Scotland is a world leader in renewable energy. We are active partners in the North Sea offshore grid co-ordination initiative and the Irish-Scottish links on energy study, and we are playing a major role in moves towards a more integrated European energy market. Our strategy for Scotland complements Europe’s flagship 2020 strategy. Both strategies share the same central aim of smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. EU initiatives make a real difference for the people of Scotland, which is why we have been and continue to be closely engaged in the multi-annual financial framework for 2014-2020—the EU’s long-term budget. The committee is correct to continue to monitor MAFF closely as it moves to the European Parliament for consideration. With the concern about the possible reduction in structural funds that was relayed to Parliament last week, the Deputy First Minister will undertake negotiations with UK ministers to ensure that structural funds are distributed fairly and to the communities that need them the most. The support of this Parliament will be important and Nicola Sturgeon is meeting with Scottish MEPs today to secure their support.

That is precisely why Nicola Sturgeon will have negotiations with the UK Government. The member may recall that, in 2006, when his party was in power, similar negotiations had to take place to make adjustments to what was at an initial stage a detrimental impact. We will work hard, I hope with colleagues across the chamber and colleagues in the European Parliament, to rectify what we currently face as a problem situation. The Scottish Government’s European action plan sets out our four priority areas: research and creativity; energy and climate change; the marine environment; and justice. Those priorities help to best focus our EU efforts. The leading role that we play in combating climate change is internationally recognised. In 2012, the Scottish Government continued its engagement in the international climate change negotiations and supported EU and UK efforts to reach a global deal. Scottish ministers have worked to support the United Nations and EU sustainable energy for all initiative for global access to renewable electricity. We have also engaged in discussions surrounding the European Commission’s approach to renewable energies in the EU beyond 2020. That issue remains at the top of the European agenda. Negotiations on a renewed 2030 EU climate and energy package will begin in April this year. The Scottish Government will work with industry and other member states and regions to make the case for ambitious, sustainable and long-term renewable energy and energy decarbonisation targets. Scotland champions the role that small and medium-sized enterprises can play in re-energising the economy. The framework 7 programme has provided grants to universities, industry and small and medium-sized enterprises to co-finance research, technological development and demonstration projects. By the end of October 2012, Scottish organisations had secured €437 million, and 16 per cent of the funds that were secured in Scotland went directly to SMEs. We are working hard directly and actively with stakeholders to promote Scotland’s interests, including in the EU’s next research programme, horizon 2020. We are seeking opportunities where we can to support EU funding calls. Again, that is a priority that was identified by the Scottish Parliament’s European and External Relations Committee, which I thank again for focusing on that programme. We are, of course, one of Europe’s foremost maritime nations, and we have played a full part in European negotiations on the common fisheries policy. The Irish presidency aims to find agreement on reform of the CFP before the end of June 2013. If it is successful, that will bring to a close over three years of deliberations on fishing. Scotland’s distinctive and independent legal system puts us in a unique position in the EU, with a particular interest in EU justice policies. We need to assess all new EU justice legislation and how it impacts on Scots law. The UK Government’s current thinking, of course, is to exercise the option to opt out of all pre-Lisbon treaty third pillar measures. The Scottish Government and many others have serious concerns about that position, and the Justice Committee is right to prioritise that issue. Beyond the Scottish Government’s action plan, there are, of course, other areas of EU policy making that are making an impact on Scotland, and our strategic engagement reflects that. We remain committed to Europe. We believe that effective collaboration with our European partners can lead to better outcomes for Scotland and a stronger EU. A Scotland that is at the heart of European activity with a direct voice in Europe enables us to benefit from the opportunities that membership of the EU brings. I began by saying that our future within the European Union is currently the subject of some uncertainty. That is not because of Scotland’s referendum in 2014, but is a result of the UK’s proposed referendum on EU membership in 2017. We understand that there is a case for reform. In fact, we are, as I said, already contributing to the process of amending the common fisheries policy, we would like to see more ambitious EU targets on carbon emissions, and we are supportive of increased transparency. However, we believe that those reforms are best achieved through constructive dialogue with member states and from within the EU. Our interests and our future lie firmly within the European Union. We understand that it is essential to respect the legitimacy of existing EU treaties, and we also understand that our continued membership would require negotiations. We would approach those discussions as a nation that would be a net contributor to the EU budget and whose people are already EU citizens. We would do so as a nation that already applies the body of EU law and policy and whose devolved Government has demonstrated its capacity to transpose and implement EU legislation. We would do so as a nation that is keen to become an equal partner in the EU and that recognises its benefits, participates in dialogue about its future and contributes to its development and growth. This debate affirms the role and importance of the EU to Scotland, and the Parliament’s priorities make it clear that Scotland has a lot to offer and a lot to contribute.

Will the member give way?

When I am at Westminster on Monday, can I count on the Conservative group’s support on exactly that point: the transition between pillars 1 and 2 in reform of the budget, which is very important indeed to Scotland?

Scottish ministers meet diplomats regularly to discuss matters of mutual interest. Ministers have recently held meetings in Scotland with a range of diplomats, including the ambassadors of Denmark, Hungary, Bulgaria and Switzerland, in which a range of topics were discussed to strengthen the links between Scotland and those countries. The First Minister met European Union ambassadors last week in London. The Minister for External Affairs and International Development met the consul general for Iraq on 19 February, when they discussed the links between Scotland and Iraq. This afternoon, the First Minister and I will meet Oscar Kerketta, the new Indian consul general, to welcome him to Scotland and to discuss links between Scotland and India.

I very much appreciate the point that Mark McDonald makes. We all have a responsibility to support and build relations for the future and in the present. Commercial and other interests are important. I assure members that any comments that are made in this chamber or elsewhere are heard in other countries. We all have to be responsible, as we will all be judged by how our country is seen internationally.

The Scottish Government has met the URTV broadband network of community-owned, hyper-local television channels. Nesta is currently running a programme of funding 10 pilots across the United Kingdom, three of which are in Scotland. Creative Scotland has partnered with Nesta in Scotland and provided 50 per cent of the stage 1 project costs of the three participants. I am delighted that URTV was one of the three successful applicants in Scotland and that it secured a £50,000 grant from NESTA to build a network of community-owned, not-for-profit, hyper-local news channels. The Scottish Government is also supporting the Annan broadband pilot in the south of Scotland as part of the digital strategy. The URTV model is an important component of the Annan broadband pilot, as it is an effective means of encouraging people in Annandale to use the internet and access public services and information online. Work is under way to embed the project in the local community.

The member is quite right. Indeed, the first director general of the BBC talked about the importance of public service broadcasting’s mission not just to entertain but to inform and educate. The possibilities of broadband are extensive in this area. Of course, the Scottish Government is committing more than £240 million of public funding to the step change 2015 programme, which will deliver a step change in next-generation broadband that will particularly focus on rural areas. Obviously, we will work closely with local authorities on that. Dumfries and Galloway Council is a co-funder of the example that I gave of the Annan broadband pilot in the south of Scotland. There are extensive opportunities for public services and television as part of that partnership and we will encourage local authorities to see the opportunities in that way.

I want to see a sustainable future for Shambellie house, which provides benefits for the local community. The Scottish Government has, therefore, provided £20,000 to fund a feasibility study into the future use of the house, to be facilitated by National Museums Scotland. I expect the study to report over the next few months, once the relevant parties have all participated. I also strongly encourage National Museums Scotland and the local authority to work together on developing improved access to the national collections in the wider Dumfries and Galloway area.

On the latter point, I make it clear that I expect not only roaming but regular exhibitions to be provided throughout the region. I am committed to Shambellie house. As I have said on a number of occasions in the chamber, the resource should be available to the local community. However, it will take all partners to come together to achieve that. Advice from the local members as to how it can best be used might be welcome. They could also provide advice on whether they, local councillors or Dumfries and Galloway Council centrally would provide the best steer on that.

I have made it quite clear to National Museums Scotland that I expect a better offer for Dumfries and Galloway. Other examples in places such as Kilmarnock and the northern isles show that there have been much-improved opportunities for sharing and, as we have just discussed, more regular and roaming exhibitions. As part of ensuring that there is a better offer, we must address two issues. One concerns the wider Dumfries and Galloway area. The other concerns the commitment to Shambellie house being used for the local community. We must ensure that that service exists. On measurement, I will be quite clear to National Museums Scotland about what I expect. In the feasibility study, I expect opportunities to emerge in both the areas that I mentioned.

The Scottish Government’s “Working with China” publication itself sets out how implementation and delivery will be taken forward. It will be for stakeholders throughout Scotland to work in partnership to achieve the objectives of the China strategy. The Scottish Government’s role is to support that engagement where it can and to encourage greater co-operation between partners.

Liz Smith makes an important point. I also echo her thanks to Judith McClure and the SCEN for their work. There are currently 13 teachers of Mandarin in local authority schools. That compares with eight in 2008-09. I share with Liz Smith the view that we need to increase the opportunities for those who can share language skills. I spoke at the cross-party group on China recently. Part of our discussion was about a hub that would help to connect people who are doing work in China, whether local authorities or businesses. That should also provide opportunities to identify skills. That is work in progress, but Liz Smith is right to identify the need to mobilise the talent that we have in Scotland to achieve the step change that we need in language skills.

Following the publication of the Scottish Government’s China strategy, “Working with China”, the Chinese consul general wrote to the First Minister in December 2012 to highlight the fact that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Beijing had positively received the strategy. I met a delegation from the Beijing municipality that month to discuss possible collaboration across culture and tourism interests, as well as trade and industry. The Minister for External Affairs and International Development met the Chinese consul general on 10 October 2012 to consider closer co-operation between Scotland and China. I attended a dinner at the Chinese consulate in May 2012 to discuss a range of issues, including strengthening relations between Scotland and China.

Scottish exports to Taiwan are extensive. We have strong links with Taiwan on trade, tourism and higher education. We estimate that exports to Taiwan in the five years to 2011 were worth about £955 million. Taiwan was the fifth-ranked nation by value for exports of Scotch whisky. Scottish Development International has had an office in Taipei City for more than 15 years and it continues to work closely with potential prospects from Taiwan. Renewables, life sciences, information technology and finance are key sectors for the future. As for culture, there was a Taiwanese performance of “King Lear” during the Edinburgh international festival in 2011, which was well received.

We recognise the strong associations that Carrick has with Robert the Bruce and we support the community in planning to celebrate them. I wrote to Councillor Alec Oattes of South Ayrshire Council in August and December last year to direct him to key contacts and relevant funding sources. I hope that Carrick community councils forum can take this interesting and appropriate project forward.

I have heard of proposals for the grand pageant, which is innovative as a celebration and as a way of promoting future tourism opportunities. I encourage the partners, including South Ayrshire Council and the local member, to engage with agencies to access appropriate funding. If Adam Ingram would like to meet agencies such as Creative Scotland and EventScotland to take forward plans, I will facilitate that.

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. I congratulate Chic Brodie on leading what I think has been a very thoughtful and informed debate. Of course, Scotland’s historic buildings are an exceptionally important national asset. Our country’s image at home and abroad and the way in which we think about Scotland as a historical landscape are based on our wonderful heritage of towns, cities, crofts, castles and country houses. Our historic houses, from the tenements of Edinburgh and Glasgow to the fantastic tower houses and castles of the north-east, are an essential part of that priceless heritage. The vast majority of those buildings are well cared for and managed by both private and public owners. As Graeme Dey said, many organisations, particularly in the private-ownership sector, contribute so much to Scotland. As private owners, Scotland’s people have the main responsibility for looking after our historic environment and they do so very well. Scotland’s historic homes are our heritage and, as Christine Grahame so ably set out, the story of our buildings is very much the story of our people. Seafield house in Ayr is a B-listed building that is the former home of Sir William Arrol, the celebrated builder of the Forth rail bridge. Both George Adam and Graeme Pearson set out his personal history. We are putting forward the Forth rail bridge for nomination as a world heritage site. Of course, we will soon have three crossings for the Forth that will span three centuries. I do not think that any other part of the world will have such an iconic heritage site, once the new Forth crossing is built. Today is the centenary of the death of Sir William Arrol. His former home, Seafield house, was converted for hospital use. As the Presiding Officer said, I am a local Ayr lass and I used to travel every Saturday morning to play hockey in front of Seafield house at the racecourse. Indeed, I visited my brother when he broke his leg and was a patient in Seafield house, so I am familiar with the building. Of course, it latterly became vacant and suffered fire damage. I understand that the building’s owner, NHS Ayrshire and Arran, has formed a viability group and is looking at all options for the site along with South Ayrshire Council, the Scottish Futures Trust and Historic Scotland. The group will meet again once the consultants’ initial work is complete to discuss the way forward. Along with our key partners in local government, the Scottish Government strongly supports owners and managers of historic buildings through grants, technical advice and statutory regulation to promote and protect our historic buildings for the benefit of all. I recently announced the fifth funding round of our conservation area regeneration scheme, which is run by local authorities. The current round amounts to £10 million to target priority buildings and provide small grants to home owners. Since 2007, £26 million has been awarded across the programme in places such as Elgin, Parkhead Cross in Glasgow, Ayr and Selkirk. In addition, Historic Scotland’s building repair grant scheme has awarded £56 million to historic buildings over the past five years and has levered in a further £271 million to our most outstanding buildings. We have unlocked the potential of our key historic buildings to deliver for local communities. Conservation projects that are based around historic buildings benefit communities and can be outstanding architectural projects in their own right. I am thinking about Castlemilk stables, Maryhill burgh halls and, in my constituency, Blackburn house, which is a successful example of how joint working brought investment in heritage-led regeneration. The beautifully restored and converted Blackburn house offers studio, office and gallery space. The friends of Seafield house might want to look at that wonderful community asset, which is run by the Scottish Historic Buildings Trust. At Linlithgow burgh halls in my constituency, a much-admired local landmark has been recast as a fantastic new community resource, which is part of a heritage set piece that recently tempted Chanel to stage a key fashion show at nearby Linlithgow palace. The historic environment is about the past, but such events demonstrate its potential for generating a dynamic future. Historic buildings are at their best and most secure when they are at the heart of the community. I urge Jamie McGrigor in particular to visit the recently restored Dalkeith tolbooth and have a look at its appropriate but effective double-glazing. We should be proud of our positive track record in Scotland on reuse and conversion of our historic buildings. As George Adam said, we should get used to seeing industrial buildings and hospitals converted to residential or business use and thereby remaining part of our landscape and heritage. Our urban designers have shown what can be done and how towns and cities can be re-energised by new projects in historic settings. The Parliament’s incorporation of the A-listed Queensberry house in the context of the Holyrood north master plan is testament to that. There are, quite rightly, concerns about historic buildings that lie unused or derelict. Some buildings are awaiting conversion but a small percentage are not currently well cared for. The reasons for that vary, but a building’s poor condition is often all too obvious and has a negative effect on community investment. To meet the challenge and highlight historic properties that were under threat, the buildings at risk register for Scotland was set up in 1990. The aim was to target buildings for repair, restoration or reuse. The register is run on Historic Scotland’s behalf by the Royal Commission for Ancient and Historic Monuments for Scotland. The new body that will be created when the two organisations merge will continue that function. In addition, in April 2011 a buildings at risk initiative was set up to bring together key stakeholders over three years, to tackle Scotland’s most endangered historic buildings. Historic Scotland has targeted A-listed buildings at risk, to deal with the most important examples of our heritage and to show how such activity addresses wider issues. Through the national performance framework, we are committed to reducing the percentage of A-listed buildings that are at risk. In 2009, 8.7 per cent of A-listed buildings were at risk, compared with 8.2 per cent in 2011. That steady improvement is continuing; figures were released yesterday that show that the proportion is down to 8 per cent. Our strategy in the area has two main themes: the targeting of deliverable projects around existing buildings at risk; and the development of effective estate management strategies, in partnership with larger landowners. We will address the on-going redundancy rate in buildings, while continuing to deal with existing buildings at risk. We will work closely with landholders, with advice and support from the Scottish Futures Trust, to deal with issues that can lead to a building becoming at risk, through preventative action. It is in all our interests to think carefully about the historic buildings in our care and to make positive decisions about them. There are many success stories. Of the 277 A-listed entries on the register in 2009, 199 remain at risk but 32 have been saved and a further 26 are in the process of restoration or conversion. When a derelict historic property is given a new lease of life in a community, we all feel good. Let us not wait until important historic buildings get into a poor state of repair. The key to good management is planning and early action. We will continue to support public authorities to plan for the continued use, strategic disposal or conversion of their historic buildings, which are our precious heritage. I thank Chic Brodie for lodging the motion so that this important subject could be debated in the Parliament, and I extend my best wishes to the friends of Seafield house.

I congratulate Drew Smith on his motion, which has enabled us to have a debate—with a healthy number of impassioned speeches—about how we can best encourage support for Scotland’s music industry. Drew Smith set out the issues well, including the pensions issue, the social expectation that musicians will play for free and the impact of digital downloading. I hope that we will return to the area, and not just in a members’ business debate, as I believe that we need to look at it more closely. I am sure that we all agree that the music industry is an essential part of the fabric of Scotland’s culture, and today’s debate marks a critical step towards ensuring that we place a value on our musicians’ art and performances. Scotland’s music culture and the industry that delivers it are world class, and it is the duty of the culture secretary to ensure that this part of Scotland’s identity is promoted, nurtured and developed. However, I am sure that members understand that there are limits to what the Scottish Government can do directly in relation to commissioners. We cannot direct private venues, charities or those who organise weddings to pay, but we can support the campaign to raise awareness of the concerns that have been raised today. The latest Scottish annual business statistics tell us that, in 2010, Scotland’s performing arts industries contributed more than £77 million to Scotland’s economy, with 460 registered businesses turning over £160 million and providing 4,700 jobs. Specifically on musicians, the annual population survey, which calculates on an occupation basis as opposed to looking at registered businesses, tells us that there are about 3,000 working musicians in Scotland. As we heard, musicians tend to operate a portfolio approach to their business, which centres on their networks and their reputation to secure their next piece of work. Although the music industry necessarily operates in a flexible manner, the compulsion to work for free has the potential to compromise the professional integrity of the industry and create insecurity and hardship for musicians. We heard about that in the debate. The Government continues to support the music sector in Scotland in a range of ways. Our national performing companies, which are the Scottish Chamber Orchestra, Scottish Ballet, the National Theatre of Scotland, the Royal Scottish National Orchestra and Scottish Opera, operate under contracts with their musicians. The terms and conditions, including rates, are cleared by the Musicians Union. However, I appreciate that there is a wide spectrum in the music industry and that the national performing companies are at the more structured end of the scale. It is important that we look at models of best practice, as set out by the campaign, and that those who commission live performances, who might previously have expected to get performances for free, consider providing at least minimum compensation for musicians’ performance time, for example by paying the living wage. We expect that in other areas—why do we not expect it in this area? Drew Smith’s points about performances around the Commonwealth games were well made. I will take that forward. Scotland loves music, but we also need to love our musicians. We need to ensure that we respect them and recompense them for the work that they do in inspiring our nation. A fairer deal all round for performers, the sector and the country needs to be engendered. The Musicians Union and the responses to the recent survey that Creative Scotland commissioned might confirm the value that our culture places on our music industry, but the dilemma that our performing musicians are facing needs to be addressed by both event managers and artists themselves. I commend the Musicians Union on its fair play guide, which sets out a simple model for musicians in managing their business. I recognise from my work with the culture sector that those who earn a living through art or culture have their art as their focus and might not have business planning as their top priority, but I also know that the commitment and passion that are delivered by artists are things that set them apart from other businesses. The artist’s passion might sustain their brand and image but, unfortunately, it does not necessarily sustain their livelihood. The Musicians Union’s simple guide could help to unlock some of our musicians’ potential through the clarity that they will experience in defining their activities and the articulation of their choices. Patterns are likely to emerge from the exercise in planning, highlighting the venues and events that their genre might tend towards supporting in kind and those with which a commercial relationship is emerging and there is more stability. We recognise the challenging economic conditions that are being faced across the music industry, from artists and their managers through to labels, promoters and venues and, critically, high street retailers. We have seen the difficulties faced by HMV, for example. What is required is the cultivation of more proactive support of and by that community, not just the music makers and performers but those who stand to benefit from its production—promoters, venues, retailers and, most important of all, music fans and audiences. Only today, we saw the launch of the CREATe—creativity, regulation, enterprise and technology—centre at the University of Glasgow, which is a £5 million research initiative by a consortium of seven universities. It will look at copyright and new business models in the creative economy. It is very important. As was mentioned in the debate, the importance of live performances will increase in a time of digital downloads. We must strive to develop a culture that recognises the interdependency of the music community and increases the intrinsic value of music itself. One of our nation’s defining characteristics is our passion for music, and we must focus our efforts on creating the most supportive commercial environment possible for our artists, labels, venues and retailers, so that they can earn a living from entertaining, enlightening, informing and inspiring our audiences. I hope that the issue can be addressed through mutual recognition of artists and commissioners. Musicians should place value on their work and not too readily accept having to deliver their business for no fee, and commissioners might consider musicians’ right to be compensated fairly for a fair hour or two’s work, as we have discussed. The Government believes in investing in and supporting music. Despite the pressure on budgets, I have maintained the youth music initiative, which is in its 10th year and which has inspired so many. We have also seen great strides forward. For example, the Scottish Brass Band Association has grown by 500 per cent in five years. We are at a point where we are creating more demand: we are creating more capacity for musicians and we are inspiring more young people to take part in music. Some of those young people will have a future with music as a hobby, as Stuart McMillan mentioned, but some will want to move on. As well as the success of the youth music initiative, there has been support for Fèis Rois, which established a successful ceilidh trail programme across the Highlands and provides valuable professional development and employment opportunities. We are looking to extend that into the central belt. It provides the transition from playing for experience to paid performances. The Fèis Rois trail included 78 performances to more than 5,000 people over the summer. One of our challenges is to support that increased passion and activity in music with structures. The more music we produce, the more audiences we grow locally and, indeed, nationally and the more music festivals we have, the greater the expectation sometimes that access to music should be free and that musicians do not necessarily have to be paid. The Government will continue to support the music industry through our partners, agencies and varying initiatives and programmes, but we need the various parts of the industry to come together, which I would be more than happy to help facilitate, to make sure that the lives and the livelihoods of people who are involved in music in Scotland can be respected and promoted so that music can be loved for generations to come. It is right that we take time in Parliament to recognise the importance of music to our country and the importance of respect for our musicians who provide that music. 13:07 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

I, too, congratulate Joan McAIpine on securing the debate on a very important subject. She set out the issues very well. I also thank all the other members who have spoken. We have probably had more members’ business debates on this one subject of broadcasting in the south of Scotland than on any other subject. That says something about how people, particularly in the south of Scotland, view the issue as being important. As the motion makes clear, the prospective relicensing of channel 3 has particular implications for the south of Scotland, and I will come to those shortly. It is a subject that concerns Scotland as a whole, partly because it matters to all of us that viewers in the south of Scotland should, as a democratic right, be able to see news and current affairs coverage on the same basis as viewers elsewhere in Scotland, and also because, in relation to channel 3 licensing, the future of STV as a major Scottish media company matters to us all. Lord Thomson of Fleet—the Canadian media entrepreneur, Roy Thomson—who first acquired the Scottish Television licence back in 1957, described an independent television franchise as “like having your own licence to print money”. Broadcasting has moved on. In 1957 there were only two channels. Now there are almost 50 on free-to-air terrestrial television, and many hundreds through cable and satellite. The move from analogue television to digital, cable and satellite services has greatly increased the choice that is available, which is good news for viewers. For broadcasters, however, one of the consequences is that simply owning a channel does not guarantee success. Lord Thomson printed money, but now it has to be earned through quality programming. It is therefore good to see STV doing so well. In 2011, its pre-tax profits rose by 12 per cent. STV has won the local television licences for Edinburgh and Glasgow. We would have preferred a different model for local television. One that was provided through a Scottish digital network with local opt-out programming would have met John Lamont’s call for local coverage in the Borders and elsewhere. However, STV had to bid for what was on offer, and it is to be congratulated on its success against the competition. As STV will not be taking up the minimum £300,000 of BBC funding for local television content, it is vital that that be used to boost BBC Scotland’s news and current affairs resources, which are already being cut severely. I am writing to the BBC’s acting director-general to that effect. A public sector broadcaster should not be judged only on financial success or even on the employment that it generates. The key test is the extent to which public service broadcasting requirements are met. In that, too, STV is doing well. The advice from Ofcom to the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, on channel 3 relicensing, in May last year, specifically praised the level of regional news programming by STV, which has been mentioned by a number of members. The recent announcement by the culture secretary that she will allow Ofcom to proceed to renew channel 3 licences for a further 10 years is to be welcomed. For STV, that ensures a stable basis on which to plan for the future. I also welcome the fact that renewal will be on condition of addressing the issues in the south of Scotland. The Scottish Government has persistently pushed for that, and it was highlighted by the Scottish Broadcasting Commission that we established in 2007. I have personally pursued the case in meetings with the chief executives of both STV and ITV, and in meetings and correspondence with UK ministers. I know that many members of this Parliament have also pushed the cause; I welcome the fact that so many have done so again tonight. It is clearly right that viewers across Scotland should receive coverage about Scottish health, Scottish education and the range of matters that are devolved to the Scottish Parliament, in a way that is appropriate to their experience and locality, and to what matters to them. It is a case that we should consider under devolution, because it is about reflecting to people what matters to them and their experiences. However, it is also a cause that is now more important than ever, as over the next two years Scotland approaches its most momentous decision in over 300 years. That highlights a problem of timing. The renewal of the channel 3 licences will take effect at the earliest from 1 January 2015—after the independence referendum in autumn 2014. It is therefore essential that we see progress in the south of Scotland, not just in the context of the new licences but under the existing licences. I will give an example of why that progress is needed soon. In the spring this year—which is not, however wintry it might seem now, that far away—STV will show a major three part three-hour documentary on the background to the current referendum debate, entitled “Road to the Referendum”. The series will take an in-depth look at how the constitutional debate has evolved over the past few decades. That is exactly the sort of programming that people in the south of Scotland deserve to see as much as people in the rest of Scotland do, regardless of what side of the debate they are on. Such programming should be shown, as part of the public service broadcasting condition to inform and educate, at an appropriate slot in the schedule rather than in the small hours. ITV has, in the past, made available significant events including the debates for the Scottish Parliament election of 2011, so I call on it to take a similar proactive stance during the next two years. I emphasise that this is about democracy; it causes me concern that people see it in a political way. It is about educating and informing as part of public service broadcasting. We all have an interest in seeing a referendum that fully meets modern democratic standards, of which adequate coverage throughout Scotland by the broadcast media must surely be part. If Dumfries and Galloway and the Borders do not have the same extent and range of coverage, that will result in a democratic deficit in public service broadcasting. We will see Ofcom consult on channel 3 relicensing, which will obviously take place after 2015 and the other date to which I referred. However, we need to see three particular things in that consultation. First, it must be an open consultation that involves everyone and does not just reflect negotiation with the licence holders. Secondly, it must be an informed consultation that sets out all the options, including for adjusting the transmission infrastructure to direct Scottish content to Scotland and, thirdly and probably most important, it must be a consultation that is rooted in the public service broadcasting mission to inform, educate and entertain. The interest in democracy transcends any party political interest. That is why this is a subject on which all parties in the Parliament can unite. However, it is important that for the channel 3 relicensing we think about not just what will happen after the relicensing but what will happen in the period up until the relicensing. The intense and intellectual arguments that everyone in this debate made, very much informed by the experience of local constituents, were well founded. This is not an issue that will easily go away; it should not go away. I agree with all members who have spoken that their constituents deserve better. We have yet to see what “better” looks like, but we can all agree that they deserve it. Meeting closed at 17:53.

As I told Parliament in November, the Scottish Government is working with a range of organisations on proposals to commemorate the centenary of the conflict. Today I can announce that I have appointed Norman Drummond to lead our commemorative programme. Mr Drummond has served as a chaplain in the Parachute Regiment and the Black Watch. He is currently chaplain to Her Majesty the Queen in Scotland. He founded Columba 1400, which is a highly regarded education leadership programme on the Isle of Skye that seeks to maximise the potential of young people. He was previously a BBC national governor for Scotland and he brings with him considerable expertise and leadership ability. He will chair the Scottish commemorative panel. I will announce details of the panel and further plans for our commemorations in due course. As part of such commemorations, on 14 January the First Minister announced an additional £1 million towards the upgrade and maintenance of war memorials in our communities.

The impact of the first world war was felt extensively across Scotland. Clearly, there will be commemorations in every village, town and community during 2014 to 2018. I am aware of the centenary exhibition at Montrose air station heritage centre. Unfortunately, I could not accept the offer to come to the opening, but I intend to visit the exhibition in the course of the year. It is important that Mr Drummond and the panel, in assessing the range and depth of the commemorative activity, reflect on the range and depth of experience across Scotland. I am sure that everybody will want to be aware of what is happening in their local villages and towns and across Scotland so as to ensure that we have a fitting tribute to, and commemoration of, Scotland’s important experience during the first world war.

The Scottish Government is committed to widening opportunities for everyone to access, engage in and benefit from cultural activity. The Village Storytelling Centre in Glasgow, for example, received funding as part of the year of creative Scotland so that it could work with young carers in the wider Glasgow and west of Scotland area, including in Maryhill, through its creative sparks project. The Glasgow 2014 organising committee, with Creative Scotland and Glasgow Life, recently announced a £4 million open fund for the 2014 Glasgow cultural programme, and the Minister for External Affairs and International Development has been involved in discussions to ensure that it will offer new opportunities for audiences across Scotland to see, experience and participate in our vibrant culture.

I was delighted that the Scottish Government was able to support the expansion of Sistema Scotland into Glasgow and Govanhill in particular. I am sure that all members will congratulate the organisation on that. However, the funding that we provided is not just for Govanhill. It is actually about how Sistema Scotland could expand the big noise orchestras progressively across future years. In terms of the legacy that we have, there are lots of different ways—music is undoubtedly one of them—in which we can enrich the lives of our young people. The Government is very committed to that. I will continue my positive discussions with Richard Holloway and the excellent team at Sistema Scotland. I am sure that all members in the chamber will be pleased to congratulate the organisation on the work that it has done to expand in Glasgow, and particularly in Govanhill.

The inventory is a major new resource for enhancing the understanding of, enjoyment of and engagement with Scotland’s historic battlefields, which draw tourists from all over the world and represent a major education resource. Through them, we can learn about key historical events and figures and their role in shaping our culture. The inventory will develop the potential of battlefields as attractions for local and international visitors. The aim of the inventory is to raise awareness of the significance of these nationally important battlefield sites and to assist in their protection and management for the future. The inventory aims to support economic growth while raising awareness and encouraging sensitive management of the heritage value of important battlefield landscapes.

I agree with that proposal, which is why, in my initial answer, I mentioned the importance of providing that educational link. Working with local authorities, we can undoubtedly promote both the tourism and education aspects. I understand that 10 of the sites are in the South Scotland region. There have been some concerns about our ability to identify the precise geographic location of other important battles. However, whether we are talking about the battle of Pinkie or the battle of Philiphaugh, using a sense of place to help to interpret major and influential battles and Scotland’s history in general is a good way of bringing history alive for many young people.

The Scottish Government’s digital participation strategy highlights the social, economic and cultural benefits that individuals and businesses can get from going online. It is estimated that the average household can save £560 a year by using the internet and the Scottish Government’s strategy aims to encourage them to do so by working in partnership with a range of organisations to promote digital skills. In Midlothian, innovation partnership projects that teach digital skills and familiarise hard-to-reach groups with digital equipment have received £21,919 of Scottish Government funding, with a further £8,281 due to be awarded.

The funding that I just announced and identified came through my work as the culture minister in helping library activity. ILAs are the responsibility of other ministers, as Kezia Dugdale well knows. I point out that there are other ways of accessing digital learning opportunities. ILAs tend to be used more for skills and training for wider use, not necessarily for the purposes that the member identified. I am willing to ensure that my education colleagues are aware of the comments that Kezia Dugdale makes, but I encourage people to use other methods and not to consider ILAs as the only method of accessing digital learning and participation.

The Scottish Government places great importance on supporting our five national performing companies and our national collections. I have managed to protect their budgets over the spending review period, keeping reductions as low as possible. The Scottish Government’s draft 2013-14 budget sets out support of £23.6 million for the national performing companies and £72.9 million for the cultural collections. Within that, I have managed to protect the £350,000 international touring fund to ensure that our performing companies can continue to operate abroad. The Royal Scottish National Orchestra, for example, has just completed a highly successful tour of China, promoting its great music and Scotland.

Clearly, repairs and maintenance put pressure on the capital budget. The 2013-14 draft budget that has been set out includes a capital budget of £17 million, which is almost double the £8.7 million that was allocated in the 2011 spending review. Of that, £6.7 million has been allocated to the collections to support capital projects. As part of John Swinney’s announcement on 19 December, I managed to secure a further £4 million in 2013-14 for capital projects for the national collections and performing companies. It is essential that the fabric of our national collections and the provision for them and our companies are in a state that allows us to maintain the high-quality, world-class offering that we have.

Ancestry is one of the five key themes that underpin homecoming Scotland 2014. Work is under way with partners including the National Trust for Scotland, Historic Scotland and the ancestral tourism group to ensure that the homecoming Scotland 2014 programme features a range of cultural events and activities that promote and celebrate our country’s rich ancestry. For example, the 700th anniversary of the battle of Bannockburn in 2014 will be a signature event in the homecoming Scotland programme and a centrepiece of the Stirling 2014 celebrations for the year.

I am aware of the important work of the association of South Ayrshire community councils. I am not aware of whether it applied to the homecoming fund; the homecoming fund events programme will be announced in the coming months. The association’s idea of bringing together a Bruce trail that links with the Bruce trail in Dumfries and Galloway is important. I understand that, once the trail is in place, VisitScotland will promote it among the things to see and do in the area. With the support of South Ayrshire Council—I am sure that Adam Ingram will promote the idea—it will be important to ensure that the trail is in place in time. The extensive activity of Robert the Bruce and his links with Carrick are an important part of a very important story.

It is clear from the two members’ contributions that knowledge and understanding of Robert the Bruce’s connections to a good number of parts of Scotland will be important. In relation to Dumfries and Galloway, I had the opportunity to meet a number of Joan McAlpine’s constituents at an event in the Parliament, when they told me about their plans. I encouraged them to apply to the homecoming fund, but I am not sure whether they did so. I remind all members of the opportunity to make partnership applications to support activity in 2014 that will complement the homecoming Scotland 2014 programme.

The Scottish Government provides annual support of £3.2 million for non-national museums and galleries, mainly through Museums Galleries Scotland. That level of funding has been protected from cuts in recent spending reviews. Museums Galleries Scotland offers a range of services to support local museums and galleries, whether or not they are registered charities, including access to funding, advice and training.

Again, I direct the member to Museums Galleries Scotland, which provides funding on behalf of the Scottish Government. A range of funding is available, from £5,000 to £40,000. The capital round closes on 14 January, so if the museum has not already applied for that funding, it will need to move quickly to do so. There is also a strategic development fund that offers project funding of up to £30,000, and applications for that close on 6 May. If the museum has not already explored those options, I strongly encourage it to do so.

The Scottish Government will continue to prioritise Scotland’s economic ambitions both at home and abroad, supporting our artists and cultural and heritage infrastructure, improving the quality of life for Scotland’s communities, supporting young people’s learning and creativity through engagement with culture and heritage, and promoting, protecting and improving access to Scotland’s historic environment. The draft budget, which was published in September 2012, provides more detail of our priorities.

I have had a number of important discussions about the development of production facilities. The member will be aware that we had a debate on the issue in the Parliament just before the recess, in which I announced that Creative Scotland would be looking at a feasibility study to make sure that we can deliver on that. The opportunities from the tax relief are to be welcomed. We have been supporting skills development in particular, and some of the skills and training facilities are important, but I reiterate that, as I said in that debate, this country needs high-quality production space, particularly in a sound studio, that is on a scale for film production, and I am treating that as a priority.

Creative Scotland’s chief executive announced his resignation on 3 December and he will leave at the end of January 2013. The board of Creative Scotland will take forward the recruitment process for a new chief executive as a matter of urgency.

The member makes an important point. I am aware of the letter and I recognise the positive impact that Creative Scotland has had throughout Scotland in different partnerships. I know from visiting Dumfries and Galloway that there have been positive responses to the engagement there. It is important that the new management takes forward that all-Scotland approach in ensuring that the support for our cultural infrastructure and indeed for our artists reaches all parts of Scotland.

Clearly, that is a matter for Creative Scotland. The Parliament has established the important principle that, as minister, I should not direct the body on what its criteria for artistic excellence should be. Artistic excellence will clearly be one criterion, but there will also be impacts through participation, which is another criterion. Indeed, some of the excellent work that has been taking place in relation to Creative Scotland’s work relates to culture and ageing, and encouraging older people’s festivals in terms of art and participation. There are also the creative industries—we just heard about film production—and Creative Scotland is actively involved in that regard. However, it is important that we give the board and the new management the space to advise us as to what the criteria might be. My job is to approve any new corporate plan, which will set out some of the criteria that it wants.

No, as that is a matter for the board of Creative Scotland, which employs the chief executive.

Creative Scotland’s accounts will be published next year, and there will clearly be disclosure of the package as part of those accounts. Such accounts are regularly published after the financial year ends on 31 March. The agreement with Mr Dixon is a confidential matter, and the board has been decisive in its actions. It has issued a statement, which was published on Friday. I am not sure whether the member has seen it, but it has been well received by the cultural community and by artists, who have commented that they think that the board has recognised the issues and that it needs to move on. The board will change Creative Scotland’s operational structure to use staff knowledge and expertise more effectively, and it will establish internal and external forums to allow artists, creative practitioners and staff to contribute to policy development. Long-term funding will be offered, and there will be changes to the perceived hierarchy in its funding operations. There is an opportunity for Creative Scotland to move on. We have a very strong artistic sector and a vibrant cultural scene in Scotland, and it is incumbent on all of us to ensure that the organisation can move on. Andrew Dixon has resigned, but more has to be done with the organisation. The board’s statement and the actions that it announced on Friday are a good step forward in that direction, and the sector has recognised that.

As the member mentioned in his previous question, I have written to the board on a number of occasions, setting out my concerns in letters of guidance to it. I made it clear in October that I wanted it to address the concerns about its operations. After my discussions with the board in June, it had already taken steps to establish the interim report process and, as the member said, those reports will be published on Friday. The member might not be aware of the statement by the board last Friday, in which it indicated what actions it is going to take in some areas. The interim reports that will be published on Friday will also set out specific actions, which is what people expect and require. I think that we can take confidence from the statement by the board last Friday, which has been well received by the sector. There is a job of work to be done, and I expect that work to happen. We need strong relationships between Creative Scotland and our artists. Over many years—since before my time as culture secretary and, indeed, since before our term in government—there has been a real issue with the relationships between artists and the funding organisation and the wider remit. However, the steps that the board is taking and the tone of the statement are the appropriate way forward. I think that the board deserves the support not just of the Parliament but of others in taking those actions forward.

I agree with Patricia Ferguson that stability and continuity are essential. Strong relationships help to develop the cultural sector and are necessary for the work of the artists themselves and others within the sector who are dependent on Creative Scotland. Patricia Ferguson talks about change, but the board had been examining the issues for some time. I gave evidence to the Education and Culture Committee a few months ago in which I said that we should allow the board time to carry out its piece of work. Two reports were produced by two of the board members, which were considered at length by the board last week. I do not think that it took the resignation for those actions to be taken; indeed, the work of the board has been on-going for several months. The statement that the board made on Friday was definitive and was also a result of listening. If it was to listen to the sector—to the artists and, importantly, to the staff of the organisation—it was important that the board had the time to pursue its deliberations. I recommend that everyone read Friday’s statement. I will ensure that it is in the Scottish Parliament information centre, so that all members will have access to it.

I am very pleased to make the closing speech in this debate on the way forward for Scotland in the light of Lord Justice Leveson’s report “An inquiry into the culture, practices and ethics of the press”. A number of members took time in their speeches to remind us of the background to the issue. I thought that Dennis Robertson, in particular, gave a wise speech on his personal experience of the two sides of the medium. Although it would have been courteous of the UK Government to make the report available in advance to party leaders in the Scottish Parliament, there is some advantage, as we have heard, in taking the opportunity of a few days’ reflection before holding this debate. That has allowed us a chance to begin to assimilate the report, and there have been some thoughtful speeches about the way forward, which is a positive development. I will respond to as many of the speeches as I can. I very much agreed with the first half of Graeme Pearson’s speech in which he set out serious concerns about the impact on public life, in particular, of relationships with the press. Paragraph 117 of the Leveson report’s summary and recommendations states: “Taken as a whole, the evidence clearly demonstrates that, over the last 30-35 years and probably much longer, the political parties of UK national Government and of UK official Opposition, have had or developed too close a relationship with the press in a way which has not been in the public interest.” I note the recognition on page 1,439 that Leveson is “conscious of the limited extent to which the Liberal Democrat party ... have ... fitted within that description” and he makes it very clear on page 1,438 that the parties of devolved Government are specifically excluded from that general criticism, when he says: “In my opinion, the conduct of politicians of devolved Government cannot be reasonably be considered as part of the historical UK national patterns with which my generic conclusions are concerned.” That is a strong indictment of the UK Government parties and, indeed, the Opposition, over many years, but I have not heard Mr Pearson, Johann Lamont or Ruth Davidson say that somehow David Cameron or Edward Miliband have been prevented from taking forward proposals in that regard. As the devolved Administrations are exempt, it is perfectly correct that the public and, more important, the victims of the press in Scotland look to this Parliament, this Government and the leadership of this First Minister to lead this debate and take forward cross-party talks. I am very pleased that all the parties have agreed that they should take part in those discussions, which is where we want to progress the issue.

Lord Leveson exempted us from that criticism. It is more important that we move on. Of the main areas covered by the Leveson report, almost all are devolved to the Parliament, namely regulation of the printed press; Scots private law, including defamation; criminal law, including contempt; police functions and prosecutorial functions. The only key areas that are not devolved are data protection and media plurality and competition. In considering how we discharge this Parliament’s responsibilities, there are some common values that we share. None of us wants to see the regulation of the press by the state; neither does Lord Justice Leveson. All of us believe in the freedom of the press, and Stewart Stevenson set that out particularly well. The Scottish Government wants an open and inclusive approach to determine the Scottish response to the Leveson report. I really want to give assurances on that request made by Patricia Ferguson, Johann Lamont and others. We have deliberately framed this as a debate without motion to allow members not to be unnecessarily corralled into a fixed position. Marco Biagi set out the position well: instead of a knee-jerk reaction, we can think through the issues as they apply in the context of Scots law. The important point is that we want the independent implementation group to consider how we can underpin in Scots law a framework of self-regulation by the press. Mark McDonald set out the case well when he said that it was about the press proposing a framework. One of the key issues is how that framework would be recognised, but it would be up to the press, not the Government, to decide the framework. Depending on what the press decides, the structure could also cover other parts of these islands. Willie Rennie and some of the Labour members made that point. However, the statutory underpinning cannot simply be UK-wide; it must adhere to Scots law. The expert implementation group can advise us on that. We envisage that the group, chaired by a past or present Court of Session judge, would consider how best to provide the statutory underpinning and how best to respond to Lord Leveson’s report as a whole. I will address some of the issues that were raised. Willie Rennie rose— I want to move on. I have a number of issues to address. One of the issues that we will require the implementation group to consider is whether the arbitration panel that Leveson set out or the Irish system of an ombudsman is the more appropriate route. Secondly, we will require it to consider who should provide the recognition—that is the point that Christine Grahame raised in her speech—and to address the concern about Ofcom and ministers. The proposal that the court could be the recognition body is one way forward on that. Paul Martin made an important point in a concerned and reflective speech about the situation of the Watson family in particular. At the end of 2011, Roseanna Cunningham set out why an extension of the law may not be the most appropriate way of delivering the requisite protection, but added: “We will want to consider carefully the outcome of” the Leveson inquiry “to inform our final conclusions”. I understand that Lord Justice Leveson heard evidence from the Watsons. In his report, he extended and stressed his sympathy towards them. However, he came to the conclusion that there may be better remedies. We can consider further his conclusions in that regard at a later date. Kezia Dugdale asked whether the Scottish Government would release information about its meetings with the press. I tell her that we do that. We are more transparent than the UK Government. The list of meetings covers a longer period than the UK Government’s. It includes editors and proprietors, whereas the UK Government list covers proprietors and senior executives only. Of course, all the First Minister’s correspondence with the Murdochs was released. The important thing is to consider how the Parliament takes things forward. The first paragraph of the first page of the Leveson report says: “my Report may be less helpful to those with decision-making responsibilities in Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales, but I have sought to set out my analysis and conclusions in a sufficiently explicit and reasoned way to enable the experts within the devolved jurisdictions to see … how they could be made to fit.” That is the task we face. That is what we need to do to take forward implementation. I do not usually quote Conservatives, but I quote to Ruth Davidson what Ken Clarke says on page 1,756 of the Leveson report: “I am not convinced, though, that a statutory underpinning of some kind would amount to state control of the press. You have pointed out the statutory duty of the Lord Chancellor to uphold the independence of the judiciary. I would note as well that press organisations have a legal obligation to register with Companies House and HM Revenue and Customs as businesses; this doesn’t appear to me to amount to political interference in their work. This is not my endorsement necessarily for a statutory backing, but simply an observation that it would not be the freedom of expression Armageddon some commentators would have you believe.” I hope that there will be a way forward as we develop the arguments and look at statutory underpinning, certainly in the Scottish context, and it is the Scots law context that we want the implementation group to look at. The debate has been worthwhile. If I have not managed to respond to every point that was made and every suggestion that was offered, I am sure that we will have an opportunity to do so as we go forward. If we move forward positively, I am sure that we will have a number of opportunities in the future to debate the Leveson report in the Parliament. There is definitely a Scottish interest in the debate. The Scottish Government definitely has a duty to take forward the issue. The Parliament definitely has a responsibility to rise to the occasion and ensure that we find a way forward that implements Leveson’s proposals and reflects Scotland’s distinct legal system, so that the victims of the press are responded to in a way that they expect and that we can deliver.

The Scottish Government regularly meets Ofcom to discuss a range of media issues. Earlier this week, I met Global Radio to discuss its plans for Scotland, particularly in light of its recent acquisition of the Real Radio stations. In those discussions, I pressed Global Radio on its plans for local content, music and news.

I believe that Ofcom should carry out its duties appropriately. Currently, the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government do not have powers over those areas. More specifically, I think that we should hold Global Radio to account, and not just for its specific Ofcom obligations. The member may be interested to know that Global told me categorically that it was not closing down any of the radio broadcasting licences in Scotland that it currently owns, nor will it close down any of the radio stations that it plans to acquire. Global intends to operate the licences as distinct services, with dedicated Scottish programming and news content, and it wants to continue broadcasting peak-time programmes presented by Scottish presenters seven days a week on all its local radio stations. An important point for the Parliament is that Global will continue to operate news services for its Scottish stations that are staffed by journalists based in Scotland making editorial decisions for the benefit of listeners in Scotland. The member may want to reflect on previous decisions by a United Kingdom Government minister, but I think that she and all members in the chamber will expect me to hold the station to account on its word as well as on its specific Ofcom obligations.

Clearly, if we had powers over Ofcom in respect of radio obligations, we could certainly do that. I will absolutely hold Global Radio to account on its content and its news content, and I think that the member is absolutely right that this is not just about the presentation of news that is made elsewhere, but about Scottish words and Scottish content. That is why I took an early opportunity to meet Global Radio—precisely to press it on its commitments in that regard.

I congratulate Christine Grahame on securing the debate—her timing is immaculate. Christine Grahame has long supported the Scottish media and has raised important issues in the Parliament, such as local television and community radio. She is right to highlight the importance of our media. Our media provide the cornerstones of an inclusive and democratic nation. They delight and challenge us, hold power to account and provide jobs and contribute to economic growth. Of course we have had opportunities in the Parliament, and as a Government, to take on media-related issues. Broadcasting is a reserved matter, but in 2007 the First Minister established the Scottish Broadcasting Commission to investigate the state of broadcasting in Scotland and to define a strategic way forward. The commission’s recommendations have since provided a coherent framework for developing the sector. That began in 2008 when the report was published and unanimously supported by the Parliament. Between 2009 and 2012, as recommended by the commission, the Scottish Government reported progress to the Parliament on implementing the recommendations. In 2010, I responded to the UK Government’s local television proposals by establishing the Scottish digital network panel, which provided independent advice on options for establishing funding of a new Scottish digital network given that the commission had recommended that, through opt-out programming, we could deliver local television across all Scotland and not just in those cities already best served by the media. I shared the panel’s excellent report with the UK Government, but the UK Government still refused to recognise the importance of the Scottish digital network. However, the panel’s findings have continued to inform our thinking. Turning from broadcasting to the printed medium, I am aware that today will be eventful not just because of this debate in the Scottish Parliament but because—within the hour or perhaps the next half hour—Lord Justice Leveson’s report will be tabled in the Westminster Parliament. As press regulation is devolved, that report will also engage the Scottish Parliament, given that significant areas of the Leveson inquiry clearly cover devolved matters. As the First Minister made clear when he gave evidence to the inquiry, we will take that most seriously indeed, and we look forward to considering Lord Justice Leveson’s report in detail. On the wider agenda, we must also ensure that we have a strong media and current affairs sector for the digital age. We need media that have the confidence of our communities and the capacity to fulfil their role in a democratic society. As Christine Grahame mentioned, that wider agenda includes the role of the internet in the digital age and, indeed, the role of social media. Clearly, even under this devolved Parliament, we have already managed to address a number of issues relating to the media area, but Christine Grahame is right to highlight the need for stability and growth in the media sector. As Alex Johnstone said, the sector’s capacity to report on, and respond to, the debates as those develop over the next few years is also important. Across Government, we have worked to support the media sector in areas such as education and training, business support and shared working. Margo MacDonald is absolutely right that the media’s capacity to respond is really important, and skills and training are part of that. It is also important to track the improvements. BBC Scotland has improved its commissioning, with the proportion of programmes made in Scotland having gone up to 8.6 per cent from the previous woeful position of 2.6 per cent. I concur with Sandra White on the importance of Equity’s make it in Scotland campaign, which I support although I was unfortunately unable to attend the reception this week. It is important that we have content and actors here in Scotland and that the entertainment sector is also reflected in Scottish production.

The member is absolutely right, but I think that there are three aspects: first, Scotland talking to itself, which is important; secondly, Scotland being able to broadcast and produce productions that can sell not just in England but around the world; and, thirdly, having the technical production capability here. All those aspects are important, but the member is right that we need to be able—we have the capability—to produce excellent content that can be broadcast globally. Sandra White perhaps got to the nub of what is a real challenge, which is the scope of the proposed media panel. The panel might cover a wide spectrum, including digital entertainment, film and other media including print, broadcast and so on. Today’s debate allows us to consider what that scope might be.

The content of Christine Grahame’s motion focuses particularly on the capacity of reporting, which is obviously about editorial control. However, even during the course of this short debate, the contributions from members have covered weekly newspapers, the wider entertainment industry and television production more widely. That is an interesting breadth of scope, which we obviously cannot do justice in this short debate. Returning to the print media, I am aware that newspapers are facing challenges in the transition to the online world. More immediately, the imminent Leveson report will provide and define a new direction for the press. We need to assess that report once it is produced, and we will play our full part in taking forward our devolved responsibilities on that. Clearly, it is important that we continue to hold the BBC to account. I was extremely disappointed at both the content and tone of the response from BBC Scotland to a committee of this Parliament. Keeping on the debate in hand, I acknowledge that Christine Grahame’s motion calls for stability and growth. I have pointed to how much the sector has been growing in different areas but, as we heard from Graeme Dey, there are significant issues to do with the print media, in particular. Christine Grahame suggests that we should have a Scottish media panel, which could be a rolling media panel that covered different issues at different times. As far as the immediate issue of the print media is concerned, we await the Leveson report. The First Minister made it quite clear that he takes seriously the capacity, capability and responsibility of this devolved Parliament to take on duties, which is why he has proposed an implementation group. I want to address the point that Christine Grahame made in her intervention. The First Minister made it quite clear that he wants to have an all-Scotland response and to ensure that all the leaders of the political parties that are represented have an input into the discussions. That is an extremely important position to take. As a media panel would constitute a panel of media experts, it would give the media plenty of opportunity to express their views. The one group that has not been covered as much as it might have been in the debate is the public, although James Kelly addressed the issue. I would not want politicians or the media to have a dominant role in determining what happens. The public’s voice must be heard. I hope that today’s short debate will cause all of us to reflect on the context of any media discussions. It has been a useful opportunity to think about the scope of future discussions on the media and media policy. If we had full powers, we would be able to develop policy that fitted a world of converging media. Looking to the wider horizon, I think that that is an issue that the Parliament will return to again and again. 13:06 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

I am delighted to open the debate, which I hope will give us the opportunity to discuss what is great about Scotland and how we can use St Andrew’s day to celebrate our history, our people, our culture and our world-famous food and drink. It was a remarkable journey that took St Andrew from being a fisherman on the sea of Galilee to being patron saint of Scotland. St Andrew became a disciple of Jesus and later an apostle in Asia Minor, Macedonia and southern Russia, before being crucified in the year AD 70 in Patras, in Greece. His journey did not end there. After his death, legend has it that the monk St Regulus, or St Rule, was instructed in a dream to take St Andrew’s remains to the ends of the earth, for safe keeping. St Rule did as he was told, removing some of the bones and taking them to a town called Kilrymont, which is now called St Andrews. Such was the veneration for St Andrew that St Andrews became the ecclesiastical centre of the medieval Scottish church, with a great cathedral. That, in turn, led to Bishop Wardlaw of St Andrews establishing a centre of learning and, 599 years ago, securing the papal bull that established the University of St Andrews, which is Scotland’s oldest university and the third-oldest university in the English-speaking world. St Andrew’s journey can still speak to us today. In life, his missions brought people together across many lands, in new friendship and faith. In death, the journey of his remains to Scotland led, in time, to a flourishing of literacy and learning. I will touch on both themes in the debate. St Andrew’s day is a thoroughly appropriate occasion for Scots and friends of Scotland, at home and abroad, to join together in fellowship to mark our national culture and heritage. The Government will be active on a number of fronts. Tomorrow, the First Minister will host the brave@heart St Andrew’s awards in Bute house, and Angela Constance, the Minister for Youth Employment, will host a St Andrew’s day concert by celebrated Scottish band Mànran in our European office in Brussels. On St Andrew’s day itself, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Mike Russell, will attend a St Andrew’s day dinner at James Watt College in North Ayrshire and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice will be at Edinburgh castle to witness the St Andrew’s day event, which promises to be a carnival of contemporary dance, with a light show, fireworks and a unique twist on the Scottish pipes and drums. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth will attend an event in Perth as part of Scotland sings, which is a brand-new national event that brings together participants and audiences in community singing events—I do not know whether the cabinet secretary will sing, but if members attend they will find out. I will be at the Saltire Society literary awards 2012 on St Andrew’s day. The event is being delivered in partnership with the Scottish Book Trust and the National Library of Scotland. I look forward to presenting the book of the year award. That is just some of what the Government is doing to celebrate St Andrew’s day. I know that members of all parties will join together to celebrate Scotland on St Andrew’s day at events across the county. Last week I wrote to all MSPs, setting out a range of events that are taking place and giving details of the Scotland.org website. It is worth exploring the website to find out about the St Andrew’s day events that are happening in members’ areas and all over the world. A good example of what happens internationally is the Alexandria Christmas parade. During my visit to the United States of America last November I was privileged to participate in the parade, which takes place over the St Andrew’s day weekend in the suburbs of Washington. It was a sight to behold. There were 30,000 walkers, massed pipes and drums and the largest collection of Scottie dogs that I have ever seen. St Andrew’s day is not just important in itself; it fires the starting gun for Scotland’s winter festivals programme and a time when we welcome visitors from around the world to bring in the new year at the home of hogmanay and celebrate Burns night in the land of the bard’s birth. The Scottish Government will part-fund 17 events in nine local authority areas over the winter festivals period. Five of the events will take place around St Andrew’s day, in Edinburgh, Glasgow, Stirling, St Andrews and East Lothian. I welcome Patricia Ferguson’s amendment, the sentiment of which is absolutely right. All of us can and should share in the saltire and the celebrations that take place. However, I am rather bemused by Annabel Goldie’s amendment, which seems to be a crude attempt to hijack for unionist purposes what should be a celebratory debate. I was in Cardiff yesterday. If I were to suggest to a Welshman that he could celebrate St David’s day only if it was as part of the United Kingdom, he would just laugh. Annabel Goldie should be comforted that it is perfectly possible for unionists to celebrate Scotland for its distinct and individual identity. There is room in the tent of celebration even for Annabel Goldie. I hope that she will take part.

Indeed.

We could debate who is churlish. I would accept that Annabel Goldie’s amendment is not a crude attempt to hijack the debate for constitutional purposes if she could list for me the whole range of events—if she cannot list a range of events, perhaps she could list a few—that will be taking place on Friday to celebrate Scotland’s place in the UK. As a Government, we have worked hard to increase interest in Scotland’s national day. We continue to encourage all parts of Scotland—public bodies in particular—to recognise St Andrew’s day but, as a Government, we would be keen to see more participate. It is worth noting that the number of public holidays that Scotland recognises, which is currently nine days, is lower than the number recognised by many of our European neighbours—some have as many as 14 per year. I mentioned earlier how St Andrew inspired a first flowering of higher education in Scotland. That began the great movement that led to our having four universities at a time when England had only two. Because of the graduates that they produced, we had enough teachers to establish the first universal public education system in the world, with a school in every parish. It is therefore entirely fitting for schools and pre-schools to celebrate Scotland and its culture by marking St Andrew’s day. Edinburgh castle is running activities for pupils in primary classes 4 to 7 in the run-up to St Andrew’s day. Pupils are encouraged to visit one of Scotland’s most iconic castles to find out more about Scotland’s history. The St Andrew’s day debating championship will take place on 3 December, with the final being chaired by the Deputy Presiding Officer. Education Scotland is working with the English-Speaking Union and the Scottish Parliament to take forward the debate, which will reflect the year of creative Scotland and the forthcoming year of natural Scotland in 2013. Around 20 secondary schools and seven universities will be represented. We have been building up the offer of free access to key Scottish visitor attractions around St Andrew’s day, which is mentioned in Patricia Ferguson’s amendment. The initiative, over the St Andrew’s day weekend, has proved popular and returns this year. I am delighted to say that as well as St Andrews castle and Edinburgh castle, St Andrews cathedral, where the bones of the saint are said to be interred, will be open for free on St Andrew’s day itself. For the first time this year, some of Scotland’s sports centres will take part in St Andrew’s day. For example, at Thurso swimming pool there will be free swimming for kids, while at Port Glasgow swimming pool there will be free swimming for those over 60. Many sports centres are offering discounts and free trials right across the weekend, starting on the 30th, in the lead-up to the Commonwealth games in 2014. I set out a few minutes ago the importance of St Andrew’s legacy, which enabled Scotland to become the first country with universal public education. In turn, that led to Scotland becoming the first country with universal literacy. This year, for the first time, we will celebrate that legacy by using St Andrew’s day to launch a new initiative on literature. We are celebrating our literary heritage on St Andrew’s day through book week Scotland. Yesterday we delivered on one of our manifesto commitments by marking the start of book week, Scotland’s first national, inclusive celebration of reading. Supported by Creative Scotland, the initiative is being delivered by the Scottish Book Trust in partnership with many other organisations. I thank everyone involved for creating such an inclusive and diverse programme of activities for everyone to enjoy. The book week programme of activities will encourage Scots of all backgrounds and all ages to embark or continue on a lifetime’s journey of reading. We have a great programme of activities and events taking place, engaging local communities across the country. For example, at 100 authors in 100 libraries events, authors will share their love of books with those attending the events across Scotland. The Scottish library service has created that national programme of writer events in libraries, which has been supported through the Scottish Library and Information Council. RNIB Scotland will open its transcription service in Partick to show people how to make a book for someone with sight loss or create writing in Braille. I encourage everyone to get a copy of the book “My Favourite Place”, which contains a collection of stories about Scotland’s best-loved places written by the public and some of our best-loved authors, such as Alasdair Gray and Liz Lochhead. Copies are available in bookshops, public libraries and National Trust for Scotland properties.

That is a good point and it is one reason why the national book prize that the Saltire Society runs will be announced on St Andrew’s day, as a St Andrew’s prize. Our culture is many and varied. This year, we are focusing on celebrating literary culture, but I am attracted to the concept of having a prize. This year, events will be focused on book week Scotland in particular. If that is successful, it can continue. The week will include events for toddlers and pre-schoolers, for example, and a St Andrew’s day reading hour, which will take place at 11 o’clock on 30 November. The idea is to encourage everyone to celebrate reading, and participation can happen anywhere. The national museum of Scotland is taking a lead on that and will hold a read-in event for reading hour with Alexander McCall Smith. There will be reading activities for people from babies to pensioners. I hope that everyone will celebrate reading as part of celebrating our culture. Reading helps with skills, employability and self-improvement. The turn of a page takes us to new countries, opens new horizons and extends our human sympathies. It is no wonder that Abraham Lincoln was reported to have given credit to the role played by novelist Harriet Beecher Stowe and her great anti-slavery novel “Uncle Tom’s Cabin” in the emancipation of slaves. Our literary heritage is central to Scotland, which is why we are celebrating literature and giving a prize on St Andrew’s day to the best of our Scottish literature to mark the importance of our celebrations. Robert Burns’s message rings out loud and clear. Sir Walter Scott’s historical novels enthralled 19th century Europe and inspired writers such as Alessandro Manzoni in Italy and Adam Mickiewicz in Poland. We have had more recent literary giants. We recently debated “Sunset Song” in the Parliament and we have modern writers such as Liz Lochhead, Janice Galloway and J K Rowling. Book week is an important part of our celebrations. I said at the beginning of my speech that it was a strange and remarkable journey that took St Andrew from the shores of the sea of Galilee to the shores of St Andrews. That a Jewish fisherman, with the help of a Greek monk, could have such an effect on a country that he never saw in life and probably scarcely knew existed illustrates how Scotland has always depended on the contribution not just of those who are born here but of those who come here as visitors and immigrants—one Scotland, many cultures, indeed. What matters about St Andrew and Scotland is not the truth of the legend but its effect in helping Scotland to become a nation of learning, literacy and literature. That is why we are particularly using literature this year to help to celebrate and promote our national day. I finish by quoting one final inspirational author. In his poem for the opening of this Parliament, Edwin Morgan wrote: “Light of the day, shine in; light of the mind, shine out!” This St Andrew’s day will shine a light on Scotland and I am sure that, during the debate, we will see the light of the mind shine out. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the celebration of St Andrew’s Day and the opportunity that it gives Scots, friends of Scotland and those who would like to know the country better, to celebrate Scotland’s people and history, world renowned food and drink and traditional and contemporary culture and notes the many events that will take place overseas, in the rest of the UK and in Scotland, on or around St Andrew’s Day, which includes the launch of Book Week Scotland, Scotland’s first national celebration of reading, which is a diverse programme of book-related events that will be held across the nation between 26 November and 2 December 2012.

I do not dispute that, which is why we have it in our motion. What I do not understand is what are all the celebrations that will take place all over Scotland to celebrate Scotland’s place in the UK? Perhaps Annabel Goldie will give us a long list.

Perhaps I can supply a connection with “Thriller”. Apparently, the producer of the video was inspired by “Tam o’ Shanter”, perhaps reflecting the theme, so there may well be a Scottish connection to “Thriller”.

We have absolutely not fallen behind in our overseas activity—it is very extensive. Indeed I was in India only a few weeks ago and one of the celebrations that I had there involved discussing with some villagers I met at a water development project poetry and our internationalism, and the fact that Rabindranath Tagore was inspired by Robert Burns and his brotherhood. Our activity is continuing. That visit also helped to bring jobs to Scotland. I completely agree with Hanzala Malik that it is important that we encourage all of the international links that we have, to help in celebrating and to ensure that there is activity. As a Government, we absolutely want to do that. However, it is not just the Government that can encourage our twinning organisations; as Hanzala Malik knows from the City of Glasgow, cities and towns throughout Scotland can do likewise with their twin towns and cities and celebrate Scotland.

I, too, was interested in the idea that the Scottish cup is the oldest cup in the world, but it is my understanding that the Scottish junior cup—which has been won several times by my home team of Linlithgow Rose—is the oldest cup. As a football fan, does John Park share my understanding?

I thank all colleagues for the debate, which has been useful, reflective and informed. We have heard of a range of events that are taking place across Scotland, but of course only Jamie McGrigor could open with a discussion about Eton school’s St Andrew’s day celebration. As someone who also spent their early years in the vicinity of Windsor—I was brought up in Maidenhead—I recognise that there are celebrations for our patron saint across the UK and overseas. The list of such international engagements is very impressive indeed. I waited to hear about the list of events for celebrating Scotland’s place in the UK on Friday, but I missed that. On reflections by members, I hope that Annabel Goldie genuinely takes on board the mood and the moment of the contributions in the debate and what has been said about our recognising that people can have different levels of identity. However, surely on our one national day we can enjoy our Scottish celebrations and our identity, and we can celebrate in song and literature, as we have heard. There are 365 days in the year, so surely St Andrew’s day is an opportunity to come together. I think that that was the point that John Park made. It is important that we sometimes come together to recognise our strengths as a country and what we have contributed. In terms of international engagement, a lot of things are happening, from Bermuda to Bangkok: there are celebrations across the globe. Roderick Campbell’s excellent contribution started off the reflection on that aspect. Indeed, most of the contributions talked about Scotland’s place internationally and the international celebrations. In that regard, I am pleased to tell members that, when I was in Ottawa last year, I helped to launch the Canada-Scotland friendship group on St Andrew’s day. The group is holding its St Andrew’s day celebrations today, and I hope that we can send the message from this Parliament to the Parliament in Ottawa that we congratulate them on their celebrations. The Scottish Government will be represented at them by the second secretary for Scottish affairs, who is based in Toronto. Among other interesting contributions were Willie Coffey’s comments on the saltire flag and the wonderful statue of St Andrew in the Vatican and Joan McAlpine’s comments about the Jamaican connections. We also heard reflections about the importance of helping visitors to Scotland understand Scotland and, of course, about the launch of the winter festivals, which in effect takes place on St Andrew’s day. We want to ensure that there are things for people to do for the celebrations. We are always looking for new and innovative ways to encourage people to celebrate. The decision this year of many sports centres to open their doors for free over the St Andrew’s day weekend is therefore a welcome innovation. Patricia Ferguson raised the point that some places might be open only on Friday, but if she looks it up on the web she will find that more than 40 historic sites will have free access and that many of them are open on 1 December and 2 December. Indeed, another 76 Scottish visitor attractions are available for free access. Another innovative development is that we now have a St Andrew’s day smartphone app, which is available on iPhone and Android. It is an essential guide to our national day, and people can download ideas about how to celebrate St Andrew’s day. I talked earlier about the importance of St Andrew himself in terms of the town of St Andrews, the university and the founding of that seat of learning, and about why literature is so important to Scotland’s contribution to the world and why it is right that we celebrate this week with book week Scotland. Fiona McLeod gave an excellent speech that outlined some of the issues and some of the events that are taking place around that celebration of reading. It is important that we recognise that there will be a reading hour. I would encourage all those who are able to do so to take part in that reading hour; reading to others in local schools, nurseries, playgroups and old folks homes is important. That is one of the ways in which we can recognise Scotland’s literature. The winter festivals are very important to our economy. Yes, we have the cultural celebration, but they are also about enticing people from home and abroad to explore all areas of our country, which is a great place to come to study and work, and to invest in and do business. St Andrew’s day allows us to present Scotland as the i-nation: a nation innovative in ideas, imaginative and inventive in spirit, international in outlook and individual in experience. We have so much to be proud of, whether it is our research capacity, our renewables sector or, as the contributions from Margaret McDougall and Mark Griffin clearly demonstrated, our world-famous food and drink and our great tourist assets. I think that we might have stumbled across something in this debate, and in that regard I pay tribute to Jamie McGrigor for his contribution. Hanzala Malik made the point that a lot of the celebrations—and many of the contributions to the debate—are actually about the celebration of Burns. Burns’s poetry is a fantastic asset for our literature that needs to be celebrated throughout the year but, as there are Burns suppers, people have a hook for their celebrations—an event they can take part in. I was struck by Jamie McGrigor’s speech, in which he spoke about St Andrew as a fisherman. We should think about all the wonderful assets we have. Yes, we want to celebrate our beef and lamb—and our wonderful menus that can be downloaded from the aforementioned app—but perhaps we should think about celebrating St Andrew’s day through fish. We could have fish suppers in a variety of formats. Perhaps Jamie McGrigor has stumbled across the extra ingredient for how we can provide a modern-day celebration that is not like the old-fashioned traditional ones. Perhaps the outcome of this debate is that we have stumbled across a fantastic idea to celebrate St Andrew’s day.

Thank you very much, Margo.

We are now cooking with gas, in terms of the creativity here. I want to make two additional points. One is about the importance, which is reflected in the Labour amendment, of recognising that Scotland is an inclusive country that does not tolerate racism of any kind. That has been demonstrated for many years by the STUC St Andrew’s day anti-racism march. I have taken part in that march and my colleague Humza Yousaf did so on Saturday. I encourage more of our MSPs to do so in the future. It is a testament to this debate that we recognise the importance of what we do internally. As Hanzala Malik pointed out, it is important to involve people from our ethnic minorities in the celebration. I assure members that the Scottish Book Trust is involving the Scottish Refugee Council in the book week Scotland celebrations. That is movement, but more can be done. I will close by paying tribute to Dennis Canavan, as Margo MacDonald did in her speech. He introduced the St Andrew’s day holiday bill to try to make sure that within the confines of the powers of this Parliament we took some steps to celebrate the holiday. I am glad that there was cross-party agreement to do that. We want to do more. We know that our young people will be celebrating, and we are trying to encourage more schools to celebrate—[Interruption.]

Local authorities in the Scottish Borders, Angus, Dumfries and Galloway and Renfrewshire will be allowing their schoolchildren the day off to enjoy the celebrations. Increasingly, more attractions are being made available—particularly sport centres, as I said—and we are growing opportunities. I liked Patricia Ferguson’s suggestions about how we could involve retail and shopping on St Andrew’s day. Combining that with Jamie McGrigor’s fish supper, we are starting to find interesting and exciting ways to make sure that there is plenty on offer during our celebrations. We should not apologise for celebrating our national day and what makes us a nation. We should celebrate it through our language, literature, song and music. Rob Gibson caught the mood absolutely right in his speech. Yes, we can have different identities and many people have many different identities to celebrate but, on St Andrew’s day, please let us be proud in celebrating our great traditions and culture. We should do that in a way that offers a hand of friendship not just to others in our own country, as the Labour amendment suggests, but internationally. I am delighted that across the world on Friday, our friends—our brothers and sisters—will be celebrating St Andrew’s day.

The Scottish Government expects National Museums Scotland to give wide public access to its collections. There are many ways in which it can achieve that, including by digital as well as physical means, and its partners in the museums sector, including local authorities, can help to facilitate that.

As I explained to Alex Fergusson when I met him and a number of MSPs on 7 November, that is an operational decision for the NMS board. However, I have met the board’s chair and director to explore the different ways in which NMS can support and improve its collections offering in Dumfries and Galloway. With regard to the future of Shambellie house, we must remember—as I mentioned at the meeting on 7 November—that we should not take for granted the position of staff who work there, as they may have other opportunities on offer. Local members have expressed strong views, and I have indicated that I will pass those on to the board as there is an important board meeting coming up in the next week or so. Although I take those concerns on board, it is not for me to determine whether there should be a postponement. However, I can and will ensure—along with the local authorities and local members—that the NMS board is fully cognisant of the need to improve the provision of national collections in Dumfries and Galloway.

Patricia Ferguson will recall that my answer on digitisation was purely in response to a very general question from Alex Fergusson. To be fair, National Museums Scotland has looked at using better public relations promotion of the activity at Shambellie house. The house is quite small and has small rooms, which means that, at any one time, only 50 out of 6,000 costumes are on display. Having said that, I think that Patricia Ferguson’s line of argument on the diversification of the use of Shambellie house is one that we could all explore, and I encourage National Museums Scotland to do so.

I met Creative Scotland on Wednesday 14 November at my regular scheduled meeting with the chair of the board. Over the month, I have kept in close contact with Creative Scotland through my officials. I was with one of the board members and Creative Scotland officials on Sunday night when I presented the Creative Scotland games award at the British Academy of Film and Television Arts awards.

That move has not taken place: there has been a delay and an operational review, as Ken Macintosh will know if he has been following the debate. I have asked the board to look at the issues, and two pieces of work will be presented to it on 6 December, one of which covers some of the wider operational issues about which Mr Macintosh raises concerns. However, I can say—perhaps I should correct my initial answer—that the first elements of the flexible funding have been allocated. All apart from one have been allocated for two years, which is the same amount of time that the previous flexible funding programmes covered. One programme was allocated less than two years’ funding at its own request. There is no shortening of the funding period, but there is an issue with regard to operation, which is why one of the board reviews will look at precisely that area of concern.

We are now moving into the year of natural Scotland. As with all the other themed years, we are encouraging different agencies to work on helping to celebrate it, and Creative Scotland will be contributing. I understand that Creative Scotland has allocated £1 million to help to celebrate the year of natural Scotland. Some of that will relate to the interpretation of John Muir, who is a very important figure in Scotland, and some will relate to other artistic formats. Opportunities are available to artists, who can look at the Creative Scotland website if they want to take part in what is planned for next year.

Creative Scotland manages the delivery and monitoring of the youth music initiative on behalf of the Government. All funded projects are required to submit to Creative Scotland an end of project report and, where necessary, interim reports. The real impacts and measures of this successful initiative are evident through the achievements of projects that have been undertaken by the likes of Fèis Rois with traditional Gaelic music, Sistema Scotland’s big noise orchestras and the flourishing Scottish Brass Band Association. I will attend the youth brass band championships on Saturday. The Scotland-wide youth music initiative supports more than 300 projects annually. Since its inception in 2003, it has continued to ensure that all Scotland’s primary school children have access to one year of free music tuition. At the end of academic year 2010-11, 1.7 million attendances at YMI-funded programmes were recorded across all local authority areas.

Despite severe pressures from the Westminster Government, I have, within the culture budget, been able to maintain the youth music initiative at a value of £10 million. I join the member in congratulating those who have been involved on the outstanding work that has been done in the Falkirk area using the youth music initiative.

Historic Scotland provides grant support for the regeneration of conservation areas in Scotland through the agency’s conservation area regeneration scheme. Since 2007, more than £16 million has been invested in 35 separate projects in 24 local authority areas. That has levered in match funding of more than £96 million.

I agree that Inveraray is one of Scotland’s most important planned towns and that it can tell a positive story about place making not only in the past but in the future. I understand that Argyll and Bute Council’s application for £970,000 has been submitted to round 5 of Historic Scotland’s CAR scheme; the round 5 applications are being assessed and applicants will be notified in early 2013. I am sure that Argyll and Bute Council’s proposal is very positive and look forward to the response when Historic Scotland makes its decision in early 2013.

The records referred to are the property of the Catholic church and the National Records of Scotland does not have its permission to make them available at local family history centres. The records are available at the ScotlandsPeople centre in Edinburgh and on the internet at www.scotlandspeople.gov.uk.

I reiterate that permission is required from the Catholic church. I recall that Willie Coffey last wrote to me on this issue in January and on the back of this question I am happy to again ask the National Records of Scotland to seek the Catholic church’s permission to provide access. As I have said, it will be up to the church to make that decision, but I am happy to take forward the issue on Willie Coffey’s behalf.

Through Historic Scotland, Scottish ministers work closely with local authorities, landholders and communities to protect and enhance the country’s historic environment, and that work is carried out in the context of a wide range of legislation, policy and guidance delivered at national and local level. Historic Scotland also administers grants for historic environment projects on behalf of Scottish ministers, with £14.5 million a year available to help to enhance and promote the historic environment for the benefit of our communities.

I know that the member was in touch yesterday with Historic Scotland about the Douglas Support or Rosehall estate, which I believe is near to the M8 in the Bellshill area of North Lanarkshire. However, the organisation has had no recent involvement in the matter. Although an application was made to list the structures, which are ruinous, it was decided not to designate them as they were not of sufficient interest to be so designated. However, as the member has noted, there might be some archaeological interest in the area. Such matters should be addressed in the planning process, which, of course, is ultimately the responsibility of local authorities. Nevertheless, I encourage the member and her constituents with an interest in the issue to look at the archaeological angle rather than to pursue the matter on the basis of the structures themselves.

Michael McMahon will know that, as a minister, I will not make a judgment on whether the planning application should go ahead. If there are concerns about heritage or archaeology, those issues can be pursued but, as I said, that is part of the planning process. I am sure that, as part of that process, the local authority and its members will consider all the issues, including the protection that is planned in the application and the wider circumstances. I will not make a judgment on whether it is appropriate to approve the planning application; that is a matter for the local authority.

I thank members for their speeches. It has been most helpful and interesting to hear their comments and to hear about the strong views that I know are held in Dumfries and Galloway. I heard those views at first hand from local MSPs when I convened the meeting with them on 7 November. As members said, the potential closure of the museum of costume is an operational decision for the National Museums of Scotland board of trustees, which operates at arm’s length from ministers. As Claudia Beamish, who secured the debate, will acknowledge, the debate is timely, because the board of NMS next meets on 23 November. I stress that no final decision has been made. I am very much aware that there is strong feeling about and strong cross-party support for the campaign, as Alex Fergusson said. Members acknowledged that we must maintain the operational independence of our national collections—the point was well made by Joan McAlpine. I appreciate that there is a good deal of concern about the potential closure of the museum of costume. That is why I welcome the discussions that NMS has held with local members. We have been able to discuss the challenges that the museum’s continued operation presents and other options in Dumfries and Galloway for access to the national collections. I appreciate the constructive nature of the cross-party discussions that I have had and am having with local members. I wrote to the NMS board to make them aware of MSPs’ views. The key question is how we get more than 10,000 paying visitors into Dumfries and Galloway. Joan McAlpine was right to say that we need to consider how to improve the offer that Dumfries and Galloway provides. We need to work collectively to secure improvement. I should let members know that I met with the chair and the director of NMS on 14 November to hear directly their views on the future of the museum of costume and NMS activity in the area. From that meeting, I know that the NMS board is taking public responses to the proposed closure seriously and looking actively at alternative activity in the area. I will send the board the Official Report of the debate as further input to its deliberations. NMS has operated a site at Shambellie for 30 years. From discussions with NMS, I know that it has a strong commitment to providing access to national collections across Scotland. Whatever the final decision on the museum of costume, the NMS board has emphasised its continuing commitment to supporting activities in Dumfries and Galloway. In the debate, we have said that there needs to be an improved offer regarding NMS’s activity. The Scottish Government is committed to investing in Dumfries and Galloway, and Elaine Murray was slightly off the mark when she questioned that commitment. Most recently, we provided £100,000 to the Dark Sky Observatory. Through winter festivals funding, we are supporting the big Burns supper in Dumfries. Creative Scotland, Historic Scotland and EventScotland continue to support development in the region. Indeed, Creative Scotland has provided £2.2 million to projects, organisations and individuals in Dumfries and Galloway since 2010. Members may also know that I was instrumental in saving the Crichton campus and that I was Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning when £27 million was allocated to the new Dumfries and Galloway College and library. I am personally committed to supporting the region. NMS has been clear with me that the cost of operating the museum at Shambellie is a challenge for it. I understand that income from visitors to the site covers less than 10 per cent of the site’s operating costs. As a result, it requires a much higher level of subsidy per visitor than any other NMS site. In this tough financial climate, with deep cuts in public spending that are being imposed by the United Kingdom Government, the Scottish Government has protected funding for the arts and culture as far as possible. I have been keen to protect the Scottish Government’s grant to NMS against a background of significant cuts in the current spending review. The grant in this financial year has been protected from any cuts. NMS will receive a 0.5 per cent core grant reduction in 2013-14, which is a much better position than that of other organisations in the sector. I recognise the challenging general financial climate faced by NMS, such as rising costs in utility bills in its large estate. As with all public bodies, it is rightly implementing the living wage for lower-paid members of staff. A rising core cost base and a lower income from the public purse mean that NMS, like most public bodies, needs to increase income from other sources and look seriously at how it lives within its means. There are constraints with Shambellie house: the building has small rooms and there have been only two weddings in seven years, despite marketing and publicity drives.

I will take an intervention in a minute. Patricia Ferguson is absolutely right that we should look at creative solutions. I caution that winter opening might compound the requirement for subsidy, but she made some very good suggestions that the board will be able to examine when I give it a copy of the Official Report.

I would welcome a greater opportunity for time for consultation on a better offer for Dumfries and Galloway. I will not tie the hands of the NMS board as to what that timeframe might be, because, as we discussed at our meeting, the key period will be what is anticipated as being the normal April opening. I would welcome the opportunity for time for consultation, but I leave that to the board and its decision making. Members should remember that the board meeting is in only a few days’ time. I recognise the concern about the potential impact on the local tourism industry of the museum’s closure. Although the figures of 10,000 paying visitors and 5,000 visitors to the cafe comprise a small percentage of the total numbers of visitors to NMS sites—as several members have said—and are certainly lower than those for other key tourism sites in Dumfries and Galloway, I recognise the museum’s importance to the local area. I strongly encourage local parties to work together with NMS to consider alternative solutions. Joan McAlpine’s idea for an NMS gallery that would involve a wider perspective rather than focusing simply on costumes is very good and is worth looking at. It is important that we strengthen the cultural tourism offer in Dumfries and Galloway and provide access to the national collections. The NMS director, Dr Rintoul, is inviting council representatives to meet him at Shambellie house next month with a view to discussing the potential for developing a partnership to provide greater access to the national collections through other means, and I am sure that he will report on that. Finally, there is the question of the house itself. As Aileen McLeod pointed out, and as I confirmed in my reply to her, the house is the property of Scottish ministers. If the NMS decides to close the museum of costume, it will become the Scottish Government’s responsibility to maintain Shambellie house and keep it secure. In that case, I would absolutely be open to considering suitable proposals for the use of the site from the local community or the wider Dumfries and Galloway region, within public finance rules. I am grateful for the opportunity to debate the matter and to set out the Scottish Government’s position. The final decision on the museum’s future rests with the NMS. However, I know that the NMS remains committed to exploring options to improve access to its collections for the people of Dumfries and Galloway, and I will continue to be happy to facilitate and take part in those discussions. Meeting closed at 17:46.

On that point, is Annabel Goldie aware that one in five overseas visitors to the UK is inspired to visit by images that they have seen on film and television?

I congratulate Nigel Don on securing the debate. The late Donald Dewar’s great speech at the opening of this Parliament evoked “the speak of the Mearns, with its soul in the land”. It was good to hear Nigel Don and others speak of the Mearns and the story of Lewis Grassic Gibbon’s “Sunset Song”. It is a great novel and one that truly deserves to have recognition, and it has its soul in the land. The great strength of “Sunset Song” and the “Scots Quair” trilogy, of which it is the first part, is how a male author centred his work on a fully believable, strong, politically engaged Scottish woman, Chris Guthrie. Watching Vivien Heilbron’s terrific performance in the role in BBC Scotland’s earlier television adaptation and then reading the book was a formative experience for me as a teenager, as I am sure it was for many members, women and men alike. That underlines how valuable it can be to read literature from our own country, and I am confident that our new curriculum will offer opportunities for more children to benefit from “Sunset Song”. I am thrilled that the novel is being adapted for film. If it matches the book and the TV programme, it will certainly be a landmark production. That it will be produced by Bob Last from Glasgow, directed by Terence Davies and star Peter Mullan and Agyness Deyn certainly augurs well, and that the work revolves around the terrible human and emotional cost of the first world war makes it all the more timely as we prepare to commemorate the centenary of that war. I am an enthusiast for film, but we learn from the last novel in the trilogy, “Grey Granite”, that Chris Guthrie is not. I will quote a sentence that tells how Chris and her mother travelled past the site of the Parliament to go to the Picturedrome cinema, which used to stand on Easter Road. They went “down Royal Mile, and up Little James Street to the Picturedrome; and paid for their seats and went in and sat down; and Chris felt sleepy almost as soon as she sat, and yawned, pictures wearied her nearly to death, the flickering shadows and the awful voices, the daft tales they told and the dafter news.” That might seem a discouraging scene to mention in a debate about film, but it is instructive. If we read on in the chapter, we discover the reason for Chris’s disdain, which is that the film is a cheap Hollywood melodrama that is set in a fictionalised New York and has nothing to say to her. Just as access to literature about our country and experiences is vital, so too is access to film production that speaks of the Mearns and the rest of Scotland. That has great cultural value. As Nigel Don’s motion brings out, it also has economic value—a value that is growing but has the potential to grow more. Film forms part of the creative industries, which are one of the seven key growth sectors for Scotland’s economy. The film industry has nearly 400 production and related companies in Scotland and they generate a turnover of £1.2 billion a year. I say to Bob Doris that about 15 to 20 feature films are shot in Scotland each year. There are a range of companies, including Park Circus, which distributes classic films, Savalas, which is innovating in sound production, and other companies that find locations, build sets and design props, to name just a few activities. Scotland is becoming a sought-after location for filming. Successes include “World War Z”, which was filmed in parts of Glasgow; the science-fiction hit “Prometheus”, which had scenes shot in the evocative landscapes of the Isle of Skye; and the latest Batman film, “The Dark Knight Rises”, which showcased compelling Highland scenery and delivered a significant economic benefit, as the production spent approximately £1.1 million in the area and retarmacked the local airport runway so that a C-130 Hercules could land on it. Location shooting also encourages tourism, as I said earlier. VisitScotland calculates that almost a quarter of overseas visitors visited a film location while in Scotland—set-jetting, I think it is called in the parlance. It is remarkable to think that this year will have seen the release of what will almost certainly be the two most-watched films set in Scotland: Disney Pixar’s “Brave” and the James Bond film “Skyfall”. The latter was filmed in Glen Coe, and I note that the National Trust for Scotland, which owns Glen Coe, has just appointed a dedicated locations manager. On that, I think that John Mason has a point about how far up the credits we might want our locations to be. The public sector in Scotland is working with the industry to support its growth, which Bob Doris touched on. Creative Scotland’s lottery funding for film sits at £3 million for 2011-12, increasing to £4 million by 2013-14. Training was mentioned earlier, and Creative Skillset is working with the screen sector to invest in our film talent of the future. For example, it is collaborating with BBC Scotland, the Broadcasting, Entertainment, Cinematograph and Theatre Union, Creative Scotland and Skills Development Scotland on the television drama training programme, which is supported by an investment of £800,000 over the next two years. That supports the training of producers for high-end TV drama and feature films. In all of that, the public sector is working with the film sector. For example, earlier this year, a £500,000 commitment from Creative Scotland helped to launch the Mackendrick fund, which levers in private sector funding to invest in films, developed by the industry itself, with strong Scottish connections. Nigel Don signals in his motion the contribution that could be made to the film industry by having a self-sustaining production centre. Creative Scotland has recently committed £75,000 to work with the industry on a feasibility study into how that can be achieved, with provisional further funding of £1 million identified if the study shows a way forward. Presiding Officer, you might recall that your predecessor in the chair of this Parliament when it was adjourned in 1707, the Earl of Seafield, said: “There’s ane end of ane auld sang.” The reconvening of this Parliament marked the beginning of a new song. That has been accompanied by a flowering of our creative arts, including film. We have achieved a lot in film and I believe that, with independence and the ability, for example, to develop the kind of film-friendly financial regime that Ireland, despite its current difficulties, has not just protected but extended, we could do even more. I look forward to seeing the new “Sunset Song”. It is part of that new song of Scotland and of a Scottish film movement that is not at sunset but rather is heading towards a noontime zenith. 13:02 Meeting suspended. 14:30 On resuming—

Fiona Hyslop has identified an error in her contribution and provided the following correction. At col 13534, paragraph 2— Original text— Film forms part of the creative industries, which are one of the seven key growth sectors for Scotland’s economy. The film industry has nearly 400 production and related companies in Scotland and they generate a turnover of £1.2 billion a year. Corrected text— Film forms part of the creative industries, which are one of the seven key growth sectors for Scotland’s economy. The film industry has nearly 300 business units in Scotland and they contribute a Gross Value Added of £120 million a year.

I am glad to have the opportunity to comment on the valuable work of the British-Irish Parliamentary Assembly and to acknowledge that Glasgow was the venue for the assembly’s 45th plenary session and that the agenda had a strong Scottish theme. The First Minister, who is a former member of the BIIPB, wrote to welcome the assembly to Scotland and offer his best wishes for a lively and productive plenary session. My colleague Mr Ewing addressed the assembly and told me how successful the event was. Reports suggest that the sessions were lively. The speeches by Michael McMahon, Willie Coffey, John Scott and Mary Scanlon reflected that well. I was particularly interested to see the comments of the assembly’s co-chairmen—Laurence Robertson MP and Joe McHugh TD—who said that, although the discussions on Scottish efforts to boost trade and tourism provided much food for thought for members of the other Parliaments and Assemblies in attendance, the overriding issue of the 2014 referendum on Scottish independence dominated the plenary. They added that, although the referendum debate would clearly continue to dominate public discourse in Scotland for the next two years, it was important that the assembly maintain its focus on building economic links and policies between Administrations to aid recovery and boost employment and trade. Mary Scanlon was right to recognise the value of exports to the Irish economy in particular. She may be pleased to know that, only last month, I attended a British Irish Chamber of Commerce event as part of the promotion of such relationships. The assembly exemplifies how we, the elected representatives of the people of these islands, can collaborate to tackle the major social and economic issues that transcend our borders, irrespective of our different political perspectives. Although it previously focused on the peace process, the fact that its members now have a greater focus on working together to build economic links between our islands is a testament to the efforts of the people of these islands, as well as groups such as BIPA. That is not to say that the role that BIPA plays in the peace process has concluded. Indeed, I encourage members to remember the genesis of the assembly and to be sensitive to that when considering its activities and future plans. The murder on 1 November of Northern Ireland prison officer David Black served as a stark reminder that security issues will remain on the agenda for British-Irish relations for some time to come. It also demonstrates the need for vigilance and attention to the Good Friday agreement and issues that affect peace, reconciliation and progress in Northern Ireland. The fact that representatives of the Administrations from the UK, Ireland, Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland, Guernsey, Jersey and the Isle of Man attend BIPA adds much to the assembly’s work. As I know from my role representing Scotland on the British-Irish Council, we face many of the same problems. The difficulties and challenges that we have to overcome—especially in such challenging economic times—are often similar, and it is essential that we co-operate with, and learn from, one another as we seek to overcome them. In that regard, the BIC, which is the intergovernmental body, has agreed to share information on various work streams more proactively with BIPA. By sharing our experiences, we can learn from one another. That not only helps us as parliamentarians but, more important, makes a difference for the people whom we represent. The willingness of BIPA members to encourage engagement and co-operation on matters of mutual interest and concern is of great benefit to us all. That will be even more important for an independent Scotland, as it will allow us to continue to meet and discuss common interests with our BIC and BIPA counterparts as representatives of a sovereign Scotland. I end by expressing my thanks to all those who worked so hard to make the Glasgow plenary a success, particularly the co-chairs, Laurence Robertson MP and Joe McHugh TD. I look forward to hearing more about the next plenary in Donegal, which I understand will discuss a joint energy strategy for Britain and Ireland—an issue on which the British-Irish Council has spent much time, and one to which it has paid much attention. It is another issue that is of great interest to Scotland and one on which we have much to contribute. In terms of co-operation, it is probably one of the areas in which we can have the most dynamic intervention.

I was about to end my speech, but I will take an intervention.

Mary Scanlon will be interested to know that, at the BIC summit in Dublin last January, which I attended, the council charged the new BIC standing secretariat—which, as John Scott mentioned, is now located in Edinburgh—with engaging with the BIPA secretariat to discuss the implementation of those areas for improvement on which the BIC and BIPA are agreed. They were set out in the letter that the BIC secretariat sent to the BIPA secretariat following the 2010 summit in Guernsey. I understand that that work is continuing. On the work streams, extensive work has been carried out between the different jurisdictions on energy in particular. It is a recurring theme at the British-Irish Council, and the willingness to engage is clear from the seeking of a response from the BIPA secretariat as to how that information can be shared. However, I endorse the view that there can be no suggestion that BIPA should be seen to hold the BIC to account. That is the role of the legislatures from which the member Administrations are drawn; it is not the role of BIPA. In relation to some of the agenda items, such as human trafficking, which Michael McMahon mentioned and on which the Scottish Parliament has been strongly involved in legislating, and particularly energy, we are starting to see the progression of the relationships, be it through BIPA or the BIC. Discussion of the substantive issues can help us proceed in the decades to come, for example in relation to renewable energy and social justice. Experiences vary—we are not saying that they are all the same—and the solutions will not necessarily be the same, but we can exchange ideas, for example on youth employment. I have already seen a testing of our approaches, which can be informed by the approaches of our closest neighbours. That is the type of relationship that we want to foster. The role of individual parliamentarians in BIPA, whether they are from this Parliament or others, is really important, because we have to test ourselves, just as the parliamentarians in the Scottish Parliament have to test the Government on what it does. If we are better informed because we know about other examples of what is happening, it can help us to produce better policy solutions. That is important, because it is ultimately the people whom we serve—the people whom we have the opportunity and the privilege to represent in the Parliament—who must be at the forefront of our thinking. I hope that that explains some of the relationships. I am happy to engage with members on the subject in the years to come. Meeting closed at 17:34.

The Scottish Government is working with a range of military and veterans organisations, cultural bodies, education groups and the United Kingdom Government on proposals to commemorate the centenary of the conflict and will ensure that Scotland plays its full part in world war one commemorations over the period from 2014 to 2018, remembering the role and the sacrifice of Scottish servicemen and the wider impact on society. On 3 July, I met 19 Scottish organisations to share and set out plans and have had two meetings with the UK representation, in May and July. Events that are planned include, for example, two exhibitions at the National Museum of Scotland.

Many schools in Scotland already organise visits to world war one battlefields. A school in my constituency does so on an annual basis. We are discussing how those trips and other existing learning activity about world war one might support and complement the centenary education programme. We are looking forward to identifying the consequentials in the autumn budget revision to see what funding is available. The member might be aware of the £50 million that has been announced by the Prime Minister, £35 million of which is for the Imperial War Museum’s refurbishment, which was announced in February. Particularly at this time, we need to take our roles and responsibilities in commemoration very seriously. The Government places great importance on future generations learning the lessons of war and commemorating those who lost their lives.

Early progress is being made through the investment of £505,000 that we have provided in 2012-13 for a graduate incentive programme with the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, which seeks to increase graduate recruitment in Scotland’s small businesses. The young Scots fund is a manifesto commitment covering the five-year term of this Parliament, and planning is progressing well for the national conservation centre, the national centre for youth arts and the national performance centre for sport.

As I explained, a number of the projects that are being developed now are capital projects. I am delighted to say that the national conservation centre is now attracting not only European Union funding but Heritage Lottery funding, so it will be even more ambitious than it was originally. Initially, there will be projects that relate particularly to graduate employment and the opportunities for all youth employment proposals. In most of the capital spend, especially in my portfolio area, there is a big focus on 2012 to 2014, although progress on the national performance centre for sport will be made particularly in 2014-15 and 2015-16.

The latest figures from the Scottish household survey, which was published in August, report that in 2011 more than 75 per cent of Scottish adults used the internet. The market communications report from the Office of Communications, which was published in March, reports an overall increase of 7 per cent in broadband uptake last year. A range of initiatives are under way, through the Scottish Library and Information Council, in schools and communities. In the first six months of 2012, the Scottish Government funded projects across Scotland that reached more than 4,500 people. In the member’s region, over the past five years more than 10,000 people in Fife have attended internet taster sessions in local libraries. Yesterday, Fife Council, working with the digital participation action group, which brings together public, private and third sector organisations that are committed to improving digital participation, held an event in the Rothes halls, Glenrothes, as part of the programme to increase the level of digital participation in Fife, in particular among the over-55 age group.

Clearly, there is supply and demand. In Glasgow we have to make sure that we stimulate demand for usage, but in rural areas there are connectivity issues. My colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities will be taking forward the procurement proposals, which are well advanced, particularly in the Highlands and Islands, to make sure that we have the connectivity that is required to ensure that there can be rural uptake on the supply side.

The Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment met the co-curator of the world festival of flight 2013 in November 2011 and I met the co-curators in March this year. We both expressed our interest in the event and asked to be kept updated as the proposals progressed.

I am very interested in the festival. I think that John Scott is right to identify that film was starting to develop at the same time as flight, so the combination of film and flight as part of the festival is very attractive. I have encouraged the organisers to contact Creative Scotland and EventScotland for what I think could be a very exciting event. I am familiar with the area—I used to spend weekends at Prestwick airport a long time ago—and I think that this is an exciting project. I wish it very well.

The Scottish Government recognises the value of cultural exchanges with a range of countries across the world, including our priority countries and non-EU European countries. The Scottish Government supports the work of our partner agencies, such as Creative Scotland and the National Museum of Scotland, to pursue exchanges. For example, NMS has recently collaborated with the State Hermitage Museum of St Petersburg to bring the Catherine the Great exhibition to Edinburgh. Cultural exchanges are an effective means of developing Scotland’s international relations and promoting our unique heritage and distinctive culture, which in turn can open up opportunities for investment in Scotland, contributing to economic growth.

No concerns in that regard have been raised with me or my officials, but I suspect that any concerns would be raised with the United Kingdom Border Agency and immigration officials. However, if the member is aware of an impact on artists involved in the Edinburgh festivals, I am more than happy for him to write to me and I will investigate.

I met the then director general of the BBC, Mark Thompson, on 8 September 2012 and the chair of the BBC Trust, Lord Patten, on 22 September 2012, who were chairing events at which I was speaking. I discussed cuts to BBC Scotland, in particular with Mr Thompson. I also expect to discuss that matter with the director of BBC Scotland at a meeting scheduled for 8 November 2012.

Clearly, we will set out our programme in the white paper in November 2013, but let me reassure Siobhan McMahon that the licence fee revenue for Scotland is currently £320 million and we will certainly have a share in the assets of BBC Scotland. I remember that Ken Macintosh was particularly concerned about whether David Attenborough’s “Frozen Planet” was shown in Ireland. I can confirm that David Attenborough’s “Frozen Planet” is shown even in independent Ireland, on RTÉ2’s television channel. I reassure the member—as I did Ken Macintosh—that the biggest threat to the BBC is currently coming from the future faced under a Tory Government as part of the union.

The additional £1 million allocated to Historic Scotland in the budget for 2013-14 is to help the efficient management of the Historic Scotland estate, increasing opportunities for local maintenance contractors and supporting jobs throughout Scotland including the Highlands and Islands.

The Scottish Government has repeatedly requested that the UK Government stimulates economic growth in construction in the heritage sector by reducing VAT. The imposition by the UK Government of 20 per cent of VAT is an attack on economic growth and the built environment. It is the wrong move and it is in the wrong direction. Using past data, the Treasury would be likely to take an amount somewhere in the range of £25 million out of the construction industry in the VAT hike for 2013-14, but what is even worse is that that tax hike to 20 per cent could discourage the commissioning of work in the first place.

I am pleased that Historic Scotland has been able to support the film house in Campbeltown. It is a good example of how investment, in cinema houses or in borough halls the length and breadth of Scotland, is not only helping to regenerate town centres but contributing to a vibrant cultural scene. I am pleased that support has already been given and I will be interested to hear from the member about any further plans that the cinema has. I am sure that funders across the country, whether Creative Scotland or others, would be interested in that programme.

Full details of the Government’s proposals for independence will be provided in the white paper to be published in November 2013.

With independence, the people of Scotland will be able to enjoy more home-grown content, including a Scottish national broadcaster that will build on the existing staff and assets of BBC Scotland, while enjoying the same programmes and channels as they do now. I say to Ken Macintosh that the biggest threat to the BBC currently does not come from the Scottish National Party Government; it comes from the United Kingdom Government. Does he want a future tied to the UK Government and 10 per cent jobs cuts? That is the biggest threat to the BBC.

Dziekuje Wam, ciesze sie ze moge zakonczyc ta debate. Thank you, I am delighted to close this debate. I am particularly grateful to Christine Grahame for securing a debate on the great Polish map of Scotland and indeed challenging us all on the basis that this is the first time that we have had a simultaneous interpretation into Polish in the Parliament. I welcome the Polish consul general and our Polish friends in the gallery. In closing what has been a fascinating debate, I add my support to Parliament’s recognition of the great Polish map of Scotland. The map represents a significant contribution to the cultural life of Scotland and is an opportunity to enhance our continuing strong cultural and economic links with Poland. I was struck by the passionate testimony of Graeme Pearson, Jean Urquhart, Chic Brodie, Annabel Goldie, Annabelle Ewing, Nigel Don and Kenny Gibson, who recognised the historic and modern connections between Poland and Scotland. I add the Government’s voice to the congratulations expressed by members to Mapa Scotland’s volunteers. Those dedicated individuals have campaigned tirelessly to protect and restore this unique three-dimensional map of Scotland. This is a timely moment to show our appreciation of the contribution that has been made to Scotland by Polish people who have settled here. I welcome the decision by Historic Scotland earlier this week to list the map. It reflects the wide interest in the map and showcases Scotland’s and Poland’s shared history, culture and creativity, and the unique contribution to Scotland’s defence during the second world war. Recently, the director of conservation at Historic Scotland met senior staff from the Polish Ministry of Culture, the Polish Ministry of Energy and Poland’s National Heritage Board to discuss our climate change work on heritage and traditional buildings. Together, we have started a journey to raise the profile of cultural diplomacy, with the potential to produce a global impact on how nations relate to one another and build trust and understanding between nations. It is appropriate to explain why the map has been recognised by Historic Scotland. As we have heard, it is a vast three-dimensional concrete representation of Scotland, which is found in the grounds of Barony castle hotel near Eddleston in the Borders. It is one of the largest of its kind in the world. The map was constructed in 1975 by five imaginative Polish geographers from the Jagiellonian University in Kraków using a range of unorthodox cartographic methods. The completed structure is a combination of precise survey technique and intuitive handcrafting to create a convincing three-dimensional representation of Scotland. The map is an incredible thing. Ben Nevis is easily identifiable at a glance, and the map originally had water flowing through it to represent Scotland’s main lochs and rivers. Following the annexing of Poland by Nazi Germany in 1939, Polish forces made their way across Europe to Scotland to reconvene at a number of lowland locations. Those included Barony house, where a staff college for Polish army officers was established. Part of their role was to create defences for large sections of Scotland’s east coast. As Scotland was largely undefended, Polish forces were deployed to aid in the building of defences. Many examples of those defences survive in the landscape today, including pillboxes and anti-landing obstacles, many of which are scheduled or listed in recognition of their place in our military history. It was at the request of General Stanislaw Maczek, the former wartime commander of the First Polish Armoured Division, and the war veteran Jan Tomasik that the great Polish map was commissioned in the 1970s. The conception, commissioning and execution of the giant map were quite remarkable and inspired. It was conceived to commemorate a wartime strategic map that was originally laid out in the grounds of Barony house by Maczek as commanding officer. We owe a debt to those courageous Poles for their great legacy, and we recognise the vital contribution that they made not only to the defence of Scotland during the war years, but in the decades that followed. Of the 50,000 service personnel who were based in Scotland, 10,000 decided to stay and settle. We have heard stories about some of them during the debate. In more recent times, links with Poland have continued, with the accession of Poland to the European Union in 2004, and there has been a dramatic increase in the number of Polish people making a new home in Scotland. More than 61,000 Polish migrants have registered to live and work in Scotland, and Poles make up the biggest percentage of nationals from the accession states who have settled in Scotland. Polish migrants came to my constituency 150 years ago to work in the mines, so in West Lothian we talk of three waves of Polish immigration. This year, we saw the largest ever Polska arts programme at the Edinburgh international festival, which included a modern interpretation of Macbeth that was wholly performed in Polish with English subtitles. I met the Polish Minister of Culture and National Heritage when he attended the international culture summit and had the pleasure of attending the opening performance of the Polish Macbeth with him and the Polish consul general, and the Adam Mickiewicz institute of culture. Although the contribution of Poles in Scotland in the modern era is one that has been stimulated by a new Europe—one that is no longer hindered by the destructive forces of war but held together by the common goal of peace and prosperity—there are lessons to be learned from the past. Scotland and Poland continue to maintain strong links in the present, but it is important to recognise the efforts of those committed individuals and organisations that bind the Scottish-Polish community. We have heard many examples of such efforts across Scotland. I congratulate the Mapa Scotland group of volunteers, who formed a charitable trust to bring the great Polish map of Scotland into focus. In 2010, they began their enthusiastic campaign to have the map protected and repaired for the benefit of future generations and to reinforce Scotland’s heritage links with Poland. The campaign to restore the map is now well under way and the Mapa Scotland group has secured heritage lottery funding to advance its plans. I have been very pleased to confirm that, as a creative nation that is rich in heritage and which contributes to the world, Scotland is open to vital cultural exchange. It is appropriate to celebrate the great map of Scotland in the Scottish Borders as an important and unique memorial that commemorates the achievements of two countries working together. In securing the debate, Christine Grahame has allowed us to celebrate the work that the volunteers have done. More importantly, we have had an opportunity to remember, commemorate and celebrate the heritage that led to the map’s creation and, vitally, to continued dialogue, exchange and friendship between the people of Scotland and the people of Poland. Meeting closed at 17:49.

Scotland’s winter festivals celebrate our nation’s rich culture and heritage and showcase Scotland on an international stage. Negotiations with event organisers are on-going, but we will publish the winter festival programme of events later this autumn. Through EventScotland, we will support a broader geographical spread of events than last year, engaging Scots the length and breadth of the country in winter festival celebrations including St Andrew’s day, Christmas, hogmanay and Burns night.

As an Ayrshire lass, I must be careful about designating any key areas for Burns celebrations. I was very impressed with the big Burns supper when I attended it in January, and I know that Joan McAlpine is an enthusiastic champion of it. Bearing in mind that 10,000 attendees were at the big Burns supper in Dumfries at that time, I think that the quality of the productions will be very attractive to investors. In championing the big Burns supper, Joan McAlpine is supporting another Burns event that we will come to love in years to come.

The 35 job losses in BBC Scotland that were confirmed at the end of August are very disappointing, particularly as fully 17 of them are in news and current affairs. The BBC should be enhancing rather than reducing that area at this important time in Scotland’s history. I have written to the director general designate of the BBC to make representations on the matter, and the First Minister discussed it with him earlier this week.

I share the member’s concerns. Indeed, in the context of democratic representation in broadcasting, the whole Parliament should be concerned about the level of the cuts and exactly where they are taking place. With the most momentous decision in more than 300 years ahead, diminishing BBC Scotland’s news and current affairs capability in such a way is unacceptable, particularly if we contrast the £320 million that the BBC raises through licence fees in Scotland with a budget for BBC Scotland that will fall to only £86 million in 2016. It is of further concern that the distribution of the cuts in Scotland is entirely the responsibility of the BBC director for Scotland.

Good progress has been made since I commissioned the development of a business case for merger in July. The work is being taken forward under the joint leadership of the two chief executives. When I met RCAHMS commissioners recently they were supportive of the process and I have committed to keeping them involved in it. My aspiration is to create a new body that builds on the recognised strengths of both organisations and is stronger, more resilient and better equipped to celebrate Scotland’s heritage. I will base a final decision on how to proceed on the business case, which I expect to receive around the end of 2012.

I made that last point quite clear in my correspondence with RCAHMS. Indeed, when I wrote to Patricia Ferguson on 4 July, I was adamant that we needed to provide certainty of employment for RCAHMS staff and that the policy of no compulsory redundancies, which is a positive policy of the Government, would extend to RCAHMS and Historic Scotland staff. On whether the proposed merger is a cost-saving measure, in most mergers any cost savings do not happen immediately. I know, because I have been involved in a number of them in the Scottish Government. I made it clear in my letter to Patricia Ferguson on 4 July and have made it clear right through the discussions with RCAHMS that the purpose of the merger is to protect and promote the commission’s core functions. RCAHMS recognises the importance of that. In advancing that, we can give the commission a stronger status by ensuring that its functions are embedded and respected in legislation, as I suspect will need to be the case.

The Edinburgh international culture summit was attended by 33 delegations from around the globe and by more than 20 Government ministers. It showcased the best of Scottish culture, positioned Scotland as a leader in international cultural debate and enhanced our reputation as a highly creative nation. It delivered a model that could be replicated, and Edinburgh provides a fitting backdrop for future meetings of culture leaders from nations around the world. The summit also provided an opportunity for discussion of future international partnerships.

We are very interested in holding the summit again and have had requests to do so. It is likely that we will hold it in Edinburgh again, most likely in 2014.

I join other members in congratulating Annabel Goldie on securing the debate. I am sure that there are many in the Conservative Party who think that Annabel is one in a million. We certainly know that she is one in half a million, as she is among the regular viewers of “River City”. Her profile on the BBC’s news website describes her as “a die-hard fan of BBC Scotland soap River City”. It is interesting that she confessed her early opposition to it—she is obviously now a sinner reformed in that regard. I also join many others in expressing my admiration for this fine dramatic series on its 10th anniversary. It is filmed in Jackie Baillie’s constituency, and she talked about the economic impact that it has had there. We also heard an impassioned advocacy of the whole area—including across the Clyde—from Duncan McNeil, who talked about the contribution of “Waterloo Road”. I hope to visit the area soon and I am very interested in exploring the opportunities that that provides. It was interesting to hear from Jackie Baillie about Gina as a punk rocker. Could we have “River City—The Early Years”? That is as much fantasy as Jackie Baillie’s scaremongering about the BBC in her later comments. Sandra White pointed out that the BBC currently faces a 16 per cent cut, and she was right to temper her celebration by saying that we must look at what is happening, concerns about which were raised earlier today in questions. What really matters is not just that “River City” is loved in the Scottish Parliament by all the members who signed the motion, but that it is loved by the Scottish people and its 500,000 viewers. We are only two thirds of the way through the year, but tours of the “River City” studio and set in Dunbartonshire are booked solid until the end of December and beyond. Indeed, the show has viewers beyond Scotland, through the BBC iPlayer, its availability on Sky and its being shown on the Australian free-to-air digital channel—a fair exchange, I suggest, for “Neighbours”. Not only have audience figures continued to rise, but detailed audience research shows that “River City” has a high level of audience appreciation for any soap opera. It is not only a show that people watch passively but one that engages with their real interests and concerns. As Annabel Goldie set out, the show tackles some difficult subjects in an involving and thought-provoking way. Recent editions have outlined health problems through a storyline about the character Big Bob O’Hara and his obesity-linked heart attack. It also deals with contemporary issues. A recent episode involved a proposal for a civil partnership, a legal status that was not even enacted when “River City” began in 2002. The show also reminds us of where we have come from. As the title “River City” suggests, the fictional district of Shieldinch is rooted in the history of Glasgow and the Clyde. To quote from the late Donald Dewar’s speech at the opening of this Parliament, it is a place where “we might hear some echoes from the past: the shout of the welder in the din of the great Clyde shipyards”. I am glad that we can still sometimes hear that shout, whether it is ships or offshore wind and wave energy installations that are being welded. Equally, I am glad that the welders’ shouts are now joined on the Clyde by the clap of the clapperboard and the whisper of the production assistant. “River City” is emblematic of the success of our television production sector, not least along the River Clyde. It is produced by BBC Scotland, which has its headquarters at Pacific Quay, with Scottish Television on one side and Film City Glasgow on the other. The creative Clyde enterprise area, which started in April, builds on that existing base by offering a streamlined planning regime, reduced local business taxation and support for marketing and development. With that in mind, I look forward to further growth of the creative industries in that enterprise area. We heard from Duncan McNeil about the relocation of the BBC’s “Waterloo Road” to Greenock. Scottish Enterprise and Scottish Development International supported the production company Shed Productions in making that move, which is expected to generate almost £25 million in direct investment and create 230 job opportunities across all levels of production over the next two years. That welcome development reflects the great strides that the TV production sector has made over the past five years. In 2007, only 2.6 per cent of network production by United Kingdom public service broadcasters came from Scotland. By 2011, that had risen to 4.9 per cent, with the BBC attaining a population share at 8.6 per cent—up from 3.3 per cent in 2007, so there has been progress. In 2010-11, the total estimated value of the television production sector as a whole in Scotland was £131.2 million, which is a 42 per cent increase since 2009-10. The energy in that sector, which many members mentioned, is evident in the figures that are being generated. That sort of success depends on having a base of dependable, long-standing television series that are produced here in Scotland. Therefore, I salute “River City” for the way in which it has been an anchor for television production in Scotland for a whole decade, in good times and in bad. Moreover, like many members, I salute “River City”, its cast, its crew and everybody who is involved in it for all that it has meant to the Scottish viewing public for the past 10 years, and I look forward to it having many more successful years ahead. 13:03 Meeting suspended.

I congratulate George Adam on securing the debate, and welcome our visitors. By highlighting the event in an interesting contribution, George Adam has brought to members’ attention the vital role played by local communities in preserving our nation’s rich history and the way in which those communities make our heritage come to life with entertaining and engaging activities. Inevitably, as the case of the Bargarran witches sadly highlights, our nation’s story has some dark periods. However, it is testimony to our local communities’ desire to retain and own their part of the nation’s story that events such as the Paisley witch trial re-enactments still grip the local and national psyche. As we heard, as a result of a child’s statement, seven Paisley residents were arrested, later found guilty under witchcraft legislation, sentenced to death, hanged and then burned on the Gallow Green in Paisley. It is estimated that across Scotland, up to 4,000 innocent individuals were accused of witchcraft and killed between 1560 and 1707. Christine Grahame just spoke of the Galloway witches. History may provide the facts and our national records may hold some of the accounts, but it is to communities that we look to maintain a living memory of our history. The passion that exists locally for local history, combined with the determination to keep alive the part that towns and communities played in Scotland’s rich story, no matter how small, ensures that a living memory is retained. Annabel Goldie and Neil Bibby reflected that in their contributions. This year, for example, Historic Scotland has appointed three tourism and community managers to cover properties in north, central and south regions. Their focus is to work with community groups, schools and colleges, external partners such as VisitScotland, destination management organisations and local tourism groups to build and develop business links and joint promotions and to help raise awareness of what Historic Scotland can contribute to a growing area of cultural tourism, which, as George Adam pointed out, also has an economic benefit. The events that take place and the public programmes at sites of Historic Scotland’s responsibility explore how we can link with other events and activities happening across the country. That is a positive step. Graeme Dey, speaking about Arbroath, is another example of an MSP who is actively engaged with Historic Scotland in his area to try to maximise the cultural, heritage and economic impact to help his constituency. A number of community-based events tell the story of places in Scotland. The Dirleton castle witch event tells to a family audience the story of the East Lothian witch trials of the 16th and 17th centuries. The event was attended by more than 400 people, although I suspect from George Adam’s figures that they may have been outnumbered by those who attended the Paisley event. Hallowe’en in Huntly at the end of October will be an innovative community-led event, organised by the arts agency Deveron Arts in collaboration with Historic Scotland, local schools and the wider community. There will be a masked pipe band lit by lanterns and a creepy ceilidh for all the family. Following the success of “Macbeth” at St Andrews castle in April this year, the St Andrews university production company asked if it could perform it at Inchcolm abbey as part of the Edinburgh fringe festival, as Inchcolm is referred to in the play. “Macbeth” was last performed on the island in the 1980s. Historic Scotland officials worked in partnership with the university production team and collaborated with it to see this most famous of plays return to Inchcolm. Elgin cathedral will enjoy a series of carol concerts this year as a result of the local youth band and local churches approaching Historic Scotland officials to request that the cathedral be made available to support their wishes. As well as Historic Scotland, Creative Scotland also works tirelessly to engage communities in order to offer as diverse a range of cultural events as possible. Festivals are wonderful celebrations and Scotland truly is a festival nation. We have over 370 festivals this year alone—large and small, of all kinds, taking place year-round and across the length and breadth of the country. New festivals emerge each year and these, alongside existing events, are now all brought together in an extremely useful annual guide produced jointly by Creative Scotland and The List. Scotland’s festivals span a range of activities and different forms of entertainment including the visual, performance and literary arts; food, heritage, sport and multi-media events; and we should not forget the festival of politics, which has just finished in this very building. We also have the Imaginate children’s festival each May. A new festival of arts and ageing will be held for the first time this year, in different parts of Scotland. Twelve festivals are held annually in Shetland as well as festivals in Dumfries and Galloway, the Western Isles and the Scottish Borders. As we have heard, community-based festivals play a very important role in the health, wellbeing and cohesion of our places. Creative Scotland, our national agency for the arts and creative industries, has established its touring, festivals and arts programming investment stream, which develops opportunities for audiences to access the arts through new festivals, events and programmes. There are a number of opportunities and I encourage members to take them up on behalf of festivals in their constituencies. Over the autumn and winter months, there will be different events and festivals including those based around Hallowe'en, the changing seasons or, as we have heard, local historical events such as Viking raids—another focal point for local legends and traditions. The planning, preparation and enjoyment of those events ensure that people meet and engage with one another, help bring communities together and tell the story of Scotland and its local places. Activities such as researching local heritage, devising events and making costumes, props and floats bring together families and the wider community, as they work together to make a successful festival. Annabel Goldie was correct to praise the volunteers who are involved. Sometimes festivals bring economic benefits and sometimes they raise money for local charities—that is an important part of participation. We have all heard of Up Helly Aa in Shetland and we are increasingly seeing the revival of Celtic pagan traditions around Beltane—the ushering in of springtime. Lastly, I mention Scotland’s history festival, held in November each year, which brings together many talks and events that present episodes of local and national historical importance in unexpected ways and in a wide variety of places. Audiences and participants alike find that those experiences add substantially to their lives and to their understanding of cultural activities and what they can bring to local communities. However, at the end of the day we need to reflect on the source of our heritage and recognise the suffering that is sometimes involved. Looking at the story of the Bargarran witches, I was struck to hear about the memorial that was built in May 2008 at Maxwellton cross in Paisley—the site where the witches’ charred remains were buried. The bronze memorial has a stainless steel horseshoe embedded in it and includes the inscription, “Pain Inflicted, Suffering Endured, Injustice Done”. On that note, we can reflect on the contribution of the re-enactments and the way in which they act as memorials, and we can also reflect, as George Adam has done, on the contribution that festivals can bring in telling all these stories to Scotland. Meeting closed at 17:34.

The Scottish Government regularly meets Creative Scotland, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and Vocal Scotland to discuss issues and share information in relation to culture and cultural services in a local authority context. The Scottish Government has not met Creative Scotland to discuss its work in Aberdeen specifically.

Creative Scotland is represented on the Aberdeen city garden project group in forming and influencing the strategic content of the proposed granite web. Its interests are in delivering quality arts facilities for the people of Scotland, and it is keen to ensure that the proposed development helps to strengthen Aberdeen’s cultural infrastructure and adds value to the work of existing organisations in the area. Creative Scotland recently spoke to the leader of Aberdeen City Council about the city garden project. The council considers that it offers the potential to be a key platform for the city’s bid to win city of culture status. I do not know whether the council indicated to Creative Scotland what the funding plans are to refurbish the art gallery should it reject TIF, but I endeavour to find that out for Kevin Stewart.

I note Lewis Macdonald’s comments. I refer to the fact that there was a referendum and that a large number of Aberdeen’s population voted in favour of the project, and it is up to the democratic process within Aberdeen to take its course. There is great potential for cultural activity in Aberdeen to be enhanced by a variety of projects. On the city of culture bid, I warmly welcome and support Aberdeen’s proposals. I add that I am aware that the city of Dundee is also interested in bidding. If the member can bear with me, I think that we can provide opportunities to support culture more generally as the proposals develop. It is fantastic that we have Scottish cities bidding to be city of culture.

I am very pleased that, in what is a difficult financial climate, we have managed to protect front-line investment for culture and creative services and, indeed, Creative Scotland. One reason why Creative Scotland has developed a formal place partnership with Aberdeen city in particular is to look at how we can strategically support all the wonderful, different festivals and cultural offerings that are available in Aberdeen. As the member knows, I am looking forward to attending the Aberdeen international youth festival to help in the celebrations and to showcase the best of not only Scottish but international youth talent to Scotland and the wider world.

The Scottish Government has not had any discussions with the Indonesian Government.

I and the Scottish Government condemn human rights abuses wherever they occur. As a responsible nation within the global community, Scotland has a strong and enduring commitment to securing fundamental human rights and we expect all states to comply with international and human rights law. Through organisations such as the United Nations, the international community has a key role in establishing the framework to ensure that the fundamental rights of all, particularly the most vulnerable and powerless, are fully protected and respected. I thank the member for bringing the issue of West Papua to the attention of the Scottish Parliament.

We are keen to take every opportunity to showcase Scots culture during homecoming 2014 and beyond. An inspirational events programme for the year will be developed, set around the five themes of ancestry, food and drink, active, creative and natural Scotland. We recently announced £3 million to support that programme, and a call for funding applications to events and organisations will be made later in the summer when full criteria and guidelines will also be provided.

The National Trust for Scotland is an enthusiastic supporter of the plans for the focus years and homecoming 2014. It is represented on the strategic group along with other key partners. As well as leading the delivery of homecoming 2014, the group will look at opportunities to work with others. The member made points about all the fantastic festivals that already take place in Ayrshire that could be enhanced during the year of homecoming 2014, and that is a great idea. I know that he has been encouraging Creative Scotland to make contact with South Ayrshire Council to see what opportunities exist. Burns country was such an important part of the 2009 homecoming, and it presents a great opportunity for the future. The suggestion of the Robert Burns birthplace museum being used as a hub for Scots is a good one, but the member will appreciate that it is for Creative Scotland, South Ayrshire Council and the National Trust for Scotland to implement such ideas.

I refer the member to the points in my earlier answer about this summer’s opportunities for bids. There will be a great opportunity to showcase Gaelic culture during the year of homecoming 2014, building on the momentum of some of the activity that we are already seeing. For example, the Tiree music festival, Fèis Canna, the Royal National Mod and the Blas festival are all joining the celebration of the year of creative Scotland. We can build on that going forward to 2014.

The member will be aware that homecoming 2009 was extremely successful. It brought a great deal of additional income to Scottish businesses, and more than 300 events were highly successful. The member will be aware that the Parliament has carried out an investigation into the one event that had some difficulties. Recommendations were made as part of that, and those taking forward any future gathering in 2014 will have learned lessons, not least to be careful who they work with when it comes to private companies. Anyone involved in clan 2014 will take on board the weaknesses of the gathering of 2009. Lessons learned at the time of the inquiry will be taken forward, but we cannot forget the success of all the festivals and events in homecoming 2009. It is important that members throughout the chamber get behind all the events in homecoming 2014 to make them a success.

At their meeting on 7 June, the First Minister and David McAllister, Minister-President of Lower Saxony, discussed strengthening co-operation between Scotland and Lower Saxony in the fields of renewable energy and energy technology, including how to turn low-carbon opportunities into reality. They also discussed wider issues in Europe. The First Minister accepted an invitation to visit Lower Saxony later in the year and received an invitation for the Scottish Government to participate in a celebration of Scottish culture in Lower Saxony next year.

I think I am with you, Presiding Officer. Fergus Ewing is in Germany this week, giving a keynote address at windforce 2012 in Bremen, which is a major offshore wind energy trade fair and conference. Mr Ewing will meet a number of existing and potential inward investors, including AREVA Wind, Alstom, ForWind, PNE WIND and Mahle. There are 14 Scottish companies attending windforce 2012, of which 10 will be on the Scottish Development International stand at the exhibition. Fergus Ewing will also meet politicians, including the Federal Minister for the Environment, the Lower Saxony Minister for Environment, Energy and Climate Protection, and the Baden-Württemberg Minister of the Environment, Climate Protection and the Energy Sector. Mr Ewing has invited the Lower Saxony environment minister to come to Scotland to build on the co-operation between Scotland and Lower Saxony.

The Scottish Government has regular discussions with the Network of International Development Organisations in Scotland, whose members are involved in development work throughout Africa, including South Sudan.

I join the member in congratulating South Sudan on the first anniversary of its independence on 9 July. I am aware of the good work undertaken by Glasgow the Caring City, which the Scottish Government has previously funded to undertake humanitarian work in response to events in Gaza and Haiti. I welcome its valuable contribution to the relief effort in South Sudan. The Scottish Government condemns in the strongest possible terms the atrocities carried out by Joseph Kony and the Lord’s Resistance Army. As I said in response to an earlier question, we promote a positive vision of human rights around the world. Our international development policy articulates the vision of Scotland’s place and its commitment to play a role in responding to challenges faced by our world today.

The Government has regular contact with the Commission and other member states concerning a range of issues in order to govern in the best interests of the people of Scotland.

When Helen Eadie asked this question on 8 September 2011, I answered: “The Government has regular contact with Commission officials and other member states, which concern a range of issues. It is not customary to divulge the content of those or any other official discussions.”—[Official Report, 8 September 2011; c 1548.] I refer Helen Eadie to the Commission. It is for the Commission to answer those points. The one statement that we have had from the Commission has been from the Commissioner for Inter-Institutional Relations and Administration—interestingly, not the commissioner with responsibility for enlargement. That statement said: “At the present time, the Commission is not able to express any view on the specific issue ... given that the terms and result of any future referendum are unknown, as is the nature of the possible future relationships between the parties concerned and between those parties and European Union partners.” I remind Helen Eadie that, following independence, the rest of the United Kingdom would be in a similar position as Scotland would be, and, as continuing members of the European Union, both of us would have interests in engaging constructively with the Commission at that time.

Yesterday, the Scottish Government announced £105 million of capital investment to stimulate the Scottish economy. I am sure that that will be welcomed across the chamber. We have repeatedly emphasised to the UK chancellor the importance of increased investment in infrastructure and have highlighted the need for shovel-ready projects to protect jobs and strengthen recovery. This Government is delivering. It would be helpful if the UK Government could do likewise. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth and I have repeatedly made those points to the UK Government in the context of the European Council and in other discussions. It is important for the sake of jobs in Europe and Scotland that we do everything that we can to generate economic growth. This Government has delivered, and I am sure that members will recognise that, with the £105 million that we announced yesterday, we are stimulating the Scottish economy.

The quality of broadcasting in the Scottish Borders and the south of Scotland generally is a key concern for the Government. That is why, in meetings and correspondence with STV, ITV, the Office of Communications and the Westminster Government, we have stressed the importance of viewers having access to Scottish programming, particularly on news and current affairs at this time of national debate. It is also why we are investing £239,000 into a pilot project for a local television service that will be delivered in Annan via broadband. That is a co-investment with Dumfries and Galloway Council. The pilot commences in the second half of this year and will last until early 2013. If the pilot is successful, it will be repeated as part of the next-generation broadband scheme in the area, starting in mid-2013, under the Scottish Government’s procurement plan.

Indeed I do. I think that the member is right to draw our attention to the Ofcom report. The Ofcom advice on channel 3 relicensing said: “Changes to the Channel 3 service broadcast in the south of Scotland may also be appropriate to ensure viewers receive coverage of both regional and National matters.” This is an issue that unites members across the chamber who want to achieve a better quality of news and service for the Borders. The licence for the channel 3 service is one of the opportunities in that regard. It would be appropriate for me to encourage the member to encourage the United Kingdom Government to make a decision about that sooner rather than later. If it heeds the advice in Ofcom’s report, we might make progress on an issue that unites the chamber.

Creative Scotland, which is our national body for the arts, culture and creative industries, continues to take forward the traditional arts working group’s recommendations. The introduction of dedicated investment programmes to support the traditional arts in commissions, mentoring and tutoring and professional development, and increased investment from a range of Creative Scotland’s funding streams, have resulted in progress, with the creation and implementation of a range of successful projects and schemes, including “The Boy and the Bunnet”, which uses traditional Scottish instruments and musical styles and which will be performed at this year’s Edinburgh festival fringe. A touring performance on the life of the Highland preacher the Rev Duncan Campbell, the Scottish Youth Theatre’s “Family Storytime” for young children and families, and two commemorative performances at the National Mod in celebration of its 120th anniversary are currently in development.

Yes. I will ensure that Creative Scotland maintains the promotion of all traditional arts, including traditional music.

The first ever gathering of culture ministers from around the world will take place in the Scottish Parliament, for which I give many thanks to the Presiding Officer. It will be hosted by the Scottish Government, Edinburgh International Festival, the United Kingdom Government and the British Council, and will take place on 13 and 14 August. The culture summit will showcase the best of Scottish culture, position Scotland as a leader in international cultural debate and, in the year of creative Scotland, celebrate and enhance Scotland’s reputation as a highly creative nation.

The summit will enhance understanding of the creative and cultural reputation of Scotland and the UK and the potential for full international relationships that are based on cultural ideas; it will promote international dialogue; and it will consolidate relationships with developing countries. It will also make a valuable contribution to the overall success of the year of creative Scotland and the cultural olympiad, which will, of course, kick off tonight in the Raploch, where the big noise orchestra will perform with the Simón Bolívar youth orchestra and Gustavo Dudamel. That is a great opportunity to showcase Scotland. The summit will allow delegates to experience Scottish and other hospitality opportunities in the Parliament. I understand that the Parliament has a key role in that, and I am sure that the Presiding Officer is looking forward to the event as much as we are. We must remember that Scotland is a creative nation. We are rich in heritage, and we have much to contribute to the world. As we welcome the world, we can promote ideas and innovation. People will see a warm, welcoming and outward-looking nation, which will enhance our international reputation. I encourage all MSPs to find some way of contributing to what I think will be a wonderful event and a chance to showcase Scotland’s international capability and our cultural contribution to an audience the likes of which we have never seen before.

I thank Rob Gibson for giving us the opportunity to celebrate the life and works of Robert Bontine Cunninghame Graham, and to recognise the recent publication of his writings in a new collection for modern readers. Rob Gibson provided a fitting and eloquent tribute. I also thank other members who have contributed to the debate. Robert Bontine Cunninghame Graham has been described by experts in Scottish literature as Scotland’s forgotten personality, politician and writer. However, that is no longer the case, and Joan McAlpine gave an interesting analysis of the need to tell his stories in a modern context. Cunninghame Graham was in every sense a remarkable individual. As we have heard, he was born in London of Spanish heritage and was educated at Harrow. He was an adventurer in Morocco, and a cowboy and long rider in the Americas, and he passed away in Argentina. However, throughout all of that, he was a Scot. The sheer scope of his life experience and the energy that he devoted to everything he did are inspirational. Joseph Conrad once said: “When I think of Cunninghame Graham, I feel as though I have lived all my life in a dark hole without seeing or knowing anything.” Cunninghame Graham was noted as an inspiration and influence for Conrad’s famous books “Heart of Darkness” and “Nostromo”. As we have heard, his notable friends extended well beyond Conrad to include the likes of Charles Stewart Parnell, George Bernard Shaw and Buffalo Bill. Don Roberto, as he became known in the Americas, inspired by both deeds and word. In Argentina, he was a champion of the miners, the gauchos, the native Americans and many others whom he considered were being exploited by the wealthy and privileged. His influence on modern Scottish political life cannot be underestimated. He entered the House of Commons in 1886 as a Liberal MP for Lanarkshire and left in 1892 as that Parliament’s first sitting socialist member. We have heard much today about his electoral platform, which was considered radical at the time. It included universal suffrage, free school meals, free education, an eight-hour working day, home rule for Scotland and the abolition of the House of Lords. Well, five out of six ain’t bad, Presiding Officer. On leaving Parliament, Cunninghame Graham’s spirit of adventure continued. He moved to Spain to prospect for gold, which is perhaps a unique undertaking for a former MP. Not content with being a founder of the Scottish Labour Party along with Keir Hardie, about which we heard from Patricia Ferguson, Cunninghame Graham went on to found the Scottish National Party. His view was that nationalism and the establishment of a Scottish Parliament with full control over all Scottish affairs was needed in order to further internationalism. Members will not be surprised to hear that I and many of my colleagues most certainly agree with that. As Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs, I am also pleased to remember R B Cunninghame’s literary work. In nearly 30 books, which include 200 short stories and sketches, and history and travel books, he draws on his many travels and adventures in Scotland and his beloved South America for inspiration. Alan MacGillivray, who is one of the editors of the recent publication that brings together R B Cunninghame Graham’s writings, notes: “Graham's image has followed a perhaps sadly familiar trajectory: from being a very high-profile politician, esteemed writer and traveller, a flamboyant anti-Establishment public figure, known by his exotic nickname of ‘Don Roberto’ in tribute to his passionate Hispanic attachments, to being a dimly-recognised name from the past, one of the great neglected band to be found within any literary tradition.” A year after his death in 1936, a memorial cairn for Cunninghame Graham was erected in Dumbarton to symbolise his adventurer’s life and Scottish heart. The cairn contains stones from Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay, where he lived and worked as a gaucho and writer, and the inscription on it briefly covers this life: “ROBERT BONTINE CUNNINGHAME GRAHAM 1852-1936 FAMOUS AUTHOR, TRAVELLER AND HORSEMAN PATRIOTIC SCOT AND CITIZEN OF THE WORLD AS BETOKENED BY THE STONES ABOVE DIED IN ARGENTINA INTERRED IN INCHMAHOME HE WAS A MASTER OF LIFE — A KING AMONG MEN”. I know that Rob Gibson has already read that out, but I think that it is worth repeating what is a remarkable tribute to any man. The monument was moved to the village of Gartmore after a spate of vandalism and has been restored to its former glory by custodians from the National Trust for Scotland. In the light of all that, this debate is welcome and timely. It will help to set the record straight and gives the rightful place to a committed champion of the people of Scotland and their home rule. Both culturally and politically, he can rightly be considered one of modern Scotland’s founding fathers. I, too, warmly congratulate Alan MacGillivray and John C McIntyre on the fruits of their work over a number of years. A publication such as that by Kennedy & Boyd of a five-volume collected stories and sketches of R B Cunninghame Graham would represent a most fitting testimony to the literary contribution of any writer. The new collection brings together for the first time for modern readers Cunninghame Graham’s short stories, sketches and essays, and the availability of easily accessible editions will give modern readers the opportunity to assess and enjoy the remarkable range of this significant Scottish writer’s work. In time, scholars might reveal why R B Cunninghame Graham’s work has received so little serious attention in the 75 years since his death, but our responsibility is to ensure that such neglect becomes history. He was unquestionably “a master of life”. The suggestion that we put his words on the Parliament building is very fitting, so if we can secure cross-party support for the proposal it will be well worth taking forward. Patricia Ferguson listed what inspired and motivated Cunninghame Graham: the miners, home rule, and injustice. Those are the same issues that motivated me to get involved with politics and might also have inspired many members in the chamber to become politically involved. That political thread and the man’s truly inspiring memory bind us together, so it is very important that we pay tribute to this inspiration of a man both in this debate and in years to come. Meeting closed at 17:32.

I thank John Mason for the motion on the death penalty and for highlighting the case of Balwant Singh Rajoana. I pay tribute to the manner in which John Mason introduced the debate, which has been thoughtful and respectful. Hanzala Malik reminded us of the need to be compassionate and Fiona McLeod told us that the death penalty brutalises society. I reiterate the Scottish Government’s commitment to working in partnership with ethnic minority communities throughout Scotland to tackle racism and religious intolerance and to achieve the one Scotland to which we all aspire. The Sikh community in Scotland has made a valuable contribution to Scotland since the first Sikhs arrived here in the 1950s. Like Sandra White, I welcome the fact that the Sikh community has raised the issue by holding a rally in Edinburgh and bringing it to the attention of many people in Scotland. The right to life is a fundamental human right. I certainly cannot regard the decision of a state to extinguish the life of an individual, after conviction for a serious crime, as a punishment that fits the crime, whatever the crime. The Scottish Government strongly opposes the death penalty in all circumstances and urges all states worldwide that practise capital punishment to establish a moratorium on executions, with a view to the abolition of the practice, which has no place in modern times. As John Finnie and Drew Smith said, Amnesty International has been at the forefront of campaigning for the abolition of the death penalty worldwide and has described it as the “ultimate violation of human rights”. On 24 May, Amnesty published its 2012 report, which noted that, in 21 of the world’s 198 countries, executions, some public, are carried out and that nearly 20,000 people were under sentence of death at the end of 2011. Substantial progress has been made in eradicating the death penalty worldwide, but there is still much to do. I welcome and commend the work of Amnesty and others in seeking to eradicate capital punishment worldwide. I am pleased that, despite the recent developments in India, the direction of travel internationally is very much away from capital punishment, and I hope that that will continue. I should take the opportunity to recognise the strong stance that the UK Government has taken on the issue. It has developed a specific strategy of continuing to push towards abolition internationally and has in recent years played an active part in helping to secure successful outcomes in relation to the resolution of the General Assembly of the United Nations on a moratorium on the use of the death penalty. The UK Government will work with others to secure record support for the resolution in autumn 2012. An independent Scotland would be the 48th signatory to the European convention on human rights, protocol 13 to which states: “The death penalty shall be abolished. No one shall be condemned to such penalty or executed.” As a result, the European continent has almost completely moved away from capital punishment, except for Belarus, which I hope will one day join the fold. Scotland will continue to lead the way as a beacon of progressive opinion on these matters, as we actively demonstrate to the wider world the importance of, and the benefits inherent in, protecting and realising the human rights of all in society. The Scottish Government is committed to creating a modern and inclusive Scotland that respects and realises human rights. Within the current constitutional settlement, Scotland frequently takes a distinctive progressive approach to issues—one that is geared towards reducing inequalities in our society and realising the rights, whether civil, political, economic, social or cultural, of all the people of Scotland. Internationally, the First Minister and Mr Stevenson have been at the forefront of championing climate justice. Scotland benefits from having its own statutorily independent and internationally respected national human rights institution, the Scottish Human Rights Commission, which currently chairs the European group of national human rights institutions. Of course, we can do much more by acting as a progressive beacon internationally and showing that having a commitment to human rights is not just the right thing to do, but something that delivers real benefit to society. As I have said, it is not only the Scottish Government that opposes the death penalty. My officials are in regular contact with the UK Government on a range of issues that are pertinent to international affairs. I understand that the relevant UK minister at the FCO, Jeremy Browne, wrote to the Indian high commissioner in London last November to set out the UK Government’s strong opposition to the death penalty and to urge the Indian Government to commute such sentences to life imprisonment. Mr Browne also raised the issue with the Indian Foreign Minister when they met on 28 June 2011 and with the Indian Minister of State for External Affairs at a meeting on 5 July 2011. The Scottish Government has received correspondence from a number of members of the Sikh community on the issue, in response to which the points that I have just made have been reiterated. I have noted the concerns of the Sikh community and others about the death sentence that was imposed on Mr Balwant Singh Rajoana, but I should explain that, as the case was heard in an Indian court, which is outwith Scottish jurisdiction, it would be inappropriate for the Scottish Government to comment on the details of the case, apart from the death sentence that was imposed. As Patricia Ferguson and others said, we should recognise India’s status as an independent sovereign state. John Mason asked about engagement. As members will be aware, the Scottish Government has a plan for engagement with India, and ministers have visited India on a number of occasions. In addition, we have welcomed a number of Indian ministers and delegations, and we want to build on what is a warm, important and highly valued relationship. However, we are mindful of our responsibility to raise human rights issues with countries at the appropriate opportunity. As John Mason, Humza Yousaf and others have said, we must acknowledge the UK’s role and recent history in doing so, but I assure members that although foreign affairs is currently reserved to the UK Government, human rights know no boundaries and Scottish Government ministers are committed to promoting respect for human rights internationally. This has been a valuable and important debate that has a wide international reach. It is important that the Scottish Parliament puts on record our views on this extremely important issue and that we do as Sandra White requested. Meeting closed at 17:47.

The Scottish Government recognises that local authorities are crucial partners in the delivery of arts and cultural activity across Scotland. We continue to work closely with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Voice of Chief Officers of Cultural and Leisure Services in Scotland, which is Scotland’s national association for local authority culture and leisure managers, to support the sector and improve and maintain cultural service provision. Examples of how the Scottish Government, its agencies and national bodies are doing that can be found across the wealth of activity that is taking place in the year of creative Scotland, Creative Scotland’s place partnerships, the cultural programme for London 2012, and the range of activities across Scotland’s local authority areas that are being undertaken by the national performing companies.

On the national budget for culture, we have managed to protect front-line services very well. The share of the local authority percentage of Scotland’s budget has been maintained, of course, and it is up to individual local authorities to make their decisions. I am pleased with the response of local authorities in difficult times in recognising the value of culture and the economic drivers of cultural tourism. Drew Smith’s perspective might be coloured by Glasgow—I do not know whether it is—but across the country, there are good and strong stories to tell. If he knows otherwise, I am more than happy to hear from him.

The recent announcements clearly show two things: nobody has had their funding cut and there is continuity, as the vast majority of the organisations will secure funding. It is responsible of Creative Scotland to review all the flexibly funded organisations. A range of organisations can achieve certainty about the quality of production, including those that Alison Johnstone cited. However, it must be remembered that the system that Creative Scotland inherited originally involved competitive bidding. Certainty—particularly in times in which more lottery resources are available from Creative Scotland—is a good news story for cultural organisations. Creative Scotland is able to talk to individual organisations; it must speak to them if they have uncertainties, and I encourage it to do so.

The primary responsibility for the delivery of cultural services and activity in Aberdeen lies with the council. However, we support cultural initiatives in the city through the work of our agencies and our national sponsored bodies. For example, Creative Scotland has a formal place partnership agreement with the council and is supporting activity that is taking place as part of the year of creative Scotland, and as part of London 2012.

I agree with the member’s first point. It is great that Aberdeen has the ambition to become the 2017 city of culture. Secondly, we have always made it clear that it is up to Aberdeen City Council to decide whether it uses TIF. Obviously, the plans include the extension and improvement of the city art gallery. If the council decides not to proceed with the TIF project, it is up to it to make that decision, but in that case it will have to determine, if it wishes to proceed with the plans—including the extension and improvement of the city art gallery—how it will finance the project. That is a very serious question.

The general responsibility for record keeping lies with individual museums. The National Museums of Scotland and accredited local museums keep a record of all loans and disposals relating to their collections and they adhere to set guidelines and policies that govern those matters. The Scottish Government does not keep a central inventory. Scottish ministers recognise the importance of preserving the curatorial independence of our museums and cultural bodies. That principle has, for example, been respected in the recently passed National Library of Scotland Bill.

I made it clear that it is up to individual museums to keep lists of what they sell and what they acquire for their collections. It is clear from his disappointment that John Finnie would like us to be able to identify all artefacts around the world that have been sourced from Scotland, and to repatriate them if we so choose. A consequence of that would be that people may want likewise to repatriate many artefacts that are in Scottish museums. The return of the ghost shirt from Glasgow is a good example of that. That balance has to be struck. A variety of negotiations already take place. As I said, our museums keep the inventories; it is not a central responsibility. Curatorial responsibility for individual artefacts—which is what John Finnie is asking about—is not the responsibility of the Scottish Government. Perhaps he wants to change the legislation to ensure that we would have ministerial direction over individual artefacts. If he had listened to the debate last week, he would have heard that there was a lot of disagreement about ministerial direction over curatorial matters.

Through Historic Scotland, the Scottish ministers work to protect and enhance our country’s historic environment. That is carried out through a wide range of legislation, policy and guidance. Since 2007-08, Scottish ministers have, for example, given grants for repairs totalling £445,000 to the Glasgow School of Art. Buildings by important architects, such as Charles Rennie Mackintosh, can be recognised by Historic Scotland through the listing process. When change is proposed, the planning system ensures that the desirability of protecting the particular character of a building is a key part of the wider consideration of an application.

None of the buildings is being left to crumble. Many of them are in trust ownership, and the responsibility for producing plans for improvements lies with owners. The national bodies’ responsiveness in relation to funding for Rennie Mackintosh buildings has been exemplary. I absolutely acknowledge the heritage. I am not sure whether 144th anniversaries are always recognised but, in relation to the 150th anniversary, the member makes a good point about the opportunities to celebrate the heritage. In difficult times, I have managed to maintain the grants that are available from Historic Scotland, precisely to protect our built heritage. However, property owners must come forward with proposals. Because of their quality, Charles Rennie Mackintosh buildings would certainly meet the merit criterion for historic building repair grants. I stress again that it is up to owners to make proposals.

Yes. Funding for the Lighthouse is one example; I gave another example, which was investment in Glasgow School of Art. In the period up to 2007, funding was provided, but since 2007 almost £250,000 has been spent on Rennie Mackintosh architecture. That must be recognised.

The Scottish Government welcomes the Carnegie UK Trust’s report as a useful contribution to the debate about public library services in the 21st century. The report asks important questions about the future of public library services, on issues such as their relationship with individual and community wellbeing and the future role of library buildings as community assets. The trust’s offer of facilitating further debate is helpful and I hope that it will be welcomed by local authorities, which are the statutory providers of library services.

There are a great many examples of how such facilities can be used for the community’s betterment. Bathgate library in my constituency is part of a wider partnership centre, and South Lanarkshire Council has funded a number of library buildings. Margaret McCulloch is right to identify the potential and opportunity to create facilities that can help many people in many ways. Libraries are not just about books, as in the past, but are about services for the future.

Yes. That figure is important and shows the strength of feeling—it is strong relative to the rest of the United Kingdom—among the public for their libraries. If we can marry that to the potential for a modern dynamic in terms of how libraries are used, the future of libraries could be strong.

The programme for 2017 is still in the very early stages of development. However, I can confirm that EventScotland is working with partners to develop a proposal for Scotland to host the opening stages of the 2017 tour de France.

As I said, we are in the early stages of discussion. The benefits that Jim Hume talked about are enormous; potential certainly exists. It has not been determined that any area will not be part of the tour de France, and I am sure that the Borders, with its wonderful scenery, is an ideal candidate. The decision is not my responsibility, but I will ensure that the people whose responsibility it is understand the strong arguments that the member has put forward.

I echo the Presiding Officer’s remark. I congratulate Aung San Suu Kyi on her recent electoral success and welcome the steps that Burma is taking towards democracy. I have written to Aung San Suu Kyi, to invite her to visit Scotland during her forthcoming visit to the United Kingdom. I understand that City of Edinburgh Council and Glasgow City Council have issued formal invitations to her to accept their freedom of the city awards.

I know that there is a long way to go and I recognise Sarah Boyack’s support for the Burma Educational Scholarship Trust. Aung San Suu Kyi has accepted an invitation to the United Kingdom and we are promoting a visit to Scotland, along with the cities that want to celebrate the freedom of the city awards that they have given her, as well as all those who campaigned to help to support democracy in Burma.

The Scottish Government’s Edinburgh festivals expo fund continues to support a diverse range of quality artistic projects that feature at the festivals. Highlights of this year’s superb programme include a series of major public art commissions in the new town, a world dance festival, a world jazz orchestra, and a world writers conference. The expo fund has supported successful projects at the recent science and Imaginate festivals, and just last week I launched the made in Scotland programme, which is also funded as part of the expo fund.

The young talents programme is a good example of how we support young artists in developing their careers. It involves bespoke meetings with film makers, events and screenings. The feedback from last year demonstrated its success and I wish the people who are involved in this year’s programme well.

I absolutely will do. The point is well made. As we heard earlier, the reductions in the Government’s capital budget make things challenging. However, as programmes are worked up, I know that a number of people will be interested in taking forward such a project, and I will pay keen attention to proposals.

With partners, we are progressing plans for this year’s winter festivals programme, which brings together our most important cultural celebrations. The programme is kicked off with St Andrew’s Day celebrations and will bring together people from all over the world to celebrate our modern culture and our traditions. Details of all the celebrations will be provided in the autumn.

Local authorities are absolutely key in promoting St Andrew’s day. Angus Council, Dumfries and Galloway Council, Renfrewshire Council and the Scottish Borders Council organised a holiday on or around St Andrew’s day last year. As the new councils take shape and new councillors take office, we hope that more local authorities will take the opportunity to mark our national day.

At stage 2, I lodged an amendment that added new subsection (1A) to section 3, to recognise that the National Library of Scotland may receive acquisitions by virtue of legislation other than the bill. For example, as one of six legal deposit libraries in the United Kingdom and Ireland, the National Library receives 90 per cent of its acquisitions through the system that was established under the Legal Deposit Libraries Act 2003. The 2003 act is not directly referred to in the bill as a means through which the National Library can acquire items, so the amendment captured all relevant legislation under which the library can acquire items. Amendments 1 and 2 are purely technical and will extend section 3(1A) so that it applies to deposits as well as to acquisitions. Therefore the same principle is applied: the National Library can accept deposits by virtue of legislation or rules of law other than the bill. The approach in amendments 1 and 2 is consistent with the drafting approach that is taken throughout the bill. Rather than provide a list of all relevant legislation that applies to the National Library, the amendments provide flexibility to accommodate future legislative developments, as was the case with the amendment at stage 2. I move amendment 1. Amendment 1 agreed to. Amendment 2 moved—[Fiona Hyslop]—and agreed to. Section 5—Legal publications

Amendment 3 is a technical amendment that is concerned with dispute resolution between the National Library and the Faculty of Advocates. It might be helpful to members if I put the amendment in context. On 22 December 2011, the national librarian and the dean of the Faculty of Advocates signed two memoranda of agreement to reinforce their operational relationship. The first memorandum contains guidelines on how both bodies will work together to manage and maintain access to their respective collections. The second memorandum deals with the ownership of items that are currently held by the National Library which are the property of the faculty. It also sets out the dispute mechanism for any ownership claims and requires that both parties draw up deposit arrangements for current and future items owned by the faculty but in the possession of the National Library. Amendment 3 extends the application of the dispute resolution provision that is set out in section 5(5) to cover section 6. As it stands, section 5(5) deals with the handling of disputes about what constitutes a legal publication for the purposes of section 5, which deals with legal publications that are made available between the National Library and the faculty. The amendment ensures that disputes about what constitutes a legal publication for the purposes of section 6, which is on the joint arrangements, are handled in the same way. I expect any disputes between the National Library and the faculty to be resolved amicably, in line with their close and long-standing working arrangements. That is why any disputes are to be resolved by agreement by both parties in the first instance and, failing that, by arbitration. Those arrangements are acceptable to the National Library of Scotland and the faculty and are in line with the dispute resolution in the memoranda of agreement between both bodies. I move amendment 3. Amendment 3 agreed to. Section 8—Directions and guidance

Amendments the same as amendments 4 and 5 were lodged by Liam McArthur at stage 2, when they were defeated by seven votes to two. I point out that we have reached stage 3 and that stage 3 consideration should be about the specifics, rather than the wider agenda of ministerial direction, which Liam McArthur and Liz Smith have raised. Between 1999 and 2007, the passage of four out of the eight acts that included a ministerial power of direction was led by Lib Dem ministers. Of those four, the one that Liam McArthur will be most familiar with is the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 2005, which contains a power of direction in relation to the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. Its passage was led by Jim Wallace, who was ably supported by his then special adviser, one Liam McArthur. We are making law, so let us home in on the specific area that we are talking about. The debate about the power of direction is all about balance and accountability. As the convener pointed out during stage 2, a power of direction is a standard feature of modern public bodies. Of the 20 bodies in Scotland that have been established as statutory bodies since 1990, a power of direction is associated with 17 of them. Eighty-six per cent of the National Library’s funding comes from Scottish Government grant, and it is correct that the National Library is accountable to taxpayers for how that money is used. At the same time, it is equally right that ministers should respect the National Library’s curatorial responsibility and freedom to look after the collections on behalf of the people of Scotland. Section 8 of the bill provides that balance. I want to take some time to explain the approach that we have taken in drafting the power of direction. To address Liz Smith’s point, section 8 is deliberately drafted in such a way as to put beyond doubt those areas in which Scottish ministers cannot direct the National Library rather than to prescribe those areas in which the Scottish Government can exert an influence. Quite rightly, I cannot direct the National Library in relation to access or how it exhibits or interprets the collections. I cannot direct the National Library on how it encourages education and research or how it contributes to an understanding of our national culture. I cannot direct on acquisitions, deposits, disposals, borrowing or lending. Those are all matters of curatorial judgment for the National Library. Furthermore, I cannot direct on matters relating to legal publications or the joint arrangements between the National Library and the Faculty of Advocates, nor can I direct on grants and loans. That approach of setting out clearly the areas in which ministerial powers of direction do not apply deliberately and explicitly supports and, indeed, underpins the arm’s-length principle that applies to the relationship between Scottish ministers and our publicly funded bodies. The committee’s stage 1 report appreciated that the power of direction as drafted preserves the independence of the National Library. Furthermore the National Library recognises the limits of the power of direction. Indeed, the national librarian, Martyn Wade, stated during a stage 1 evidence-taking session that when he and the board considered the provision, they found that “ministers are able to direct only in a very small number of areas”.—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 7 February 2012; c 707.] The limited power of direction is very much a measure of last resort and would be applied only if all other requirements or financial controls had been exhausted. Members could ask why, if a power of direction is not intended for use, it should be included at all. I am ultimately accountable to the Scottish Parliament for the services that the National Library provides. I say to Liam McArthur that it is impossible to predict what might happen in the future, which is why I have chosen the ability to direct in relation to particular functions of the National Library. Liam McArthur’s amendments would remove the Government’s ability to direct the National Library in relation to two of its functions: promoting collaboration and the sharing of good practice. With regard to amendment 4, I emphasise that section 2(2)(d) concerns the promotion of collaboration and the sharing of good practice. It is important to emphasise that distinction. That function does not mean that the National Library could be directed to enforce collaboration or the sharing of good practice by others. I want to make it clear why I believe that Scottish ministers should have a power of direction in relation to section 2(2)(d). The National Library and other libraries operate in a rapidly changing technological age and I want the bill to be sufficiently future proofed to enable it to cope with associated demands and uncertainties. Members have appreciated that at all stages of the bill. The National Library will have a duty to promote collaboration and the sharing of good practice, which thus supports public sector performance, efficiencies and shared services—that is part of the accountability to the Parliament and to the taxpayers. That is relevant with regard to, for example, current digitisation work. I am sure that we all agree that services in that area should be shared wherever practical in order to avoid duplication and unnecessary additional costs. Our public bodies should be working together on that wherever possible. I cannot believe that the Conservatives would be happy to let the efficiency agenda slip on this issue. Overall, the ability of ministers to direct in respect of promoting collaboration and good practice is in the interests of the public purse and public efficiency. With regard to amendment 5, it is important that Scottish ministers have the ability to direct in relation to section 2(3)(c). The Government is committed to the equalities and diversity agenda. I believe that the question of the National Library promoting the diversity of people accessing its collection is a matter of public policy interest rather than purely a matter for the library’s curatorial independence. By voting for Liam McArthur’s amendment, members would be voting against Government’s ability to ensure that linguistic, geographic and socioeconomic diversity is represented. I cannot believe that the Labour Party is seriously thinking of voting against diversity by supporting amendment 5. A power of direction in respect of the promotion of diversity is consistent with the founding legislation for Creative Scotland and was accepted by the committee at stage 2—indeed, Liam McArthur did not move an amendment on the issue at that point. For those reasons, I cannot support the amendments. I ask Liam McArthur to withdraw amendment 4 and not to move amendment 5.

The bill, if passed by Parliament, will prevent by statutory force any interference in curatorial responsibilities. There is no risk whatever of that happening, and Mr McArthur’s remarks belie the fact that his argument is really not strong enough.

Amendments 6 to 8 are about the transition from the old board of the National Library to the new one. Should the Parliament agree to pass the bill, I propose to commence it as a whole in the early part of 2013, by which time we hope to have completed the process of advertising, interviewing, selecting and appointing members of the reconstituted board. Professor Anderson, the current chair of the board of trustees, has indicated that he wishes to stand down after serving as chair of the National Library for 12 years. The transitory provision in amendment 8 would modify the National Library of Scotland Act 1925, as a short-term measure until that act is repealed, to allow the new chair to hold office before full commencement of the bill. That will allow Professor Anderson to stand down after chairing his final meeting in October 2012. The new chair will then be appointed under the 1925 act to chair his or her first board meeting in December 2012, before the appointment of the reconstituted board under the bill, which will meet for the first time in the early part of 2013. It is essential that the new chair is in post in good time to take part in the selection of the new board and to benefit from a handover by Professor Anderson. My officials hope to advertise the post later this month, with a view to an appointment being made by October. Amendment 6, which supports amendment 8, brings the transitory provision into force automatically two months after royal assent. It has the advantage of automatically commencing the transitory provision that will be introduced by amendment 8 and avoids the requirement for an initial commencement order for the appointment of the new chair. Amendment 6 also respects the convention that acts of the Scottish Parliament are not brought into force until two months after royal assent. Amendment 7 provides that the existing trustees of the National Library of Scotland cease to hold office when the bill comes into force. As members will be aware, I want to maintain business continuity for the National Library. The point about the need for that was well made by members of the Education and Culture Committee at stages 1 and 2. That is why I have proposed that a small number of existing trustees will form part of the reconstituted board. That will be achieved through the appointment of those members under paragraph 2(1)(b) of schedule 1 immediately after their appointment under the 1925 act ceases. We seek to encourage applicants who have a wide range of skills and who can assist with the strategic development that continues to take the library forward. New members should have an enthusiasm for libraries and their contribution to Scotland’s national culture in this increasingly digital age. The board will also require specialised knowledge and skills, including knowledge of the world of education and research; an understanding of public library services in local areas; and general skills in governance, audit, financial management, fundraising and income generation. The recruitment process for board members will begin once the new chair is in place. It is anticipated that appointments will be made in the early part of 2013. I take this opportunity to thank the current chair, Michael Anderson, for his commitment to the National Library during his 12 years as chair. His legacy will undoubtedly be the promotion of access to the collections. Record numbers of people now benefit from the new visitor centre, the increased size of the reading rooms and the availability of online material. Under his stewardship, the National Library secured for the nation the permanent acquisition of more than 200 years of publishing history from the John Murray Publishers archive. I also thank the trustees of the National Library for their sterling work and for their support for the governance reforms that are proposed in the bill. The trustees have helped to ensure that the National Library of Scotland responds to the changing requirements of libraries in the modern age. The board has embraced the advancement of new technology to make the collections more readily available online, not only for those in Scotland, but for the enjoyment of a worldwide audience. I move amendment 6. Amendment 6 agreed to. Schedule 1—NLS Amendment 7 moved—[Fiona Hyslop]—and agreed to. Schedule 2—Modifications of Enactments Amendment 8 moved—[Fiona Hyslop]—and agreed to.

I thank members of the Education and Culture Committee for their scrutiny of the National Library of Scotland Bill. Throughout the process, members have provided constructive comments on the bill. I thank the convener, the clerks to the committee and, of course, the Scottish Government’s ever-responsive bill team for all their hard work. I also recognise the input of the external stakeholders who have informed our thinking and have helped us to shape the bill. My particular thanks must go to the National Library of Scotland for its support and for helping my officials and me to understand more fully the true nature of its work and what it hopes to achieve as a result of the reforms. I also value the contributions of all those who took the time to share their views and knowledge during the consultation period, including the Faculty of Advocates, to whom I will return later in my speech, and the Scottish Library and Information Council. I have listened to a variety of views and believe that the bill that we have in front of us is the product of those reflections. I am confident that all those who have worked on the bill will agree when I say that collaboration across party lines, and with stakeholders, has been central to the successful development of the bill and the general consensus on it, despite the previous debate. Throughout the bill process there has been strong agreement across the Parliament that the current National Library of Scotland Act 1925, which governs the National Library of Scotland, is out of date and out of step with its vision, both now and for the future. The bill will therefore support the development of the National Library by modernising the governance arrangements for the 21st century. What will that mean in practice for the National Library and its users? First, the entire board of the library will be made up, for the first time, from those who have chosen to be appointed. Board membership will no longer be determined by the office that someone holds. Indefinite terms of appointment will also come to an end. Instead, the National Library will benefit from recruiting members with the skills and experience expressly required by an ambitious organisation. There will be a regular refresh of board membership and an opportunity to review the skill set required each time appointments are made. The National Library and the general public will benefit from the clear functions that are set out for the first time in the library’s history. The National Library will have a specific objective of ensuring that the collections are accessible to the public. One of the ways in which the National Library will continue to make its collections accessible to all is through its exhibition programme. The bill will safeguard the collections by placing a statutory duty on the National Library to maintain and develop the collections for generations to come. It also recognises that the National Library has a duty to ensure that researchers, students and learners continue to have access to the collections. The National Library’s collections will need to be relevant to enable the research community to continue to produce high-quality work to maintain Scotland’s place on the academic map. To support the National Library’s function of conserving and preserving its collections in a physical sense, I announced earlier this week that the Scottish Government has committed more than £2 million towards the transformation of the library’s Causewayside building in Edinburgh. That will secure the conservation of the collections for years to come by rectifying long-term problems with the external fabric of the building. An additional advantage is that the transformation project will significantly reduce energy consumption. I should at this point mention the library’s strong record in carbon management. As one of 47 Scottish organisations selected in 2009 to take part in an ambitious programme with the Carbon Trust to realise vast carbon and cost savings, the library committed itself to a target of reducing CO2 by 30 per cent by 2014-15. The library’s carbon management plan involves potential financial savings of around £620,000 over the course of the project and £160,000 annual recurring savings thereafter. Aiming for a 5 per cent CO2 reduction in 2010, the NLS exceeded that first target as it achieved 15 per cent reductions through the involvement and creativity of staff, contractors and unions. Progress has been maintained, and a cumulative 28 per cent reduction in CO2 was achieved by the end of 2011-12. Thanks to investment in new plant, with support from the Scottish Government, the library is likely to exceed its CO2 reduction target. I turn to the content of the National Library’s collections. One of the library’s great strengths is the John Murray Publishers archive, to which I referred earlier. The library recently received the final set of papers to complete the archive, which will be permanently housed in the library. The archive provides a remarkable insight into British life over three centuries. The final items that were received include unpublished material from Sir Arthur Conan Doyle and “The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes: The Field Bazaar”, which appeared in an unnamed charity magazine in 1896 and has never been published since. During the bill’s parliamentary passage, members have heard about the National Library’s involvement in great advances in digitisation and the use of modern technology. That is why the bill was drafted with future developments in mind. The bill is as flexible and future proofed as possible, to allow the National Library to respond to technological advances. The bill has given the Parliament and the National Library the opportunity to raise awareness of how the library already champions cutting-edge technology to enable greater access to its collections, not only for those of us who are in Scotland but for the world, through the wide and ever-expanding availability of items that are displayed online. A particularly imaginative use of new technology is the travel application called “Great Escapes: Moray”, which the library helped to develop earlier this year. The library collaborated on that with schools in Elgin and Lossiemouth, with community volunteers and with local authority libraries, and it had the assistance of a hotel chain. The app highlights 20 points of interest in Moray that have natural, industrial and cultural heritage. The library provided a range of archive films, images, maps and documents that the young people in Moray helped to bring to life through developing the app. I will reflect briefly on the amendments to the bill, including those that we discussed a few moments ago. The bill and the National Library will be strengthened by the amendment to increase the minimum number of board members from six to eight, as was argued for at stage 1, and by the transitional arrangements that will be put in place for a new chair. The procedure for implementing the bill will allow a core group of current board members to be carried forward into the reconstituted board—members across the parties made a point about that at stage 1. The bill process has allowed us to think through and strengthen the mechanisms for giving the library continuity in the transition to its new modernised governance arrangements. I do not want to prolong the debate that we had about the ministerial power of direction in relation to Liam McArthur’s amendments, but I repeat my general view that the debate has been useful. In the end, we have struck the right balance between the library’s curatorial independence, in which I passionately believe, and its accountability as a heavily subsidised public body. I will touch on the amendments that were made in response to suggestions from the Faculty of Advocates. The relationship between the National Library and the faculty was discussed briefly this afternoon and more extensively in committee. That relationship is historical and continuing and it prospers to this day, so recognising it appropriately in the bill was important. The amendments to sections 5 and 6 replicate and modernise requirements on both parties that were set out when the relationship was first enshrined in the National Library of Scotland Act 1925 in relation to the organisation of and access to the collections. The bill as amended will ensure that there is no misunderstanding about what is meant by the faculty’s collections, which are the books that are contained in the faculty’s law library. The joint arrangements that section 6 provides allow the faculty and the National Library to agree the practicalities of their operational relationship in particular areas. That approach is consistent with the memoranda of understanding that both parties signed in December 2011. It is right that the bill should set the overall principles for an effective continuing relationship between the faculty and the National Library. I make it clear that I am not imposing inflexible statutory requirements on either body. It is for the faculty and the National Library to agree and update arrangements as technology and library users’ requirements evolve. I am grateful to the National Library and the faculty for their careful consideration of those aspects of the bill and I confirm that they are content with the amended bill. We have an opportunity today to pass legislation that will modernise the National Library’s governance and functions. Together, we have crafted a well considered bill that meets the library’s needs and meets what Scotland expects of its National Library today and in the future. I invite the Parliament to agree to pass the National Library of Scotland Bill. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the National Library of Scotland Bill be passed.

I welcome the tone of the debate and the genuine respect that members across the chamber have expressed for the work of the National Library of Scotland. In relation to Annabel Goldie’s legal point, section 1(1) modernises and updates the legal name of the governing body. The members of the NLS board can continue to call themselves trustees if they so wish. The debates on the bill have focused on the National Library’s role as a national centre of research and as a preserver and curator of one of Scotland’s major national collections. That role is distinct from the particular functions of public lending libraries that local authorities fulfil but, as Patricia Ferguson said, the bill gives the National Library a new function of actively promoting collaboration and the sharing of good practice between such services. I appreciate the comments that members such as Neil Findlay have made on the importance of local authority public library services and the challenges that they face. However, the situation in Scotland is quite different from that in England—in Scotland, there have been fewer than a handful of closures over the past two years. The recently published Carnegie Trust report on public library services, which Clare Adamson mentioned, raises questions that are being considered by local authorities across Scotland, as the statutory providers of library services, and by library professionals. It is appropriate to acknowledge that the City of Edinburgh Council’s library and information service won the library of the year accolade at Monday’s bookseller industry awards in London. I remain committed to continuing to help to facilitate library improvements by maintaining the provision of annual funding of £0.5 million through the Scottish Library and Information Council. At earlier points in the bill’s progress, members have raised points about the regime for electronic legal deposit. I agree that, nearly 10 years after the passing of the enabling legislation in Westminster, progress with finalising the regulations must continue as speedily as possible. Draft regulations were published by the UK Government in February this year, and public consultation on them is due to close at the end of this week. I understand that further work still needs to be done to find the right balance between the need, in our highly digital age, to preserve the national record and the legitimate rights of publishers, particularly as regards microbusinesses. I hope that those issues can be resolved productively and speedily, as all members will be anxious to ensure that the regulations are in place to enable Scotland to preserve a record of significant events such as the Commonwealth games. Members have commented this afternoon on the technological advances in libraries and collections that have occurred or are still to come. It is interesting to reflect that, even 10 years ago, the concept of the National Library taking on a film archive would have been novel. However, the National Library now keeps the Scottish screen archive and, as I announced at stage 1, plans to move it into the redeveloped Kelvin hall in Glasgow, a proposal that the Scottish Government has supported with a £250,000 grant. Looking ahead to the future unknowns is, of course, more difficult. One seemingly unlikely clue may be found in the recent announcement that the late Freddie Mercury is due to make a return to stage as a hologram in a special 10th anniversary performance of Queen’s popular hit show, “We Will Rock You”. Who knows—data storage by hologram may be one of the future formats that any comprehensive collection such as our National Library will need to adapt to in the coming years.

When I met other culture ministers in Brussels last week, I heard some fascinating insights from Professor Nigel Shadbolt of the University of Southampton about the potential for collaboration between online communities through new web-based methods such as cloud computing, which in turn could revolutionise concepts of access to public data. Those sorts of future developments are the reason why we have been at pains to future proof the terms of the bill. With regard to forthcoming NLS projects, we can look forward to a major summer exhibition, “Going to the Pictures: Scotland at the Cinema”, which will open on 20 June. It looks at films that have been made in or about Scotland from the early days of cinema up to the present day and will be opened by the actor and filmmaker Richard Jobson. The exhibition tells the story of Scotland at the movies, from the romantic world of photogenic landscapes, brave heroes, and eccentric locals that can be seen in “Highlander”, “Braveheart”, “Rob Roy” and “Local Hero” to more recent depictions of urban life in the likes of “Trainspotting”, “Ae Fond Kiss” and “Hallam Foe”. US independence day will be celebrated at the National Library with the opening of a treasures display that will highlight the strong links between Scotland and the US founding fathers. The library is supporting the Borders book festival in June by sponsoring an event with Sir David Frost and is taking part in the Ullapool and Boswell book festivals. The library is working on a project that will allow smartphone users to call up historical maps, photographs and records of any location in Scotland, which is being developed in partnership with the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland and the National Records of Scotland. The library has also established a partnership with Wilbourn Associates, a leading firm of chartered environmental surveyors, to provide online access to historical maps of Scotland from Victorian times up to the 1950s. National libraries have been rather technocratically described as “specifically established to store a country’s database … to host the legal deposit and the bibliographic control centre of a nation”. However, like Clare Adamson, I prefer the National Library’s description of itself, which is that it exists “to advance universal access to knowledge about Scotland and in Scotland.” It is part of our nation’s collective memory. It is a resource for the people of Scotland to learn about themselves and to challenge their own ideas about Scotland. It is, equally, a window for the world to learn more about Scots and our country. By setting out simply what the National Library of Scotland should do and also who benefits from it and how, the bill addresses those prosaic and poetic descriptions of why we have a national library. The bill has been designed to stand the test of time. I am confident that it is sufficiently well crafted to enable it to cope with the technological advances that the National Library will continue to embrace. With the bill, we have the opportunity today to reform the National Library by setting out clear functions in legislation and to bring in a new modern board structure that will take this great institution forward in the years to come. We should reflect our thanks to the current chair and previous chairs for their stewardship of the institution, and to all the trustees who have guided the National Library of Scotland. With the purpose of looking forward, I ask members to endorse the National Library of Scotland Bill at decision time today.

I welcome the opportunity to debate and celebrate the significant achievements of the five national performing companies during the first five years of direct funding from the Scottish Government. I agree with the Scottish actor Willie Boyd, who said, “I think Scotland has some great stories.” The success of our national companies is a great story, and they are helping to tell the world the story of this confident, innovative and cultural Scotland in which we live. They help to shape our identity and hold an important place in the nation as leaders of our cultural life, showcasing the very best that we have to offer in the fields of dance, music, opera and theatre. This year sees not only the fifth anniversary of the direct funding relationship, but Scottish Opera’s 50th anniversary, which I very much look forward to celebrating with it in June. The move to direct funding was a result of the thinking generated by the Cultural Commission in June 2005 around the definition of what qualities a national company should have and the expectations that the people of Scotland should have of their national companies. Many of those have been incorporated into the criteria by which we determine national company status today, including excellence of output, reach throughout Scotland and international profile. With cross-party support from the Parliament, the then Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport, Patricia Ferguson, introduced a new structure that was unique to Scotland to take the companies forward. The move to direct funding saw an immediate increase of £2.64 million of investment by the Government to stabilise the companies, and funding for the companies now stands at £23.5 million annually in revenue grant. This Administration is proud to continue to support the companies in the face of deep cuts in public spending that have been imposed by the United Kingdom Government. We have managed to maintain revenue funding in 2012-13 for the five national performing companies at 2011-12 levels to ensure continued access to high-quality performances and services. In addition, we have maintained the national performing companies international touring fund. There has been no reduction in the £350,000 budget for this year, with a similar allocation outlined for the remainder of this spending review period. That will enable the companies to continue to showcase the high quality of Scotland’s contemporary culture internationally and to develop new international opportunities. I have already announced a capital funding allocation of £11 million to support the redevelopment of Glasgow’s Theatre Royal, which will support Scottish Opera, and of the Glasgow Royal Concert Hall, which will provide new rehearsal space for the Royal Scottish National Orchestra, in preparation for the Commonwealth games in 2014. Those two projects will support the construction industry to create employment in other sectors and will prepare Glasgow to upgrade its cultural estate. The motion draws attention to the latest report covering the companies’ activities during 2010-11. In the interests of transparency, I will continue to report annually on their activities. I will talk about key points in the report, to give a flavour of the companies’ many and varied achievements. In 2010-11, the companies gave more than 900 performances and delivered just under 4,000 education and community events. More than 450,000 people attended performances and more than 110,000 people participated in outreach and education programmes. All five companies are independent charities and are in good financial health. They operate a mixed economy and receive income from a variety of sources, including a revenue grant from the Scottish Government. The grant accounted for about 63 per cent of turnover during the first four years; the remaining 37 per cent was raised from performances, education work, merchandising and fundraising. In that context, I note the Labour Party’s amendment, which I am happy to support. I pay tribute to the many private supporters whose donations help the companies to deliver such a wide variety of projects. Support enables new partnerships to develop. There has been highly innovative media sponsorship. I attended a performance of an excellent production of “La Bohème”, which was supported by The Sun newspaper’s £9.50 ticket offer. Some 97 per cent of the audience that evening was new to a Scottish Opera performance, and the paper reported that it had had to close all its ticket lines, because the tickets had sold out in advance. The companies are creating opportunities for Scottish audiences to see work of an international standard and key Scottish artists. This year, Scottish Opera produced a new version of “The Rake’s Progress” with acclaimed director David McVicar. In 2010 the actor Alan Cumming starred in the National Theatre of Scotland’s Edinburgh festival production of “The Bacchae”. The wonderful violinist Nicola Benedetti has regularly performed with the RSNO and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra. The companies also encourage talented UK and international artists to work in Scotland. I enjoyed an outstanding night of ballet at Scottish Ballet’s thrilling production of “A Streetcar Named Desire”. That world premier was conceived by American director Nancy Meckler and Belgian-Colombian choreographer Annabelle Lopez Ochoa. Key to the funding relationship between the Government and the companies are the criteria that are used to manage the relationship and what the public can and should expect from our companies. I will talk about five areas in particular. First, it is vital that people throughout Scotland have the opportunity to see a variety of work by the companies. The five companies between them worked with all 32 local authorities in 2010-11. Activity spans a range of classical and contemporary performing arts, education and community work and takes place in a range of places. In March, the Royal Scottish National Orchestra spent a successful week working in the Shetland islands, producing 24 events, which were attended by approximately 15 per cent of the island’s inhabitants. Later in the year, Scottish Opera aims to tour to 50 Scottish venues, as part of its 50th anniversary celebrations. Secondly, audiences remain enthusiastic about the work of the companies. The Scottish Chamber Orchestra and the RSNO are reporting increasing audiences for their Scottish seasons. In the first five years, the total audience for the companies’ concerts and performances was in excess of 2.28 million. There are fluctuations year by year, as members would expect. The companies generate different programmes of work each year, and invitations to tour internationally or participate in festivals vary from year to year, which makes annual comparisons difficult. Thirdly, the role of education, learning and community involvement is central to the purpose of all the companies. Each company delivers a range of work, to complement performances or to explore new ways of encouraging participation or involvement in the arts. I was pleased that Scottish Ballet went to Linlithgow academy, in my constituency, to talk about “A Streetcar Named Desire” because fifth years are studying the play as part of their higher studies. In the first five years there have been more than 15,000 events and more than 500,000 participants. In 2011-12 there were more than 2,300 events and about 88,000 participants. The companies attract a range of audiences and participants to their projects. Early years projects, such as Scottish Opera’s innovative “BabyO” and “SensoryO”, and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra’s popular big ears, little ears concerts allow parents, babies and toddlers to attend performances together. On the other hand, Scottish Ballet’s regenerate project offers opportunities for adults aged 50 and above to enjoy dance. Scottish Ballet recently performed a new piece at the national museum of Scotland as part of the science festival. The fourth area is talent development. The companies understand the need to develop new talent, and they are running a number of successful schemes to ensure that new talented artists get opportunities to develop. That can be a challenge in the current climate. For example, Scottish Opera, working with the Royal Conservatoire of Scotland, employs a number of young talented singers, who are given a range of roles to allow them to develop their singing and performance skills. When I was Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, with ministerial guidance, provided additional resources to what is now the Royal Conservatoire to support a dance programme. An outcome of that has been the introduction of a bachelor of arts in modern ballet, by the Royal Conservatoire and Scottish Ballet, to train the next generation of dancers to the high levels that are required to pursue a professional career in dance. Of course, degree status also helps to support more teachers in dance for our schools. Finally, I turn to the companies’ international role. The Administration has placed a greater emphasis on bringing our cultural crown jewels to the attention of audiences across the world. The international touring fund supports international tours and events, and an emphasis is given to invitations from countries with which we wish to develop better economic and cultural ties. Today, I can announce that, with support from the Scottish Government’s international touring fund, the Royal Scottish National Orchestra, with its new music director, Peter Oundjian, will perform six concerts in five venues across China in December and January. Overseas tours by the companies showcase Scotland’s creative talent on a world stage and further enhance our global reputation. They also strengthen cultural and diplomatic links with countries, such as China, that are identified as priorities in our framework for international engagement. Indeed, when I was in Chicago recently for Scotland week, I was struck by the fantastic relationship that the National Theatre of Scotland has established with the Chicago Shakespeare Theater. Some of the links are very well embedded—they provide a great opportunity for showcasing work in Chicago in particular. The companies have visited a wide range of countries in the past five years. It is, of course, difficult not to mention the impact of “Black Watch” in raising Scotland’s cultural profile. All the companies are being encouraged to work with other Scottish Government agencies. Recently, both the National Theatre of Scotland and the Scottish Chamber Orchestra have supported events in Chicago, which I mentioned, and Bilbao. Of course, not all the work requires our financial support, as the continuing success of “Black Watch” confirms. I am very hopeful for Scottish Ballet’s “A Streetcar Named Desire”, in which there is already a lot of international interest. However, the fund allows more projects across the arts to be seen and underlines the strength of Scotland’s cultural offerings. The exchange of ideas and introductions across borders is also important. This year, the National Theatre of Scotland is again running its exchange festival, which brings together young people in Scotland with their compatriots from abroad to create theatre. The Uncommon Charter High School from Brooklyn is one of this year’s international guests. I visited it during Scotland week in New York and joined in their extreme ceilidh, and I look forward to welcoming them to Scotland in July. They will mix with young people from Aberdeen at an event in Stirling, which will really bring people together. The enthusiasm of the young people from Brooklyn was fantastic. They are keen to learn more about Scotland and will be able to showcase that work when they return to New York. Those types of connection might not be obvious, in terms of international work, but they are important and show not only how serious we are about developing new talent, but also how the language of culture can reach across borders. I want to put on record my appreciation of some of the new developments that are taking place, and my recognition of some of the senior level changes across both the RSNO, whose music director is moving on and whose chief executive has moved on, and Scottish Ballet, whose artistic director is leaving after 10 influential years. I pay tribute to Stéphane Denève, Simon Woods and Ashley Page for their major contributions to cultural life in Scotland. In turn, I offer a warm welcome to Peter Oundjian, the new music director at the RSNO; Christopher Hampson, the new artistic director at Scottish Ballet; and Michael Elliott, the new chief executive at RSNO. The death of the great conductor Sir Charles Mackerras was a great loss to the Scottish Chamber Orchestra and its audiences, but I know that, with the prodigiously talented principal conductor Robin Ticciati at the helm, the orchestra will carry on from strength to strength. As we mark five years, it is clear that the companies have made a significant and enduring contribution to the nation, and in them we have much of which to be proud. The quality and range of their work showcases the many talented people who live, learn and work in Scotland. The companies regularly visit every part of the country, and those visits continue to highlight the cultural excellence that springs from Scotland to the many audiences across the world. The Government will continue to work with the companies in that productive relationship, as we all accrue not only artistic but social and international benefits from their work. I look forward to hearing from members their reflections on the companies and the work that they have experienced as we celebrate a very successful five years. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the excellent work that Scotland’s world-class National Performing Companies continue to deliver; recognises that it is now five years since the start of a direct-funding relationship with the Scottish Government as set out in the recently published annual review of the companies; celebrates their ongoing commitment to delivering performances of quality and to distributing their work across Scotland; commends their innovative community and education projects, and recognises their importance in raising Scotland’s international cultural profile.

The member might be reflecting some coverage that the audience figures received when they were released. She might also be aware that the chief executive of the Scottish Chamber Orchestra highlighted the fact that international audiences in one year can distort what happens subsequently, and international audiences have grown over the past years. Patricia Ferguson is absolutely right that it is the responsibility of the boards to ensure the cultural health—in terms of audience figures, participation and quality of performance—as well as the financial health of their organisations.

Sandra White makes an important point. I refer her to a report that I think I brought to the Parliament’s attention when answering a question from Annabel Goldie recently. We have extremely strong evidence that participating in cultural activity—not only being an audience member, but taking part—has a massive influence on whether people attend or take part in cultural activities later. I am pleased that, in the debate, we are highlighting youth and children’s activities, but I think that we cannot overestimate the impact that such early involvement has on audience development, let alone participation in culture and the arts. I embrace the point that Sandra White makes. It will form an important part of our youth strategy on the arts in future.

I gently point out to Annabel Goldie that we have gone through the credit crunch and the recession. Interestingly, the arts and business figures for Scotland have increased despite the economic situation. The Labour amendment recognises the role of private investment and sponsorship. To keep and maintain that position is very strong in the context of challenging times for many investments because of the financial situation that everyone is facing.

The debate has been very helpful and it was interesting to hear about members’ experiences, views and opinions of the performing companies. I thank members for their many insightful contributions. I will try to address a number of the points that were made during the debate. Patricia Ferguson mentions local authorities in her amendment and she made an important point about incentivising and rewarding them, although she steered clear of the ring fencing argument. That is a real challenge, and I reassure the member that in recent months I have met local authority leisure, education and culture conveners to identify what can be done across the piece to help develop a network of good practice. The Government can also work with local authorities to ensure that we have a creative partnership, and to see what both sides can bring to the cultural field, nationally and locally. That approach might address some of the points made by Jenny Marra about access to transport, which is an issue that applies to sport and not just to culture. We have made progress in supporting travel costs in the heritage field. However, I repeat my point about participating in culture and not just attending as an audience. To ensure audience development in the future, singing or taking part in musical activity is probably of greater value than attendance. The piece of research that I referred to is important in relation to that. However, how we work with local authorities, and how we address the access issue if transport is one of the major issues—we know that it relates to, for example, the cost of fuel during these pressing times—were reasonable points to raise during the debate. Patricia Ferguson also made an important point about the national youth companies; indeed, a number of members talked about them. There is a good relationship between the national performing companies and the youth companies. Patricia Ferguson previously made the interesting proposal to Mike Russell that each of the youth companies should become a national performing company, although I do not think that that issue was raised today. I have asked Creative Scotland to produce a national youth arts strategy and I am expecting those proposals shortly. I have requested that the strategy address the role of the youth companies, which have been consulted as part of the process. I look forward to Creative Scotland’s proposals and to working with the Parliament to help to improve on what is already a vibrant arena for youth performance. I must address the points that were made about audiences. We should listen to Sandra White—it is about quality and not just quantity. In Patricia Ferguson’s latter speech, she talked about the value of intimacy in cultural performance, which can be lost if we are looking at sheer volume. I reassure Annabel Goldie that in the period of direct funding from 2007 to 2012, Scottish audiences for the Scottish Chamber Orchestra increased by 26 per cent. For Scottish Opera, audiences increased by 19 per cent in the same period. Joan McAlpine referred to subscription sales. Since 2005-06, the Royal Scottish National Orchestra has doubled its subscriptions in Glasgow and trebled them in Edinburgh. There is an important point there about the information that is provided in the report. That point, and other feedback, means that this has been a helpful debate for identifying what the Parliament needs in terms of report and interpretation. Some valuable points have been made about that. Malcolm Chisholm, whom I might refer to as the token male in a debate dominated by women, talked about local collections and performances and outreach work. He made an important point about the pertinence of the modern expression of theatre in terms of the National Theatre of Scotland’s “5 Minute Theatre”, which is part of the NTS’s fifth anniversary. I confess that I was part of the audience—the back of my head can be seen—for one of the performances in a railway carriage in Kinneil station in Bo’ness. It was not only a good celebration but a connection—how do we grow the writers and performers of the future and connect nationally? Claudia Beamish made an important point about the Òran Mór and NTS spring productions—it is about content and value, the human aspects of communication, and telling stories that cannot be told any other way. Claudia made an excellent contribution in that regard. She also touched on issues around training. I give the example of Scottish Opera, which is unique in that it provides traditional artisanal skills and creates jobs in which artists can learn and practise their trades to the highest professional standards. It has third-party clients in the Royal Opera House, Scottish Ballet and the National Theatre of Scotland. The creation of a network of skills—whether it is performance skills or technical skills—is essential for sustainable creative industries in future. We are well placed to grow in that respect. Annabel Goldie—sorry, I have done it as well—Annabelle Ewing referred to the Crieff and Comrie drama groups. I thought at one point that she was appealing for them to become national performing companies but her ambitions did not quite stretch that far.

I thank Annabelle Ewing for that important intervention. I will touch on geographical co-ordination because I have indeed asked the performing companies how they work together on the outreach work that they carry out for the performances that they put on across Scotland. In that respect, geographical co-ordination is important in ensuring that their performances reach audiences. Co-ordination of activity is also important for tourism. For example, the companies have put on performances in support of the St Magnus international festival in Orkney, but I reassure Annabel Goldie that I am discussing with not only our collections, but our national companies ways of maximising Scotland’s international presentation. In the recent debate on the year of creative Scotland and in questions that I have answered recently, I have stressed that very connection as an important means of promoting Scotland as a tourist destination. We have high expectations of our companies. They must continue to produce high-quality work that inspires audiences, enriches lives and fosters creativity; to provide leadership in these sectors; to encourage the development of new talent; and, as I have said, to represent Scotland internationally. I can also give the chamber an indication of the kind of support that we might expect the companies to provide for the Commonwealth games. In this Olympic and Paralympic year, Scottish Ballet’s youth collective will, as part of the Olympic torch relay, perform live on 8 June a new piece of choreography set to Scottish song in George Square with children from the Gaelic school choir. Scottish Ballet is also teaming up with the National Dance Company Wales and English National Ballet for the first time for a ground-breaking Olympic-inspired national celebration of dance called Dance GB. This triple bill of new commissions will open in Glasgow and then go to Cardiff and London. Meanwhile, the National Theatre of Scotland is going green and getting on its bike with a production called “The Last Polar Bears”, which will have a four-week tour of primary schools in Ayrshire, Dumfries and Galloway, the Borders and East Lothian. Finally, the Scottish Chamber Orchestra has started its extensive summer tour of Scottish communities with sell-out performances featuring Nicola Benedetti. Given all that—and the fact that the Royal National Scottish Orchestra will play at the St Magnus festival in Orkney just before this year’s Edinburgh international festival opens—the Parliament should certainly be reassured of the reach and range of our companies across Scotland. As for the companies’ international profile, Alan Cumming will star in the NTS’s new version of “Macbeth”; “Black Watch” will be back in the US, with performances in Washington, Chicago, Seattle and San Francisco; the Scottish Chamber Orchestra will visit Vienna and Rotterdam; the RSNO will play six concerts in China; and Scottish Opera will visit the city of Tianjin. I think that we can be proud of the reach of our national companies not only across Scotland, but internationally. Indeed, they are also taking part in and promoting the year of creative Scotland and, looking forward to the year of homecoming and the Commonwealth games in 2014, I think that we are very well placed to maximise their participation. I have already mentioned the investment that has been made in the RSNO’s move and in Scottish Opera. In conclusion, this debate should be marked as a celebration of our national performing companies. They contribute a great deal to Scotland and, as Annabelle Ewing suggested, we should recognise their role in feeding Scotland’s soul. I ask members to support the motion.

With the permission of the Presiding Officer, before I reply to the member’s question I will say a few words on the recent death of the Malawian President, Bingu wa Mutharika. The First Minister has written to the Government of Malawi, emphasising that the thoughts of the people of Scotland are with the Malawian people at this time. President Mutharika played an important role in formalising Malawi-Scotland relations, particularly through his signing of the co-operation agreement between our two countries in 2005. Former First Minister Lord McConnell worked closely with President Mutharika on the co-operation agreement at that time. We have, therefore, asked Lord McConnell to represent Scotland and the Scottish Government at the funeral of President Mutharika on Monday 23 April—an offer that he has kindly accepted. That is a fitting symbol of the cross-party support that exists for the Scotland-Malawi relationship and its deep roots in Scottish civic society. I return to the member’s question. VisitScotland is promoting Scotland’s world-class culture and creativity to an international audience through its core marketing campaigns and is targeting North America and Germany—our two largest international markets—boosted by a £500,000 investment by the Scottish Government. VisitScotland has also produced a documentary-style video to spotlight, celebrate and promote our nation’s cultural and creative strengths, which was shown during Scotland week to key trade and media representatives at events in New York and Toronto. It will also feature on the dedicated year of Scotland web pages and across a suite of social media outlets. During my recent visit to the USA and Canada for Scotland week, I announced a £350,000 investment in the international touring fund for our national performing companies to promote Scottish culture and creativity.

Under the current arrangements, the British diplomatic services have a responsibility and are funded to support Scottish interests. However, cultural policy rests entirely with the Scottish Government, so the majority of cultural and creative activities operate independently of that. Many independent countries have cost-effective and efficient ways of delivering international support.

The year of creative Scotland is inspiring our people and our visitors to celebrate Scotland’s world-renowned culture and creativity. There has already been significant activity throughout the country in support of the year and we are working closely with Creative Scotland, VisitScotland and other partners to ensure that we continue to build the momentum as we progress through the year. Examples of year of creative Scotland events in April and May include the port project, an exciting new multi-arts collaboration led by Aberdeen International Youth Festival, and see Scotland by train, which is run by National Museums Scotland and focuses on some hidden railway cinematic gems.

I declare an interest as a primary 7 winner in the solemn poetry category of a Robert Burns World Federation competition. It is important that we celebrate our bard not just in the year of homecoming 2009 and in the year of creative Scotland, but continuously. I wish the celebrations at Cults academy well. I agree with the member that we should celebrate our literary history every year and that the legacy is an important part of that.

I am proud that a Burns club is associated with the Scottish Parliament. I was a bit concerned when it was inaugurated—I was present then—as the Burns club number 1; I had visions of a breakaway Burns club number 2 being established. I hope that the invitation will make it clear that I am being invited to the Burns club number 1.

During this year’s event, the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism and I promoted Scotland in New York, San Francisco, Chicago and Houston in the United States and in Vancouver and Calgary in Canada with representatives from a range of sectors, including the creative industries, energy, tourism and finance. Between us, Mr Ewing and I held 27 business-related meetings. I met enStratus, a cloud computing company that is creating 30 high-value jobs in Edinburgh, which will be its European hub. In Chicago, which will host this year’s Ryder cup, I promoted the 2014 Ryder cup, which will be held at Gleneagles. In New York, we showcased some of the best of Scotland’s contemporary theatre and music, as well as 12 of Scotland’s top fabric and fashion designers.

I am pleased to say that Scottish Development International is recognised as one of the world’s leading operations in encouraging global investment and has a strong role in encouraging exports. I am also pleased that, when Fergus Ewing, our energy minister, was in Calgary, he opened an SDI office there. That will provide opportunities for investments and for globalisation of some of our companies, particularly in servicing the important oil and gas sector.

The 2008 treasure trove code of practice contains the presumption that found items will be allocated to a local eligible museum, unless a convincing argument for allocating them elsewhere is presented. The process of claiming found items, inviting museums to apply for them and allocating them to museums is operated independently of ministers by the Queen’s and Lord Treasurer’s Remembrancer.

The St Ninian’s Isle treasure is of national and international significance but is also of local significance. Under the agreements that were made—independently of ministers—National Museums Scotland holds and has in its care the items. It is important that the partnership agreement between National Museums Scotland and the Shetland Amenity Trust ensured that the items were loaned to the Shetland museum for three months in 2008, to mark the 50th anniversary of their discovery. I understand that replicas can now be seen in the Shetland museum. I understand why the member argues for the items to be relocated, but I hope that he understands the difficulty that I as a minister would have in directing National Museums Scotland. Increasingly, I am being asked not to direct our national collections to carry out requests such as the member’s request. I am delighted that the Lewis chessmen found their way home as part of the recent exhibition from the British museum.

Mr Gibson has been pressing the case for Scotland to have a fair share of network programming ever since the Scottish Broadcasting Commission first drew attention to the issue back in 2008. I am pleased to note that, since then, BBC network programming of Scottish origin has risen from 3.3 per cent in 2007 to 7.4 per cent in 2010 and is worth significantly more than £20 million annually to the economy in Scotland. In the Scottish Government’s response to the BBC trust consultation on its change programme, “Delivering Quality First”, we welcomed that development but made clear the importance of Scotland receiving its fair share of licence-fee spend in a manner that ensures that there is quality programming, particularly in news and current affairs at a time when there is great national interest in Scotland’s future.

The BBC is Scotland’s national public service broadcaster. It is our window on the world. A fair share of the licence fee should be raised and spent in Scotland through the entire BBC offering, which includes its website, its rolling news channel and the World Service. A strong level of quality network programming must be made in Scotland to ensure that there is clarity and impartiality in news and current affairs reporting during this period. I will continue to remind the BBC of its obligations to Scotland.

Historic Scotland offers about £1 million in support annually to national organisations that support the historic environment voluntary sector.

The short answer to that question is yes. The member is correct to draw attention to world heritage day. The work of voluntary heritage societies is vital. I congratulate Jim Fiddes and wish him well on the launch of his book—I am sure that a great time will be had by all at the celebrations. It is right that we continue to support heritage societies. That is why Historic Scotland provides funding to the national heritage societies. As a Parliament, we should put on the record our thanks to community heritage societies for the vital work that they do in the protection, promotion and preservation of our vital assets.

Creative Scotland, as Scotland’s national agency for arts, screen and creative industries, champions the own art scheme as part of its wide remit. The scheme provides interest-free loans from £100 to £2,000 to help people purchase original pieces of Scottish art and craftwork. Members of the public can apply to purchase anything ranging from paintings, prints, drawings and sculpture to glassware, ceramics, jewellery, furniture and textiles.

I remember that exhibition. Paul Wheelhouse does well to promote the work of those craftspeople. I would like to dispel any sense that furniture makers or other craft makers are specifically excluded from the own art scheme. Any exclusion is definitely not because they are not considered to be artists, but is due to the rules in place for galleries to join the finance scheme, regardless of what art form they exhibit. Many of our talented Scottish-based furniture and craft makers work independently or under umbrella organisations that do not have permanent gallery bases. Therefore, they might be missing out on the opportunities. I am very pleased that Creative Scotland intends to investigate the potential to widen the craft offer through own art in Scotland during 2012-13, working in conjunction with representative bodies such as the Scottish Furniture Makers Association to find a way forward. The Scottish Government fully supports that plan and I congratulate Paul Wheelhouse on raising this important issue.

Through Historic Scotland, the Scottish Government provides a great deal of help and advice to communities and local authorities. That includes technical advice on repairs and routine maintenance, and advice on the planning system and on available sources of funding. Those sources include Historic Scotland’s very successful conservation area regeneration scheme, which, since it started in 2007, has put £16.7 million into repairing and enhancing our historic towns.

Inveraray is one of our important and historic planned towns, and is well recognised as a very early example of urban design. I understand that there was a meeting in April that was attended by various parties, including Historic Scotland. On-going maintenance is key, and collaboration from all members is needed. I commend the conservation area regeneration scheme as a way forward, but it is for Historic Scotland to advise on the case for Inveraray.

As I indicated in my answer to Tavish Scott, and in my letter to Dave Thompson following his supplementary question during parliamentary questions on 27 October last year, we support the local allocation of historical artefacts. The code of practice for treasure trove states that items will be allocated locally to an eligible museum unless a convincing argument for allocating them elsewhere is presented. That process is operated independently of ministers by the Queen’s and Lord Treasurer’s Remembrancer.

In giving advice to the sector, one of the key issues is the capability and standard of the space in the local museum to host what can be very precious objects. I recommend that contact is made with Museums Galleries Scotland: it is the main channel for Government funding for the sector, and it can provide advice and support to local museums about the application process and the conditions that would need to be met.

The national strategy is designed to set out the direction and vision for the whole sector, Scotland-wide, to ensure that we can maximise reach, growth and potential over the next 10 years. The Scottish Government recognises the importance of the maritime museum and, in response to recommendations from the ministerial think tank on museums, the museum is now in its second year of receiving direct funding from the Scottish Government. On 18 January, I was pleased to announce £1 million of capital funding to enable the much-needed repair of the roof of the museum to allow all-year-round better use of the building.

That is an interesting proposal. It is important that Scotland celebrates its maritime history. I have not visited the Denny ship model experiment tank and I would be interested to know more about it. In terms of our celebration of our engineering and shipbuilding, it is extremely important. We should take the opportunity to recognise the important work of the Scottish Maritime Museum in Denny and its other locations.

The member will be aware that, after a great deal of time when there was little action on the matter and a real risk of the demolition of the City of Adelaide, we carried out an appraisal of various bids. Neil Cossons, who is respected in the area, assessed the applications from the point of view in particular of ensuring that the heritage quality and support was provided. We have been reassured that the support that will be provided by the charitable organisation, the Clipper Ship “City of Adelaide”, will be such as to preserve and promote the ship in a way that was not possible in Scotland.

I, too, congratulate Christine Grahame on securing the debate. She has a long record of promoting local radio and television interests, not least in her work with other members in pressing for improvements in Scottish programming for the part of the south of Scotland that is served by ITV rather than STV. Indeed, she led a previous members’ business debate on that issue, and it is good to see her returning to media issues. I know that she has long taken a personal interest in community radio and that, just last month, she hosted a reception in the Scottish Parliament for community radio, as was mentioned. As the debate has made clear, many other members also have a close personal interest in community radio. Speakers from across Scotland—particularly Jim Hume—talked with real knowledge and enthusiasm about community radio in their regions and constituencies. I hope to pick up on some of the points that they made. I believe that the respect that members have for community radio mirrors the respect that people throughout the country have for it, and the value that they place on it. It was only in 2005 that licensing of community radio began in the UK. It is a relatively short time since then, but we now have just under 20 community radio stations broadcasting across Scotland, and we hope to have more soon following Ofcom’s current round of issuing new licences. In many respects, that is a tribute to the continuing passion and commitment that have been demonstrated by community radio supporters for many years. In the light of that, I take this opportunity to commend the work that the Scottish community broadcasting network does in advocating for the sector. Community radio in Scotland matters. That is one reason why we published research last month entitled “‘We are Community Builders, Part of The Fabric’: A Review of Community Radio”, which documents this remarkable sector. Experience overseas and in Scotland is that community radio is proving its worth every day in a variety of ways. It is mandated to serve the underserved and give a voice to local communities. It can be an agent of change, a supporter of young people and the disenfranchised, a training ground for broadcasters—I was interested to hear what Fiona McLeod said about that with reference to her local radio station—and a source of opportunities for diverse communities of interest. In our public attitudes to broadcasting research in 2009, just under half of the respondents regarded community radio as important, and we should bear it in mind that we are still in the early days of community radio. Although support in areas where community radio does not yet have a presence was fairly soft, it was noticeably higher in areas such as the Highlands and Islands and the north of Scotland, which have strong local identities and are perhaps occasionally less fully served by media that are based in larger cities.

I appreciate both those points. I am happy to look into the former, and I will come on to mention some of the things that the Government has done to help financially. In relation to my previous comments, I congratulate stations such as Bute FM, Mearns FM, Speysound Radio and the Super Station in Orkney. Community radio is also of huge value in our towns and cities. It provides a unique service that goes beyond what is broadcast by larger media interests. Stations such as shmu FM in Aberdeen, which Maureen Watt mentioned, and Sunny Govan Radio—I am not sure about the pronunciation, but if Sandra White says that that is how you say it, that is how you say it—show what can be done to maintain a sense of local community in large urban areas, as do 3TFM in Saltcoats, Black Diamond FM in Midlothian, Dunoon Community Radio and Pulse Community Radio in Barrhead, which Annabel Goldie mentioned. They show how stations can serve both local towns and their rural hinterlands. Of course, communities are not just location based, as there are communities of common interest, faith or origin. Edinburgh Garrison FM serves military families in the Edinburgh area and, at a time of increasing postings and reducing expenditure, we can imagine what a positive impact it must have on family morale. Celtic Music Radio in Glasgow serves those who are interested in traditional music; Insight Radio in Glasgow provides support and advice to people with disabilities; Alive Radio in Dumfries, as we heard from Elaine Murray, and Revival Radio in Glasgow specialise in religious broadcasting; and, as Sandra White set out, Awaz FM in Glasgow was in 2010 the first community radio station to win the Queen’s award for voluntary service for its work with the Asian community. With such good work happening, there is rich potential for the sector to grow and become a vital part of communities across Scotland. It is interesting to note that the early days of community radio happened at about the same time as the current Administration was formed. I am not claiming that community radio was the Scottish Parliament’s achievement; that could not be because we know that the regulation of broadcasting is still reserved to Westminster. However, if we had greater responsibility, imagine what we could do to support the community radio sector. My ministerial colleagues and I took a strong interest in community radio, so one of the first things that we did was to increase the amount of advertising on community radio—perhaps that was what Maureen Watt referred to—to help to increase resource and to get our message out to people. Most notably, we increased advertising in community radio by 48 per cent in 2009-10 to £129,000, and in the following year we increased that to £134,000. We are generally interested in community radio and we must remark on the energy and achievements of the sector to date. However, we know that there are challenges ahead. Last month’s research study set out possibilities for further progress. Money is tight and, in what I thought was an impressive speech, Jim Hume set out some of the challenges. There are, however, opportunities for mutual support across stations and between larger broadcasters and community stations, like the BBC’s support for Sunny Govan Radio. I have met representatives from community radio and I want to maintain that dialogue. I look forward to working with the sector and developing greater mutual support to see community radio advance. The debate has been extremely useful. It has celebrated community radio, but it has also given us some direction. More important, we have seen a cross-party commitment to community radio. Community radio has a positive future in Scotland. Meeting closed at 17:46.

Local museums and libraries services are provided by local authorities, which have statutory responsibility for the library service. I am pleased that, for Scotland as a whole, figures for library visitors and internet provision are rising, while our museums and galleries have an estimated 23.5 million visitors each year. The Scottish Government provides funding to support local libraries and museums and I have maintained existing levels of funding despite the pressures on public finances. I will launch a new strategy for museums and galleries at the end of this week.

The member makes an important point and I congratulate West Dunbartonshire on the increase in library usage. The Scottish Government has managed to maintain the £500,000 funding to the Scottish Library and Information Council to help local authorities with improvement. I would be delighted to hear more about West Dunbartonshire’s efforts, so that good practice can be shared elsewhere.

I welcome this debate to draw attention to the awful situation in Syria. I welcome the contributions from members today and the powerful way in which Jim Eadie introduced the debate. For more than a year, we have witnessed the citizens of a number of countries in north Africa demanding to be heard and demanding the right to choose the Governments that they want. After decades of not having any democratic representation, they have demanded change. Change has come in many of those countries, although we have to realise that a lot has still to be done. We urge the international community to continue its support to ensure that the promises that have been made are fulfilled and that the countries emerge as true democracies. We live in a democracy; this Parliament is proof of that. We are free to cast our votes to choose the Government that we want, so it is hard to imagine what it would be like to live in a country without such freedoms. Therefore, we should not forget that the changes that have taken place in those other countries have come at a high price to people who have faced significant opposition, especially through physical force. We should remember the sacrifices that many people have made to gain their freedoms. As we have heard in the debate and from the daily media reports, the situation in Syria is appalling. The facts speak for themselves—in a year of protests, more than 9,000 civilians have been killed. We cannot forget the pictures from the city of Homs after a nearly month-long bombardment by Government forces left hundreds dead, large parts of the city devastated and many civilians fleeing for their lives. As Patricia Ferguson was, I was shocked to read the comments today by Navi Pillay, the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, on the detention of hundreds of children by the Assad regime. She said that the regime has been deliberately and systematically targeting children. We welcome the involvement of the UN Human Rights Council in highlighting the abuses that are taking place in Syria, and in calling for those who are responsible to be held to account. The Scottish Government condemns the continuing violence by the Assad regime against the people of Syria. We support a political process for Syria, within the framework of the United Nations, to help to resolve the crisis. On 21 March, I wrote to the Foreign Secretary, William Hague, adding the Scottish Government’s support to that of the UK Government, the United Nations, the Arab League and others in the international community in trying to find a resolution to the situation in Syria. We welcome the appointment of the well-respected diplomat Kofi Annan as the UN-Arab League special envoy and we support the work that he is undertaking to begin political dialogue. His efforts are working—the Assad regime has announced that it agrees with Kofi Annan’s six-point peace plan, which has the backing of the entire UN Security Council. However, as many members have said, we urge the regime to make good on that promise. Actions speak louder than words. We welcome the news that several Syrian groups have agreed to recognise the Syrian National Council as the official representative of the Syrian people. International pressure on the Syrian Government has been intensifying; Syria has been suspended from the Arab League, and the EU and a range of countries have imposed a series of sanctions, including in relation to arms sales and the import of Syrian oil. Two weeks ago, I met a delegation from the Syrian community in Scotland and this afternoon I met constituents of Bruce Crawford who are involved with the Aid for All charity to discuss the situation in Syria. They are rightly worried about what is happening in Syria and the impact that it is having on the Syrian community here. Sandra White and Humza Yousaf asked about what we can do from here in Scotland. As the UN humanitarian affairs co-ordinator Baroness Valerie Amos has reported, the situation in Syria continues to worsen. Many people have been displaced and have no shelter, food or water and many require urgent medical attention. Therefore, the Scottish Government, the Parliament and the people of Scotland more widely call for immediate humanitarian access in order to help those who have been wounded and displaced. The situation cannot continue. One of the greatest needs is for unhindered and full access to all areas of Syria for the UN and other international humanitarian agencies, including the International Committee of the Red Cross and the Red Crescent. The UN is leading efforts to deliver a single co-ordinated response to the humanitarian situation in Syria to ensure that needs are prioritised, that aid gets to those who are in need as quickly as possible and that the international community works effectively together. It is only right that the UN co-ordinates in that way. The Scottish Government will continue to monitor the situation and consider how best we can support the Syrian people. We welcome the launch of the regional response plan by the UN Refugee Agency and the Office for the Co-ordination of Humanitarian Affairs to help the estimated 96,500 Syrian refugees in Turkey, Lebanon, Jordan and Iraq, who have been referred to. However, the main issue is not about providing humanitarian supplies such as water canisters or food; the situation in Syria is a result of the on-going action of the Syrian Government in committing violence against its own people. In that situation, the most urgent need is for a political solution to end the violence. In the interim, it is for the UN to provide what support it can to help those who are in greatest need, working with the Red Cross and Red Crescent in dangerous and difficult conditions to bring what support they can to the areas of Syria that they can access. There is also a role for non-governmental organisations. For organisations that were active in Syria before the civil violence, that can include providing support on the ground for the people of Syria, where it is possible to do so. NGOs play a wider role in raising awareness and campaigning politically. As Jackson Carlaw pointed out, new technology has had a role in making that communication possible. The global campaigning as well as this debate and others like it across the world show solidarity with the people of Syria and can make a contribution. I urge everyone to continue to press for an end to the violence and to look for a rapid resolution for the sake of the people of Syria. It is important that the Parliament, on behalf of the people of Scotland, stands in solidarity with the people of Syria. Meeting closed at 18:49.

The Scottish Government’s ambitions for Scotland align closely with the Europe 2020 strategy of the European Union for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. The EU’s programmes add value to what we do in Scotland, which is why our engagement on the next multi-annual financial framework, for 2014 to 2020, is vital. The MFF will determine how much can be spent in key programmes—including the CAP, the horizon 2020 research programme and structural funds—in pursuit of economic growth in Scotland. Among the Commission’s work priorities in the coming year, we will focus our efforts on the initiatives that will have the greatest impact for the people and communities of Scotland. By concentrating our focus, the Scottish Government can be most effective. We can also showcase the wealth of experience and expertise that Scotland can offer. We welcome the greatly enhanced cross-committee EU scrutiny that the Parliament is now promoting. The range of the work of the EU institutions and agencies is vast. The Scottish Government has agreed to maximise our impact, rationalise our engagement and focus our efforts on four priority areas, which are set out in the Scottish Government’s European action plan. We regularly update the European and External Relations Committee in that regard. We have focused our engagement on EU policy on energy and climate change; research and creativity; the marine environment; and justice. Given the EU’s activities over the coming year, in our four action plan priority areas, there are a number of new and on-going initiatives on which we will seek actively to offer input and exert influence. Scotland is a European and global leader in the field of climate change. We are seeking to capitalise on Scotland’s enormous natural resource potential and become a low-carbon energy hub for the EU. We are at the forefront of the drive to provide better interconnections between energy networks across Europe, as evidenced through our leading roles in the Irish-Scottish links on energy study—ISLES—and the North Sea offshore grid co-ordination initiative. An EU renewable energy strategy and completion of the internal energy market will be vital to developing a low-carbon future for the whole of the EU. A renewable energy strategy will set us on the right path and ensure that completion of the internal energy market takes account of a renewable energy future. Those will be significant priorities for Scotland as we develop our renewables resources, become a low-carbon hub for Europe, support stronger interconnections and increase energy security EU-wide. On research and creativity, we are in the vanguard in Europe of a recognition of the vital role that small and medium-sized enterprises will play in re-energising the economy, which is a priority of the EU in the proposals for the next research funding programme, horizon 2020. We whole-heartedly support the emphasis on ensuring the accessibility of that funding for SMEs. I raised that point at the last joint ministerial committee on Europe and it is perhaps something that we could draw to the attention of the Education and Culture Committee. The innovation union aligns closely with our refreshed economic strategy and we are determined to ensure that it develops so as to add value to what we are doing specifically in Scotland. Universities and companies across Scotland are at the forefront of collaborative projects that are producing world-class research in key sectors such as life sciences, energy and education. We are actively looking at ways to encourage partnerships between research institutes and SMEs. From this year, we are establishing a £45 million SMART: Scotland fund to bring together innovation and commercialisation support for business that is provided from across our partner organisations. Scotland is one of Europe’s key maritime nations, with 10 per cent of Europe’s coastline and 20 per cent of its seas. The Scottish Government is committed to managing Scotland’s seas for prosperity and environmental sustainability. The industry in Scotland has responded to the challenges that it has faced and has pioneered innovative solutions to ensure the sustainable future of our maritime industry and coastal communities. We share our seas and the marine resources that we use. I cannot emphasise strongly enough how vital it is that we are directly involved in key EU negotiations on maritime and fisheries as they progress. Throughout the negotiations for reform of the CFP, we will stand by our fishing communities and work hard with the UK Government and our European partners to secure a deal that ensures the continued stability and sustainability of the industry for Scotland and for the whole of the EU. Scotland has a special interest in EU justice policies as we have a legal system that is distinct and separate from that of the rest of the UK—that is a unique position in the EU. We therefore assess the impact of all EU justice proposals on Scots law. We can also offer a unique perspective to our European partners. Our experience of co-operating over two different legal systems offers valuable insight into how co-operation may be taken forward across the entire EU. In 2012, the Commission intends to bring forward three justice dossiers that will have a particular impact on Scots law and require our attention. The dossiers are on special safeguards in criminal procedures for suspected or accused persons who are vulnerable, compensation of crime victims and the alternative dispute resolution instrument for business-to-business disputes. Beyond our four action plan priority areas, we engage with our EU partners on a broad range of policies and programmes. The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that the interests of Scotland are represented successfully at all stages of the policy-making process in the EU. I thank the committee for bringing forward the debate and, more important, for injecting a sense of responsibility on the part of all the Parliament’s committees for scrutiny of EU matters. That is an important agenda, which will ensure that the international aspects of the EU are scrutinised by all the committees, rather than just being considered by one of them. The responses from the different committees are helpful in demonstrating to the Government the areas in which they are interested, and I know that my fellow cabinet secretaries will respond directly to each committee on its priorities. As I have outlined, the EU has a huge impact on policy making in Scotland. The Scottish Government’s strategic engagement reflects our main interests. I look forward to working with colleagues across the chamber to ensure that Scotland’s interests are represented and that our expertise shapes EU policy to our best advantage. The prospectus that the committee has laid out represents a positive way forward for the Parliament.

Patricia Ferguson has raised that point in the last three European debates. She has been answered satisfactorily by John Swinney and Alex Neil. I hope that she is satisfied that the issue of our level of engagement has been addressed, and I think that she exaggerates.

The Scottish Government welcomes the Commission’s work programme for 2012, the forward look to 2014 and this debate. They demonstrate the wide range of policy areas that we need to engage in—the wide range of interests of the MEPs, which are noted in the report, also reflects that—and the need for us to focus our resources to best effect. The Government is encouraged by the proposed reform of several key EU policies. Jim Hume talked about the common fisheries policy and we have heard about research and innovation funding. A number of points were made on horizon 2020 and the interconnectedness with the impacts of other funds. Those are issues that we cannot address completely today, but which should return to the chamber at different points. I reassure members that we are actively engaged on a range of issues that have been mentioned. In some cases, we think that the reforms—for example, to the common fisheries policy—need to go further, and we will press vigorously for that. Nevertheless, there are synergies between the stated ambitions of the EU and the Scottish Government, which demonstrates our shared goal of sustainable, smart and inclusive economic growth. Indeed, the Scottish Government’s economic strategy, which was published in September, provides an economic roadmap for Scotland. Aileen McLeod, Jamie McGrigor and Helen Eadie made important points about public procurement, state aid and infrastructure. The work of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, in particular, will bring together a number of those strands. Patricia Ferguson and Clare Adamson identified children’s issues, but those will perhaps require further engagement with the Education and Culture Committee, which did not address that area in its submission to the report that we have in front of us. We must ensure that we are leveraging added value from the EU—that is an important agenda—and finding ways of providing leadership as well as partnership. It is equally important that we pursue our own interests directly in Brussels, co-operating fully with the UK Government in developing the UK line and key policies. We are currently agreeing new ways of ensuring early upstream engagement with the UK Government. At the outset of the debate, Christina McKelvie talked about the importance of influencing early. The Government believes that, where Scotland has the leading interest, we should act for the UK as a whole. That is especially true for fisheries and aquaculture, where we have 66 and 80 per cent, respectively, of the UK’s industry. I advise Jamie McGrigor that on Monday, at the EU fisheries council, Richard Lochhead was prevented from leading on mackerel—which is a key issue for Scotland—and, when the UK fisheries minister left at 5 o’clock, he was replaced for the remaining hour and a half by a farming minister, despite the fact that Richard Lochhead has experience and could easily have represented the UK line that had been agreed at that time. There is good collaboration on the environment and climate change, but that is no substitute for being able to speak with our own voice. Scottish ministers and officials are attending more and more council meetings and are engaging with stakeholders in Scotland and across the EU. We are ensuring that we are working effectively with the UK Government by developing a renewed culture of upstream engagement to shape initiatives at the earliest possible stages and to secure outcomes that represent a good deal for Scotland. We recently agreed a new system with the UK Government to ensure that we have early engagement with some of its EU work. The Scottish Government will continue to press the case for greater direct representation in the EU policy-making process, where we have expertise and where there is a strong Scottish interest. Engagement between the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament is vital. The principal role of the Scottish Parliament in its EU strategy, which we welcome and support, is to scrutinise the Scottish Government and its EU engagement, but the Parliament can also be of support. As Patricia Ferguson said, when we speak to the EU with one voice and unite behind the interests of the people of Scotland, we influence better and demonstrate the commitment of the whole of Scotland to progress for the European Union. I welcome the Parliament’s EU strategy and the European and External Relations Committee’s efforts and energy in bringing this debate to the chamber. Let it not be a one-off, and let it not be one way. Let us continue to work together co-operatively to ensure that the European Union offers added value to address Scotland’s needs and to take Europe forward.

I am pleased to open the debate on the general principles of the National Library of Scotland Bill. I thank the people who gave evidence and I thank the convener and members of the Education and Culture Committee for their scrutiny of the bill at stage 1. I welcome the committee’s support for the general principles of the bill and appreciate the opportunity to address some of the key issues that it highlighted. The bill is long overdue. The National Library of Scotland is a 21st century organisation, the governance of which is, increasingly, out of date. The National Library of Scotland Act 1925 set up the board of trustees with the sole function of managing the library. The 1925 act was also concerned with transfer of non-legal material and legal deposit privileges from the Faculty of Advocates’ law library. The people who created the National Library in 1925 were in inspiring company. It was a pivotal year, which saw the publication of great literature—F Scott Fitzgerald’s “The Great Gatsby” and Virginia Woolf’s “Mrs Dalloway”. The first surrealist exhibition was held in Paris and, closer to home, John Logie Baird created the first television transmitter. Two years later, the world’s first long-distance television pictures were transmitted by Logie Baird to Glasgow’s Grand Central hotel. Of course, Logie Baird’s achievements have had an enduring impact on the development of modern culture and society. The National Library continues, in its own way, to reflect the past while being ever relevant to the future. In its recent history, it has assumed responsibility for the Scottish screen archive, which preserves and gives public access to our TV and film heritage. We are supporting the library through the bill and in other ways, and I am delighted to confirm that the Scottish Government is providing £250,000 to support the library’s planned relocation of the screen archive to Glasgow city centre, as part of the exciting project with Glasgow City Council and the University of Glasgow on the revamped Kelvin hall, to develop a progressive research centre for our great collection of moving images. It is interesting that during the passage of the 1925 act through Parliament, the then member for Edinburgh Central, Mr William Graham, referred to the National Library’s establishment as being quite a radical political statement of its time. He said: “what the Secretary for Scotland is proposing this afternoon is in my judgement the highest form of Socialism in this or any other country, because he is bringing the means of learning directly to the ownership of the Scottish people under a representative board. That is quite a remarkable departure in the case of a Conservative Government”.—[Official Report, House of Commons, 24 July 1925; Vol 186, c 2628.] The proposals that are in front of us could not be described in such radical terms, but I am happy to say that the Scottish Government is proud to carry on funding the National Library as a resource for learning and research for all Scotland. The bill is small, but it will make a big difference to the National Library and its stakeholders. It delivers on a commitment that I made to the National Library before the election, in the event of the Scottish National Party’s being returned to government. The National Library has achieved much over the past 87 years and the bill will ensure that it has the necessary governance arrangements to realise its ambition for decades to come. The bill sets out clear statutory functions, which reinforce the importance of what the National Library does and can do for Scotland. Its main purpose is to maintain and develop the collections and to make them as relevant and accessible as possible to users. The functions emphasise the library’s role as a major research library and its role in sharing good practice and expertise. The governance reforms will ensure that the library’s board structure is comparable with that of other modern public bodies. The bill will reduce the size of the board, which can consist of 32 members under the current arrangements—I will come back to the number of board members. The bill will also remove reserved places and ensure that all appointments are based on merit and selection. I am grateful to the current chair, Professor Michael Anderson, and to board members for their service to the board. The National Library is part of our rich cultural heritage. As Scotland’s only legal deposit library, it can request a copy of all printed items that are published in the United Kingdom and Ireland. Some 5,000 items are added every week under legal deposit arrangements. With 14 million items in its collections, the National Library is Scotland’s largest library and is a major reference centre for the study of Scotland and the Scots. More than 70,000 people visit the library’s reading rooms each year, and online hits of around 2.25 million show the demand for, and relevance of, its collections. The National Library received a record number of visitors in 2009, when it displayed the last letter of Mary Queen of Scots, with 12,000 visitors in one week. The library also holds the wonderful John Murray archive, which contains a quarter of a million items from great writers, politicians, explorers and scientists of the past. The National Library ensures that our national record is made accessible and relevant for generations to come through the growing use of electronic formats: the library is to be congratulated on its already significant work to digitise more than 1.5 million items, which extends its national and international reach. Its website is viewed by visitors from 188 countries. The bill is forward looking and has been drafted so that the legislation will keep pace with future technological developments, including the advent of United Kingdom regulations for electronic legal deposit. I want to ensure that the bill works to support the National Library and to enable it to continue its working relationship with the Faculty of Advocates’ law library. The relationship between the National Library and the Faculty of Advocates is important to the future of Scotland’s legal library collection. The Faculty of Advocates’ library has been run and funded by the Faculty of Advocates since 1689. Between 1842 and 1925, the faculty held the sole right of legal deposit for Scotland. In 1925, it passed that right to the National Library. The significance of the gift of non-legal material and legal deposit privileges was not underestimated in its day. At the time of the parliamentary passage of the 1925 act, the advocates’ library was described in the House of Lords as “a great Scottish national possession ... which has grown ... with the development of modern Scotland”.—[Official Report, House of Lords, 2 July 1925; Vol 61, c 961.] The National Library was the fruit of the generosity of the Faculty of Advocates, and there is great history to be found in that continuing relationship. The bill complements that good relationship by ensuring that the National Library and the Faculty of Advocates can enter into co-operative agreements on public access to their collections and on the care of items that they hold. That process has already begun, with both organisations signing a memorandum of agreement that outlines how they will work together. I am pleased that the Education and Culture Committee has accepted the general principles of the bill. The committee expressed concerns that the proposed size of the NLS’s board is too low, given the range of skills and expertise that is required. I want to be constructive on this issue. There is a danger that, if a board is too large, it can become less focused on strategic direction and leadership. I certainly do not want to hinder the board’s operation and I am content to raise the minimum number of NLS board members, so I will lodge an amendment at stage 2 that will allow the membership range to be between nine and 14. Early indications are that the NLS, the Scottish Library and Information Council and the Faculty of Advocates support that proposal. The committee questioned the need for and the scope of a ministerial power of direction. The inclusion of such a power provides accountability. Around 86 per cent of the NLS’s funding is provided by the taxpayer so ministers need to ensure the money is spent wisely. A ministerial power of direction is a standard feature of modern public bodies. The great majority of non-departmental public bodies that have been established as statutory bodies since 1990 have powers of direction—17 out of 21 bodies. Eleven of the 14 NDPBs that have been established since devolution have statutory powers of direction. The power of direction that is proposed in relation to the NLS has been carefully crafted to maintain the curatorial freedom of the NLS. That is why I cannot direct the NLS on the delivery of key functions such as preserving, conserving and developing its collections, exhibiting and interpreting objects in the collections and making the collections accessible to the public and to people who are carrying out study and research. The NLS supports that drafting approach and pointed to the protection that it offers in relation to its independence from ministers. A similar arm’s-length guarantee in relation to Creative Scotland is contained in the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Act 2010. The committee has asked for more explanation of the power of direction, so I will write to the committee on how and when the power of direction can be used, so that my intentions are on the record before stage 2. For the purposes of today’s debate, it may help if I outline that a direction could be justified in the event, for example, that the NLS failed to comply with public sector policies, such as those on no compulsory redundancies or on pay. Those examples refer to overall management of the library; ministers can direct the overarching function that the NLS has in relation to managing the library, as expressed in section 2(1) of the bill. Ministers can also direct in relation to collaboration and diversity because those areas extend beyond the NLS’s particular curatorial and cultural functions. Action might be taken if there were efficiencies to be realised from greater collaboration and shared services, but the NLS was not complying with public sector duties in that regard. The National Library of Scotland currently works with local authorities, universities and a range of other information service providers. The general intention is to future proof legislation sufficiently to allow for any significant changes in public sector policies or operational practices. I confirm that my officials have been discussing the nature and extent of the power of direction with the NLS, including in relation to collaboration. On the powers on charging in schedule 1, I am pleased that the committee welcomed my restated commitment to the principle of free access to the National Library. The committee sought to ensure that the bill will allow the NLS to collect material electronically under the legal deposit arrangements. Since I gave evidence, the United Kingdom Government has published updated draft regulations on that, including new provisions that directly address the position of the NLS and the Faculty of Advocates. The bill has been drafted with the UK developments firmly in mind and is sufficiently future proofed to ensure compatibility with proposed and future regulations. As part of my on-going exchanges, I have forwarded a copy of the committee’s report to the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, and have highlighted the relevant paragraphs relating to electronic deposit. I acknowledge that the committee accepts that the bill as a whole will be beneficial to the National Library of Scotland, its users and stakeholders. I am grateful for the help and input from the NLS, the Faculty of Advocates and SLIC in drafting the bill. I welcome the opportunity to respond to and reflect on points that have been raised by members and to address some of the issues in the committee’s report. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the National Library of Scotland Bill.

In my opening remarks, I indicated that I would be willing to move the bottom end from seven up to nine. The range of board membership will be very similar to other public bodies, at between nine and 14 members.

With regard to a number of points that Neil Findlay has raised, it is important to look again at the functions of the NLS. If it did anything to jeopardise access to its collections for the public and researchers, it could be challenged legally. The functions themselves are an important protection in relation to Neil Findlay’s concerns.

I remind the member that for the Public Service Reform (Scotland) Bill the Conservatives lodged an amendment that would have given ministers greater power to enforce collaboration and direction for Creative Scotland, which I resisted because I was concerned about the mission creep of ministerial direction. It is important that for all such issues for public bodies we take a proportionate approach, which is what we are trying to do with the bill.

I will come back to the issue of charitable status in my closing remarks, but I ask the member to acknowledge that some of the comments that he referred to were made before the bill was published. The concern of the bodies involved perhaps reflected concern about previous proposals by a previous Government for a more general power of direction. In the bill as published, the power of direction is highly restricted.

I thank the members who have spoken in the debate, and I would say that Alex Johnstone is living testament to the fact that libraries broaden the mind. I am pleased that, in this stage 1 debate on the National Library of Scotland Bill, the Parliament has had the opportunity to educate Mr Johnstone in areas with which he was perhaps unfamiliar. We have had a useful and constructive discussion, and I will keep in mind the points that members have raised—as well as the points raised by all the people who have commented on the bill so far—as we steer the legislation through its remaining stages. I have been delighted to hear such warm words about the National Library and the importance of the reform of its governance. Back in 1925, all sides at Westminster backed the proposal to establish a national library of Scotland, and members pointed out the universal support in Scotland, with one stating: “I do not think that any right hon. Member would grudge anything from public funds for this very important object in Scotland”.—[Official Report, House of Commons, 24 July 1925; Vol 186, c 2628.] In the same way, this Government is proud to support the National Library of Scotland. We recognise the great benefits that the nation enjoys from the library. As we have heard, the National Library holds tremendous collections on behalf of the people of Scotland—including Oor Wullie. The collections span the centuries, and include items such as the only known copy of blind Harry’s 15th-century epic, “Wallace”, and a copy of the first printed book, the Gutenberg Bible of 1455. The National Library ensures that the past is brought to life in a modern context. Its exhibitions and events remind visitors of the enduring relevance of the collections. The current exhibition, “Beyond Macbeth”, uses material held by the library and by the University of Edinburgh to illustrate the importance of Shakespeare to Scotland. The fabulous John Murray archive boasts material from Sir Walter Scott, David Livingstone, Jane Austen and, as we have heard, Charles Darwin. The material has been given a modern relevance by the library; those tremendous figures from our past are brought to life using technology. The National Library has created an app for mobile phones, and there are interactive pods at the entrance so that users can explore in a fun and informative way. As we have heard, the National Library has operated under the existing legislation for 87 years, and it has done a remarkable job of maintaining and developing the national record. However, it is now time to build on those strong foundations and equip the library with the necessary functions. That is important, because many of the concerns that people have raised will be dealt with by the functions that are set out in the bill. The 1925 act does not set out the functions. A great deal of legal protection will be given in relation to some of the issues that members have raised. The bill also covers powers and governance arrangements that will allow the library to achieve even more. As well as what it can achieve internally, the library can contribute to a modern and dynamic Scotland. As one of Europe’s major research and reference libraries, it offers world-class collections. The bill will modernise the functions and governance of the library for the 21st century. It is essential that we take this opportunity to strengthen the library’s role in safeguarding and sharing its collections, and to strengthen its work in bringing the nation’s history and culture to life. The bill is drafted to keep pace with requirements so as to preserve and develop our national collections for generations to come. This afternoon’s debate has given me a further opportunity to reflect on points that were raised in the committee’s report. As I have said, I am content to increase the minimum number of board members from six to eight, with the chair being the ninth member, which I think addresses a point that Fiona McLeod raised. That increase makes sense when we consider the range of skills that are required to support and enhance the strategic operation of the library. However, I would not expect the library to operate at the lower end of that board membership. Similarly, I will strive to ensure that the boards of National Museums Scotland and the National Galleries of Scotland exceed the minimum quota. Liz Smith made an important point about the need for a smooth transition, and we are already in discussions on how that can be achieved, with the skills of the current board members progressing into the new arrangements. We have done similar things with other organisations for which there have been mergers or changes. Members have rightly scrutinised the inclusion of a ministerial power of direction, to ensure that we have the right balance between accountability and curatorial freedom. I am sure that Patricia Ferguson will remember the consultation on the 2005 bill, in which the ministerial power of direction was very general. Changes have been made since then to restrict the power of direction. I refer those who have not looked at it to section 8, which sets out the limitations of the Scottish ministers’ power of direction. It completely restricts any directions that would affect the curatorial aspect that Patricia Ferguson mentioned.

I will come on to some other important points on the power of direction, but we are damned if we do and damned if we don’t in terms of how far the direction might go. The bill provides necessary safeguards, but I confirm that my officials have held—and will continue to hold—discussions with the National Library of Scotland to provide clarity about the nature and use of the power of direction. As requested, I will write to the committee on the matter before stage 2. I am pleased that the committee is satisfied with the assurance that the inclusion of a power of direction will not jeopardise the library’s charitable status—a point that was raised by members today. If there were an overt use of the ministerial power of direction, that could compromise the library’s charitable status. It is important that we do not jeopardise that, and I am pleased that the committee agrees with our approach. However, 86 per cent of the funding that is provided to the library comes from taxpayers, and I know that, if something goes awry and a ministerial power of direction is required, members of this Parliament will be the first to leap to their feet and call for ministers to get involved, take leadership and so on. The bill needs to be future proofed, and we are concerned to get the balance correct. The issue of the ministerial power of direction was raised by Stewart Maxwell, Liz Smith and Neil Findlay, and I refer members to the restrictions in section 8(2). We have moved a long way in our discussions and it is important that we get the balance right. As well as amending the minimum size of the board, I intend to lodge amendments at stage 2 to address some of the points that were raised in the written evidence from the Faculty of Advocates. I agree in principle that the bill should be clearer about the scope of the faculty’s collections, which are wonderful. I will also lodge a technical amendment to tidy up the provisions about legal publications. My officials will discuss those amendments to sections 5 and 6 with the Faculty of Advocates and the National Library of Scotland shortly. I think that everybody recognises the Government’s position on fee charging. I wrote to the committee on 23 February to explain that, where provisions for charging exist, the National Library of Scotland is providing additional material free of charge; however, it can charge users for digitisation on demand. Fiona McLeod made a good point when she said that, in the past, there has been charging for things that have subsequently become normal provision. We must future-proof the bill to allow progress in areas where technology may overtake us in the future. In terms of companies, it is a standard provision for NDPBs to charge and mirrors provisions for Creative Scotland. Neil Findlay asked about charging for services. That will be restricted because of the functions in the bill and the need to make collections accessible to the public. However, in relation to catering and hospitality, for example, there needs to be a provision to allow the library to charge for goods and services. This has been a good stage 1 debate. The committee has taken its responsibilities seriously and the debate has been an opportunity to showcase what Liam McArthur described as a national treasure. It is important that, as we have legislative responsibility for the National Library of Scotland, we take the opportunity to celebrate what is there, recognising not only its role in the past but its role into the future. It is heartening to hear that members and stakeholders are passionate that there should be no charges for access to the library. Free access to our collections is something that I treasure and I am committed to maintaining it. I am pleased to have the Parliament’s support for the bill and will seek to work constructively with the committee as the bill proceeds to stage 2.

I welcome the debate, which has been secured by Sandra White in recognition of Commonwealth day, and I welcome the contributions of members. The theme of this year’s Commonwealth debate is connecting cultures and, as many members will know, this is also the year of creative Scotland. This August, ministers from Commonwealth countries and beyond will gather here in the Scottish Parliament to focus on the power of culture in forging and fostering international relationships and dialogue between nations. The summit is a collaboration between the Scottish Government, the United Kingdom Government, the Edinburgh international festival and the British Council, and it will bring together culture ministers to discuss how culture in its widest sense enriches the lives of people around the world and contributes to the wellbeing of nations. The importance of cultural diplomacy in our international affairs cannot be overestimated. It can open doors and strengthen and support Scotland’s international ambitions. The announcement of the timetable for the referendum means that the world’s eyes will be on Scotland in 2014, when we are hosting a number of world-class events, and we are now seeing a step change in the level of international attention on and engagement with Scotland. In that context, it is vital that we continue to strengthen our relationship with our Commonwealth friends around the world, to share knowledge and experiences and to forge the links that can bring tangible benefits to our countries. Our national touring fund helps Scotland’s performing companies to travel the world every year. Most recently, the National Theatre of Scotland has been touring Australia and New Zealand with “Beautiful Burnout”. In celebration of the 20th Commonwealth games in Glasgow, an excellent project has been developed with India, Canada, New Zealand, South Africa and Botswana. The idea is to create a large-scale choral music performance, inspired, created and performed by young citizens from across the Commonwealth. The project is being led by Scottish Opera, and is supported by the British Council and the Scottish Government. In November, I celebrated St Andrew’s day in Canada. During my visit, it was clear to me that our two countries share so many important historic, cultural and economic links. While I was there, I had the pleasure of launching a Canada-Scotland parliamentary friendship group in Ottawa—another example of our strong ties with that country—and in April, as part of Scotland week in North America, I will be returning to Canada to continue to promote those links. On international women’s day last week, I attended the launch of a production called “Ana”, which is a collaboration between the Imago theatre company from Montreal and Stellar Quines from Scotland. Scotland’s historic and modern links with India are very evident. Over 3,000 Indian students have chosen to study at our educational institutions and our universities and colleges continue to build on existing exchange and research programmes with Indian universities. The Scottish Government has also provided funding for Scotland’s saltire scholarships, which each year give 50 awards each to Indian and Canadian students. Last month, we sponsored an exhibition at the Robert Burns birthplace museum on the theme of Robert Burns and Tagore, two hugely influential national poets connected by common themes and specifically by Tagore’s translation of two of Burns’s works. The exhibition also took place in Kolkata and marked the year-long celebration in India of Tagore’s 150th anniversary. Historic Scotland’s Scottish ten laser survey project is digitally recording five Scottish world heritage sites and five international sites, which now include the Rani Ki Vav—the Queen’s Stepwell—in Gujarat. With less than 900 days to go until the Commonwealth games, never before has there been a more exciting time for our nation. It is clear that the games are already having huge benefits: the east end of Glasgow—John Mason’s constituency in particular—is being transformed; across Scotland jobs are being created and sustained; and businesses are winning major contracts from London and Glasgow. The £10 million games legacy get active fund will provide funding to sports and community-based facilities to help people engage more with sport and be active. We recently launched the £5 million Scottish Sport Relief home and away programme, which is jointly funded by Sport Relief and the Scottish Government. The programme will provide support to projects that benefit some of the most disadvantaged people in Scotland and in the poorest countries across the Commonwealth. Key to our legacy aspirations is to allow our young people to become responsible global citizens with an understanding of the Commonwealth, the world and Scotland’s place in it. Curriculum for excellence provides the framework for education practitioners to use the Commonwealth games as a context for learning, with the ability to create the sustainable, international connections that are required in our 21st century, globalised society. Our cultural programme being developed for the 2014 games will feature high-quality events inspired by the Commonwealth that will engage Scotland’s communities and reinforce our international image as a land of creativity and innovation. We have secured three London 2012 pre-games training camps with Commonwealth countries—Namibia, Zambia and Cameroon. We will work with local communities to ensure that they receive a fantastic welcome and build lasting links that can be sustained as we welcome them back in 2014. Of course, our Government’s international development policy demonstrates our commitment to supporting countries in the developing world. As part of that, I am incredibly proud of the unique and special relationship between Scotland and Malawi. It is not just a relationship at Government level, as formalised in the co-operation agreement, but one that recognises and encourages the many links across all the villages, towns and schools in Scotland and civic society in particular. The Scottish Government has committed over £5.5 million to projects in Malawi over the next two financial years. We have also recently closed a funding round for the Malawi development programme and I look forward to making announcements on successful applications in April. In 2013, we will mark the bicentenary of David Livingstone’s birth, which will be a wonderful opportunity for Scotland to showcase the activity that we are carrying out with our partners across sub-Saharan Africa and celebrate the legacy of David Livingstone’s work. Through funding provided by the International Development Fund we are also supporting work in sub-Saharan Africa and in south Asia to help establish Scotland as one of the world’s first fair trade nations. In south Asia, we are supporting 19 projects in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka to support poverty alleviation. In sub-Saharan Africa, we are working in Rwanda, Tanzania and Zambia. In addition to Malawi, we have recently closed a funding round for sub-Saharan Africa. Drawing on Scottish expertise, we will also look to support work on water, climate change and renewable energy. It is vital that we continue to progress that work, but we must also work together to face new challenges on climate change and in other areas. In so many ways, we are connected to the countries of the Commonwealth and we want to celebrate our culture and our connections. The Government will continue to push forward new initiatives in the years ahead. With regard to the Commonwealth, we can say that there is much to celebrate but there is also much to do.

As I am sure that the member will agree, Scotland has a great deal to learn from its European partners and a great deal to offer, including to European Union candidate and potential candidate countries. We have always been clear that we want to play our role in shaping Europe’s future, to build closer relations with individual European partners and to develop closer economic, educational and cultural links. We continue to explore new and innovative ways of doing that while building on our past successes.

I am interested to hear of the Parliament’s activity. Much of the question is about the Parliament’s activity, so the Presiding Officer might want to consider some of those points. The important contribution that we make is valued and recognised elsewhere. We are a constructive player in global affairs. We contribute expertise on a number of areas, including climate change, inequalities and renewables, and we are always ready to assist possible states, states that are building into democratic free states and those that aspire to different positions. However, some of the points about scrutiny might be for the Parliament. Clearly, on independence, the Government would be able to play an even greater role.

The Scottish Government has made numerous representations to BBC Scotland and to the BBC trust on handling in Scotland the cuts that have been forced on the BBC by the coalition Government’s imposed licence fee settlement. Most recently, the First Minister and I met the trust’s chairman, Lord Patten, for a positive meeting last month, at which we all agreed the need to ensure that the BBC is properly equipped and staffed to properly cover Scottish news and current affairs at an absolutely pivotal time in the country’s history. We now need that common ground and agreement to be reflected in practice. I hope that we will have all-party support for that in the debate later today.

That is a critical issue and we will have a chance to debate it later. People have expressed concerns about radio and the Education and Culture Committee has taken evidence on that. It is a real concern because, if the democratic process is to be successful, it is important to have media scrutiny and quality journalism. That is precisely why members from all parties have raised their concerns and Sandra White has raised the issue at First Minister’s question time. I look forward to this evening’s debate, which can be a message from all members of this Parliament to the BBC.

Creative Scotland, Scotland’s national agency for the promotion of the arts, has established a formal place partnership with Aberdeen City Council. Place partnerships are a key tool that Creative Scotland uses to develop its relationships with local government and to share good practice and celebrate different strengths across Scotland. Creative Scotland has invested £250,000 in Aberdeen City Council as part of its work to develop a set of strategic actions to develop cultural provision in the city that I expect will include new contemporary arts initiatives.

Creative Scotland is represented on the Aberdeen city gardens project group, and in informing and influencing the strategic content of the proposed granite web. Creative Scotland wants to make sure that a contribution is made to the contemporary arts scene in Aberdeen in particular. As an arm’s-length body, Creative Scotland seeks to support projects that it considers to have artistic merit. If the member wants me to, I can find out from Creative Scotland what financial arrangements have been made, but I cannot give him an answer to that just now.

It would be wise to await the outcome of the referendum, which, I believe, closes today. I am sure that members will bring representations to me on the creative future of Aberdeen. I am pleased that Peacock Visual Arts is continuing to receive £262,000 a year from Creative Scotland in support of its activity. It might be wise to wait for the referendum result. I am more than happy to meet members at any time although, as I explained to Richard Baker, Creative Scotland is taking the lead in its relationship with Aberdeen City Council and is taking forward what I hope will be a vibrant future for Aberdeen, regardless of the referendum result.

The 2010 V&amp;A at Dundee business case estimated that the V&amp;A at Dundee could attract 500,000 visitors initially, and 300,000 a year thereafter, with a total net employment impact by 2019-20 of 354 jobs to Dundee city region, 336 to Dundee and 30 to Scotland. Work is being done to maximise the impact of the V&amp;A at Dundee on the surrounding region. A meeting between neighbouring local authorities, including Angus Council, and VisitScotland on 10 January 2012 sought to identify areas for collaboration, tourism, promotion of the region, and cultural opportunities. That was followed up by a VisitScotland and V&amp;A at Dundee industry event this week which aimed to bring the tourism and creative sectors more closely together in the year of Creative Scotland, and to allow businesses to network and to discuss opportunities, collaboration, issues and priorities for their individual businesses and for Angus and Dundee as a destination.

The Universities of Dundee and Abertay are founding partners in the project, so there will be university involvement on a whole number of levels, including economic and cultural involvement. There will also be an interactive web resource and a learning resource space to help educational links with schools, not just in Dundee and Angus, but across Scotland.

The investment from the Scottish Government in particular, and from the other partners, means that the project will be a substantial boost to the construction industry. As a magnet for activity, the V&amp;A has drawn in and attracted activity to other businesses in Dundee, and the project itself will create construction jobs. It is important at difficult times to do big things, and that is exactly what we are doing at the V&amp;A.

The Scotland Bill proposes to remove this Parliament’s responsibility for Antarctica. The Scottish Government believes that the proposal is unnecessary and disproportionate. However, recognising that our responsibility has never been exercised, we have not opposed that part of the bill.

Mr Gibson has set out an imaginative approach to negotiations in this area. He also draws attention to the sell-out of the 1999 order for Scotland. However, the proposed linkage between Antarctica and the boundaries of Scottish waters is not one that we have made.

That is one of the reasons why there was an issue with Antarctica. In recent years we have co-operated with the UK precisely because of some of the University of Edinburgh’s work. As an Edinburgh MSP, Colin Keir is absolutely right to draw attention to the really important work on climate change that the school of geosciences at the University of Edinburgh is carrying out. It is also working with other universities and other international operations. That is an example of excellence in our universities and of our will to collaborate and co-operate wherever we can.

The Scottish Government is committed to widening access to culture and increasing cultural participation. We encourage all the national cultural bodies, companies and national collections to contribute. I will give a couple of examples. National Galleries of Scotland provides free, regular and special events for families with children. In the recent half-term week about 1,000 people took part in such activities, with more than 850 visiting the reopened Scottish National Portrait Gallery. As part of its outreach work with families, the National Theatre of Scotland is working with Queens Cross Housing Association in Glasgow to encourage families to attend its open doors event in April and to take a behind-the-scenes look at theatre. Museums Galleries Scotland is working with local museums to ensure that the 2012 festival of museums offers stimulating activities for all ages this May. Family-friendly activities are planned at the Stirling Smith art gallery and museum, the Kinneil museum in Falkirk and the Andrew Carnegie birthplace museum in Dunfermline.

We have had research carried out, which was published last Christmas. I am happy to share that research with the member and to send it to her. What was interesting in that longitudinal survey was the fact that, regardless of parental income and activity, as long as youngsters had participated in cultural activities—not just made visits—they were more likely to participate as adults. The information is complex, but I am more than happy to send it to the member.

I agree with the member and I hope that the festival goes well. She is right: we must find different and inspiring approaches, and community-led festivals are sometimes the first step to introducing youngsters to cultural experiences. I hope that the weekend’s activities go well.

As I am sure Elaine Murray appreciates, the answer depends on the particular circumstances, such as who owns a property and the conditions on which it was gifted to the community concerned.

Under the common good, it can be the use of a property rather than necessarily its ownership that has been gifted. That can cause issues. A council might have been gifted ownership as well as use. If we are talking about only the use of a property as being common good, that is perhaps a different matter. The subject is complex. Perhaps looking at the different parts of local government legislation that determine the position might help the member. I can send her some of the relevant documentation, if that helps her to access it. We could be here not just all day but all week discussing the common good and the issues that relate to it.

The culture sector has an extensive reach to Scotland’s young people through creative education programmes and because it is an exciting area in which to work and learn new and valuable skills. Apprenticeship projects are in place in heritage and culture organisations. Historic Scotland will employ an additional 30 apprentices in traditional skills over the next three years—10 are to be employed in this financial year—and there are further apprenticeship opportunities in the National Records of Scotland and Creative Scotland. The five national performing companies provide vocational training in the performing arts, internships and roadshows on employment opportunities and career planning. The Museums Galleries Scotland internship programmes have attracted huge numbers of applicants. Recently, more than 3,000 young people applied for the 20 paid internship programme places that were on offer in local museums across Scotland.

There is an appetite to ensure that we provide opportunities in all the cultural sectors. The Government is investing more in the college sector than the previous Administration did. The creative industries have been an important area. Through difficult times, employment opportunities for young people who come through the college sector into the creative industries have been quite successful relative to other areas.

I, too, congratulate Sandra White on securing this evening’s debate. I know that the future of BBC services in Scotland greatly concerns her as she has raised it at First Minister’s question time, and indeed she raised it this afternoon. I am glad that we have now been able to discuss the matter at more length. I was pleased to hear a degree of cross-party support for the maintenance and enhancement of BBC services in Scotland, and also the recognition from members throughout the chamber of the quality of the staff. I share that sentiment. I turn to a point that Bill Kidd raised. When the Prime Minister came to Scotland recently, he was kind enough to remind us that Reith of the BBC—Lord Reith of Stonehaven—was a Scot. The Scottish Government was already mindful of that fact, and mindful not just of his origins but of his vision of public service broadcasting. In a particularly good speech, Patricia Ferguson raised the issue of the licence fee and the source of the problem. Had the coalition Government been more mindful of that vision when it imposed the current licence fee settlement, which was negotiated secretly over 48 hours, we might not be having this debate. I have made that point repeatedly in the Parliament and directly to ministers, both in person and in writing. That is one of the reasons why, in the current Scotland Bill discussions, we proposed to include in the bill a power of consultation on the licence fee. We come here not to criticise the BBC—although some members have done so—but to protect it. We recognise that the BBC has been placed in a difficult position by the cuts that have been made by the UK Government. Indeed, even as the Scottish Government absorbs the effects of cuts to its funding, we understand that that is also the case for the BBC. Just as the challenge for us is to respond to our financial situation in a way that maximises public benefit, preserves front-line services and protects priorities, so the BBC faces a similar challenge. Just as the Scottish Government expects the Parliament to recognise that the overall position under current constitutional arrangements is forced upon us and to hold us vigorously to account on how we work within those constraints, so it is entirely right to challenge the BBC on how it works within its financial constraints. Joan McAlpine’s point about the BBC not touching Radio 4 because it is the jewel in the crown gets to the nub of the issues that were raised by several members, including Bill Kidd and Sandra White, regarding the way in which radio, particularly, is being treated in Scotland compared with how it is being treated in England. The BBC has approached its response to the cuts in a systematic fashion through its “Delivering Quality First” consultation, to which the Scottish Government has sent a response. Patricia Ferguson talked about the importance of the quality of output, and that was very much at the heart of what we put in our submission. We were grateful to Lord Patten, the chairman of the BBC trust, for the opportunity to discuss that when he met me and the First Minister last month. We look forward to seeing the BBC trust’s response to the consultation in due course. It is concerning, therefore, that the BBC both in Scotland and more generally is making decisions in advance of the BBC trust reaching a formal position in the light of the responses to its consultation. It is also concerning that, when such decisions are made, they do not always match the rhetoric of “Delivering Quality First”. In the final paragraphs of the introduction to the Scottish Government’s response to that paper, we say: “Turning to how the BBC will operate within these constraints, few—if any, and certainly not the Scottish Government—would argue with the broad ambition that is contained within the five pillars of proposed editorial strategy identified by the Director General: seeking the best journalism in the world; ambitious original drama and comedy; inspiration and commitment in the fields of knowledge, music and culture; outstanding services for children; and events that bring people together.” Those are all laudable aims. However, it is vital that the detail of the BBC’s proposals matches those ideals and that they are met specifically for Scotland as for the broader network—a point that was made by a number of members.

That ship has sailed—unfortunately, within 48 hours—and the renegotiation will not take place until 2015-16. Either we will have the full powers of independence to allow us to make decisions about broadcasting or, at the very least, we will need to have a consultation on the negotiation as it proceeds. Patricia Ferguson is absolutely right about the price of the cut and the freeze, and we should have been part of those discussions. I agree with her that there could have been other solutions, and the effects of the freeze should have been addressed. The Scottish Government’s response continues: “The emphasis on delivery in the title ‘Delivering Quality First’ is, like the Director General’s five pillars, wholly laudable. The concern is the lack of detail to demonstrate that the BBC’s proposals will, indeed, deliver those pillars to the standard of quality to be expected.” As more detail emerges, that concern has grown rather than diminished. We debated “Introducing in Scotland” in January. However, the issue is not about a specific programme, excellent though it is, but about preserving the opportunities that it offers to our gifted young people and the “inspiration and commitment” to music and culture that it shows—to use the words from one of the director general’s five pillars. The challenge is similar in relation to programmes such as the Janice Forsyth show, which I think is the best show on the radio, and “Mary Ann Kennedy’s Global Gathering”, which is described on the BBC’s website as “a world music show with a uniquely Scottish perspective”. The challenge for the BBC is to demonstrate how that kind of unique Scottish perspective in music and culture can be maintained. I was encouraged to see that BBC Scotland’s brief for the debate mentioned a continuing role for those presenters. I hope that more detail will follow soon. I might be thought to have a vested interest in encouraging the BBC to pay particular attention to Scottish news and current affairs, but no more so than any member of this Parliament or, indeed, any citizen of this country. The First Minister and I had a very positive meeting with Lord Patten. We all agreed that the BBC must be properly equipped and staffed to cover Scottish news and current affairs fully at this vital point in Scotland’s history. I think that every one of us in the chamber can agree that that is imperative. That applies both to factual reporting and to providing the opportunities for wider reflection and debate that a programme such as “Newsweek Scotland” currently delivers. A point that was well made by Bill Kidd is that the need for information on and analysis of Scotland’s constitutional debate applies not only to citizens of this country but to citizens of the world. Scotland is now subject to international attention as never before. That is a challenge, but it is also an opportunity that the BBC and other public service broadcasters need to live up to. Let the word go out from the chamber that Scotland and the world look to our public service broadcasters to match the needs of this historic moment. I will send a copy of the Official Report of the debate to Mark Thompson and to Ken MacQuarrie to reiterate our concern about the BBC’s proposals. Meeting closed at 17:36.

I echo the sentiments that have been expressed in the chamber and thank George Adam, the cross-party group on fair trade and its co-convener, James Kelly, for their involvement in the debate. I also thank George Adam for securing the debate. I add my congratulations to local authorities such as Renfrewshire Council and West Lothian Council on achieving Fairtrade status, and I congratulate Ayr on the fifth anniversary of its achieving Fairtrade status, which John Scott referred to. This promises to be an exciting year for fair trade, as Scotland aims to become a Fairtrade nation in 2012. The criteria that describe the steps that we need to take to achieve that were jointly developed between the Scottish and Welsh Administrations. Wales announced itself as the world’s first Fairtrade nation in 2008, and Scotland will soon follow. For us to meet the criteria, 55 per cent of local authorities need to become Fairtrade zones; 100 per cent of cities should have Fairtrade status; and 55 per cent of towns and 60 per cent of higher education institutions need to have active groups working towards achieving that status. However, I will reflect on the point that Linda Fabiani made. She is right to give a word of caution that we should challenge, inspect and drive forward what we mean, in qualitative terms, by the fair trade agenda. All six of Scotland’s cities are already Fairtrade cities, and 65 per cent of higher education institutions have now achieved Fairtrade status or are working towards achieving it. The Scottish Fair Trade Forum has been working hard to achieve the remaining unmet Fairtrade nation criteria, particularly by increasing the number of Fairtrade towns. There are 61 towns in Scotland that have either achieved Fairtrade status or an active fair trade steering group. A further nine towns are expected to launch their fair trade steering groups during Fairtrade fortnight. That would leave Scotland requiring 22 more towns to establish an active group and get involved in the campaign for us to meet the criteria. Within my constituency, Bathgate, Linlithgow and Whitburn have all achieved Fairtrade town status, which is a credit to the hard work of the local steering groups. It has also been an honour to support schools such as Boghall primary, Bathgate academy and Linlithgow academy in their efforts. The relocated Fair Tradewinds shop in Linlithgow is also successful. It was important that we heard from members such as James Kelly, who reflected on the impact of local campaigns in his constituency. I confirm that all 32 local authorities in Scotland are involved in the campaign, with West Lothian Council the most recent to become a Fairtrade zone. In total, 14 local authorities have achieved Fairtrade status and only four more are required to do so to meet the criteria. An assessment panel will meet in the autumn to review our evidence and judge whether Scotland has achieved enough to become a Fairtrade nation. I am confident that we will have done so, but we have to strive to go beyond that. Therefore, we must turn our minds to what lies beyond Fairtrade nation status, as I think Linda Fabiani was challenging us to do. I thank the staff and volunteers of the Scottish Fair Trade Forum for their hard work and dedication in getting us to this point. I look forward to participating in a number of events during Fairtrade fortnight. I will attend a fair trade celebration in Linlithgow and speak at an event at the University of Edinburgh organised by the Scottish Fair Trade Forum. However, we should not forget that promoting fair trade is a year-round challenge, not only the work of a fortnight. Evidence suggests that fair trade sales are holding up, despite the recession. In 2010, sales of fair trade products soared by 40 per cent to an estimated retail value of £1.17 billion, and the Fairtrade Foundation is expected to reveal another increase in sales. However, in this tougher economic environment, it is important that all of us, as consumers, think carefully about how we spend our money and do so responsibly. That is equally true for the public sector. George Adam and Linda Fabiani raised that issue. Many people feel that more can be done to support fair trade through public sector procurement. The Scottish Government will introduce a sustainable procurement bill in this session of Parliament to maximise the economic impact of the £9 billion annual procurement spend and to ensure that public procurement in Scotland delivers environmentally sustainable, socially responsible and innovative goods, services and works. Scotland has always been an outward-looking, innovative and caring nation. As George Adam said, it is not good enough to be socially just at home; we need to be socially just abroad as well. The global fight against poverty and inequality is no different, and Scots are active in that fight at home and overseas. The Scottish Government’s international development policy demonstrates our commitment to supporting countries in the developing world, such as Malawi. I was pleased to hear from Mark McDonald about the visits from Malawi to the north-east of Scotland. I am incredibly proud of the unique and special relationship between Scotland and Malawi. An example of that is the Scotland-Malawi trade project, which was funded by the Scottish Government to create links between Malawian producers and Scottish buyers. Strong partnerships such as that ensure that local people are part of the decision-making process and are creating and shaping their own future. The fair trade movement in Scotland is another good example. Earlier today, I was delighted to meet pupils from Selkirk high school who have shown leadership in supporting and promoting fair trade in their local community. The pupils all participated in their school’s Fairtrade cotton t-shirt and poster design competitions. I was delighted to judge the t-shirt competition and select the winning design, and I congratulate the winners, Harry Murphy and Jo Marr. James Kelly and Mark McDonald were quite right to identify the impact of education on the leadership role within the fair trade movement. The local steering group in Selkirk has also ensured that that town is the latest in Scotland to achieve Fairtrade town status. Joan McAlpine might want to reflect on whether Dumfries and Selkirk will be cheering at the same time, as she said that Dumfries is about to celebrate becoming the latest Fairtrade town as well. George Adam referred to cotton. An example of an innovative approach to supporting fair trade in Scotland is the Fairtrade cotton schoolwear campaign. The campaign, which began in November 2009, seeks to improve the slow rate of growth of the Fairtrade cotton industry and to respond to the huge demand from schools to be involved in and to embrace fair trade. The campaign aims to raise awareness of fair trade, help schools to switch, encourage shops to stock Fairtrade cotton products, and help to combat many unacceptable problems in the cotton industry, such as child labour. In becoming a Fairtrade nation, Scotland is demonstrating that we are delivering real and lasting impacts, contributing to reducing poverty and improving the lives of the people whom we seek to support as well as helping them to access their rights. I am talking about our duty and our social responsibility. We can do that at home and, once we have achieved Fairtrade nation status, we will continue the campaign to influence people abroad. Meeting closed at 17:57.

I am very pleased to lead this debate on the year of creative Scotland, which is the third in a series of four focus years that showcase some of Scotland’s great creative, cultural and tourism assets and build the momentum as we progress towards homecoming 2014. Building on the success of the earlier focus years, the year of creative Scotland will spotlight, celebrate and promote Scotland’s cultural and creative strengths. The year is underpinned by four objectives: to support events and activities; to inspire our people and visitors to participate; to raise the profile of Scotland; and to encourage partner collaboration. Although public finances are tough, I have been able to protect front-line funding for culture where possible. The programme for 2012 features fantastic events and outstanding new work taking place in communities the length and breadth of Scotland. It is only 1 February, and already an incredible amount of activity has happened in support of the year. The year got off to a great start this hogmanay with the extended and stunning fireworks display at Edinburgh castle. On 1 January, for the first time, an exciting day of fun and games for all the family in Edinburgh’s old town was provided in the form of the new year games. Ten thousand people took part, competing for the red stag of the doonies or the silver eagle of the uppies. In the end, the doonies were triumphant, but a fantastic time was had by all. Last Friday, I launched the fantastic new Big Burns Supper festival in Dumfries—a new, inspirational festival with 45 venues, 80 artists and an estimated 2,000 performers. That is an example of the year reaching different communities, and I—literally—raised the flag for the year of creative Scotland with the organisers. Last week, I attended the year of creative Scotland’s creative places awards, which celebrate and recognise the exceptional creativity and cultural activity that go into nurturing the fabric—the social and economic lives—of our communities. I was hugely impressed by the line-up of shortlisted applicants. Organisations and partnerships supporting performers in St Andrews, craftspeople in West Kilbride, poets and writers in Wigtown, and budding artists in Creetown and in Huntly were recognised, with funding awards ranging from £40,000 to £150,000 for new, expanded activity. More widely, a wealth of activity will happen as part of the extensive partner programme. For example, the trad trails of Fèis Rois and the Traditional Music and Song Association of Scotland will, for the first time, take place in central Scotland, enabling visitors and local people to experience the very best of Scottish traditional music throughout 2012. From March to November, Scotland’s pubs, village halls, historic sites, farmers’ markets and other venues will resound to the strains of Scotland’s traditional musicians. Many of the events are free and all will guarantee an authentic experience of Scottish culture. Events and community projects such as these, coupled with our already vibrant cultural calendar, will offer something for everyone to enjoy, all year round, and will complement the cultural activity taking place around the Olympic and Paralympic games. In that spirit, I am happy to accept the Labour amendment.

I diplomatically leave the matter of the most appropriate site for the rings as one to be resolved between the City of Edinburgh Council and Glasgow City Council. Creative Scotland has provided £6.5 million of lottery funding to support a range of activities in places across the country. Newly funded projects announced so far include Dancing Voices and Mission: Possible, which promote dance in Glasgow and Dundee, and Edinburgh UNESCO City of Literature Trust’s enLIGHTen project, which will bring the streets of Edinburgh to life in February with spectacular projections of literature from the Scottish enlightenment. Between July and September 2012 in the Scottish Borders, there will be a celebration of contemporary Scottish printmaking to bring that activity in the Borders to a wider audience. There will be activity to celebrate Scotland as a land of ideas and innovation with a world-class creative legacy in the fields of education, science, engineering, medicine and ecology. For example, during 2012, to celebrate the year of creative Scotland, National Museums of Scotland will host a series of museum talks focusing on Scottish innovation and pioneering spirit across a wide range of fields including sport, business and science. To harness the full potential of the exceptional programme of activity that we have planned, it is essential that our communities and visitors know what is happening and are inspired to take part, so a wealth of marketing and promotional activity in support of the year has already happened. I took the opportunity during my recent visit to North America to showcase the year of creative Scotland and warmly invite our friends overseas to visit Scotland during 2012. We have more marketing activity planned and the momentum will ramp up significantly during 2012 as more exciting events and activities are announced. In January, I was pleased to launch the new year of creative Scotland television advert, which is expected to reach around 20 million people. It spearheads a wide range of co-ordinated partner activities—boosted by £500,000 from the Scottish Government—to showcase what we have planned for 2012 and extend a warm Scottish welcome to the world. Today, I unveiled the groundbreaking short film “Scotland the World Over”. That new work, which has been made by Scots and Scots at heart in 32 countries around the globe, is a great showcase of our creativity on the global stage and has already captured the imagination of more than 1,500 people at home and abroad who have contributed. Already, more than that have viewed it since 9 o’clock. It can be viewed at the Scotland.org website. Organisations, communities and businesses the length and breadth of the country are enthusiastically contributing to the celebration of the year of creative Scotland. The partner events programme already showcases more than 4,000 cultural events and activities throughout the country. VisitScotland’s consumer website can help people to find out what is happening in their area and enables them to sign up for a newsletter to keep themselves informed as things develop over the year. In addition, its corporate website provides a range of tools to help businesses and organisations to gain maximum benefit from the year of creative Scotland, including advice on how to have their event or activity added to the programme. The media, marketing and promotional activities that we have developed are not the only things that will help to celebrate and promote Scotland’s culture. Our collective and active enthusiasm for our creativity will also spotlight, celebrate and promote Scotland’s strengths on the world stage. Jackie Kay writes: “A poem is a little moment of belief”, and I like to think that the year of creative Scotland is about belief in ourselves, our culture and our creative aspirations. It will provide economic growth and investment in new work, but it also offers the opportunity to celebrate, value and experience the great wealth of cultural activity that our communities already enjoy and to which our artists contribute. The year of creative Scotland programme clearly has a global and international reach, and we expect that to evolve continually as the year progresses. The year of creative Scotland supports the London 2012 cultural olympiad and offers us the opportunity to participate on the global stage. We have an opportunity to ensure that the quality and reach of festival 2012, as it is being called, relate to the work that we are doing and that we can be proud of that work. Indeed, the first festival 2012 performance is Gustavo Dudamel and the Simón Bolívar Youth Orchestra of Venezuela, performing alongside Sistema Scotland’s big noise orchestra in the Raploch in June. Our museums and galleries will also contribute. The national collections are producing a range of work and activities to enhance a key theme of international reach in this creative and Olympic year. That includes: “Fascinating Mummies”—the title will interest my children, although I am not sure that they find me fascinating—an exhibition of antiquities from the Netherlands and the United Kingdom that will provide an insight into life and death in ancient Egypt; and “Sounds Global”, which puts young people at the heart of the curatorial process and is delivered in collaboration with the Museums, Libraries and Archives Council and the London Organising Committee of the Olympic and Paralympic Games—LOCOG—as part of the cultural olympiad. National Galleries of Scotland will also host a series of exhibitions that will focus on celebrated artists from Scotland and around the world. All five of the national performing companies will showcase some of the best of Scotland’s creative talent at performances this year. The year of creative Scotland will also see them produce a range of community-based activity to promote creativity throughout Scotland—that relates to Patricia Ferguson’s amendment. That activity has been made possible as part of Creative Scotland’s first-in-a-lifetime awards. For example, Scottish Ballet will visit a number of communities throughout Scotland—Arran, Mull, Islay, Perth, Fort William, Dumfries and Greenock—four days and nights at a time in the autumn of 2012, working in partnership with organisations such as the Royal Conservatoire of Scotland to improve dance participation. What is more, the Scottish Chamber Orchestra, with Nicola Benedetti, will perform Vivaldi’s “Four Seasons” in Ayr, Edinburgh, Glasgow and Aberdeen. In addition, the 12 main Edinburgh festivals, which are supported through the expo fund, are fully engaged with the year although, of course, Scotland’s festivals are not confined simply to Edinburgh. The year offers us the opportunity to promote, enjoy and visit festivals throughout Scotland. Visitors and residents alike can take advantage of The List and Creative Scotland’s free “Guide to Scottish Festivals 2012”, which showcases more than 350 festivals across the country. On top of that, Creative Scotland has produced an interactive festivals map to showcase Scotland’s rich cultural events through its international touring programmes. In the time that is available, it is difficult to encompass the incredible wealth of cultural and creative activity that will take place in Scotland during the year of creative Scotland, which will take place on top of the activity that takes place each and every year. The year of creative Scotland provides us with a fantastic opportunity to celebrate and promote our writers, artists, musicians and performers, and it does not all end on 31 December 2012. On 1 January 2013, Scotland will enter the year of natural Scotland with a stronger than ever global reputation for culture and creativity. As Einstein was famously quoted as saying, “Creativity is contagious. Pass it on.” The year will continue to have an impact and reach beyond 2012. To help to ensure the cultural legacy of the year, I am pleased to confirm that an additional £1.1 million of the money that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth announced yesterday would be released from UK capital consequentials will be allocated to culture. Of that allocation, £840,000 will be invested in key infrastructure: £300,000 will go to the National Library of Scotland to help with the Kelvin hall project and other improvements; £300,000 will go to the National Gallery of Scotland for essential improvements; and £240,000 will go to the national performing companies for new equipment for performance and education work. Further announcements will follow on how the remainder will be allocated. In addition, I am pleased to announce a further allocation of £300,000 from existing budgets to the National Museums of Scotland for repairs and maintenance. Those resources, our existing world-class portfolio of cultural events and activities, the new initiatives and projects that will be funded under the year of creative Scotland, the wealth of partner events that will form part of and benefit from the celebration, the London 2012 festival and torch relay, and all the partnerships that will be strengthened during 2012 place us in an excellent position to build towards the once-in-a-lifetime opportunity that will arise in 2014, when Scotland will welcome the world to join us for our second year of homecoming and when, as a nation, we will take centre stage in world terms as host of the Commonwealth games and the Ryder cup. I move, That the Parliament notes that the Year of Creative Scotland is the third in a series of focus years leading to Homecoming 2014; recognises the role it will play in celebrating and promoting Scotland’s creativity, innovation and culture; welcomes the Year as the start of a three-year cultural plan of creative and cultural activity embracing the Olympic and Paralympic Games in 2012 through to the Commonwealth Games in 2014, and acknowledges the economic and cultural benefits that can be realised by taking full advantage of the opportunities offered by the Year of Creative Scotland to raise the profile of Scotland both nationally and internationally as a world-class cultural tourism destination.

We are already in the European Union and an independent Scotland would continue membership, fulfilling the responsibilities that that brings. The Scottish Government regularly meets European commissioners to discuss a range of issues and it will continue to do so.

In his answer to Ruth Davidson, the First Minister cited Eamonn Gallagher, Emile Noël and Lord Mackenzie-Stuart. The member asks whether Scotland would be better off. There is an important point to consider. Ruth Davidson mentioned farmers. If Scotland were an independent member state, under the reforms to the common agricultural policy, the new negotiated position would mean that our farmers would be hundreds of millions of pounds better off than they are. I refer the member to more recent coverage. Aidan O’Neill, who is a Queen’s counsel, has said that “the most likely position that the Luxembourg court would take” would be that Scotland, and England, Wales and Northern Ireland “should each succeed to the UK’s existing membership of the EU, but now as two States rather than as one.” Even more recently, on 15 January, when a European Commission spokesperson was asked to comment on the status of Scotland and the rest of the UK in the EU in the event of Scottish independence, he said: “We will not comment on hypothetical questions”. I suggest that David McLetchie should let the Scottish people answer the question and decide their own future in a referendum made in Scotland.

I welcome Denmark taking over the presidency of the Council of the EU. I met the Danish ambassador at an event here in the Parliament last week. Of course, Denmark and Scotland are closely aligned in our vision for the future. We share a vision of a low-carbon society with a 40 per cent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2020, which is well above the EU’s 30 per cent target, and we share the target of generating 100 per cent of our electricity from renewable sources. Those ambitions are reflected in the Danish presidency’s priority of a green Europe. In the next six months, whereas Denmark will be chairing key EU meetings at which it can advance that agenda, Scotland will be left having to request permission from the UK Government even to attend those meetings.

We are working with partners to ensure that events and activities to celebrate the year of creative Scotland take place the length and breadth of the country, including in our rural communities. We are using the emphasis on creativity to highlight and promote Scotland’s rich and diverse cultural life for the benefit of our communities and visitors alike. For example, we recently announced funding under the year of creative Scotland for the Fife music hub, which is a year-long project that involves working with communities in central Fife to enable them to participate by playing and ultimately performing their own music. Such events will engage our communities and visitors and provide a welcome boost to rural economies.

I certainly encourage the member’s constituents and others to apply for that funding. The music initiative that I just mentioned was one of the first in a lifetime programmes for which funding has already been announced. I know that Fife Council is embracing the year of creative Scotland and that it sees great opportunities to promote cultural activity and attract visitors to Fife to experience the fantastic cultural opportunities that will be provided, not only from the new programmes but from the existing wealth of talent and capability in Fife and across Scotland.

I am delighted that the big Burns supper received funding from Creative Scotland. It is a fantastic way to begin the year of creative Scotland. I look forward to visiting the festival on 27 January to mark the launch of the exciting and innovative programme. It is fantastic to see contemporary artists celebrating the life and work of our national bard.

There is a wealth of artworks of national importance throughout Scotland in both national and local collections. The national collections are expected to continue to display work from their collections as widely as possible.

Yes. The National Galleries of Scotland is developing its galleries without walls model to enable greater access to its collection and to develop partnerships across Scotland. I will encourage discussions between the National Galleries of Scotland and cultural institutes in Aberdeen so that there can be greater collaboration. The member might also be interested to know that the National Galleries outreach team is working with Aberdeen City Council to create a collaborative film portrait of the city, which will form part of the Scottish national portrait gallery’s portrait of the nation project.

The Scottish Government is continuing to seek a more plural and diverse public service broadcasting sector in Scotland by developing the case for a Scottish digital network, particularly through our call for the Scotland Bill to be amended to grant this Parliament powers to establish public service broadcasting institutions. We are also engaging with the BBC as it develops its response to the licence fee settlement, particularly calling for the quality and diversity of its programming in news and current affairs to be maintained and for the preservation of the Radio 1 “Introducing in Scotland” programme, which has introduced such a diverse range of new performers and on which we will have a members’ business debate later this afternoon. More generally in the arts, Scotland’s national companies, galleries, museum and library are all encouraging wider access to their productions, exhibitions and services. Just last week, Creative Scotland announced funding of over £1.2 million to create first in a lifetime opportunities for people to enjoy or take part in creative activity for the first time. As the member knows, however, both broadcasting and equal opportunities are matters that are currently reserved to the Westminster Parliament under schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998.

Yes—I will take up that commitment. I will raise the issue when I speak to the BBC trust and BBC senior management. In my capacity as a constituency MSP, I met the manager of the Scottish women’s football team only this week. That team has just received a new ranking—its highest ever—of 22nd in the world. I think that it is performing slightly better than its male counterpart. Patrick Harvie is right to identify broadcasters’ performance in showing sport and representations of women. The younger generation that is coming through sees role models on the television. The point is an important one to raise, particularly given that the Scottish Women’s Convention is visiting the Parliament this week, as members will be aware.

I set out my priorities for culture for 2012-13 when I addressed the Education and Culture Committee on 25 October last year. The priorities include minimising the impact of spending reductions on Scotland’s cultural and heritage sector as far as possible and delivering key cultural capital projects over the next three years that will contribute to economic growth. In addition, 2012 is the year of creative Scotland, which will involve a range of activity throughout the country that will promote and celebrate Scotland as a culturally vibrant and creative nation for our communities and our visitors. We will continue to focus on the creative industries, which are one of seven priority areas for economic growth.

In December, I met the senior management of not only the national performing companies but the national collections, along with Creative Scotland and VisitScotland, to ensure that we are all working together to maximise the opportunities in the year of creative Scotland. All five national performing companies are closely engaged in that as programme partners. I am pleased that the National Theatre of Scotland and Scottish Ballet have succeeded in achieving awards from the Creative Scotland first in a lifetime programme, which I talked about earlier. They will undertake two exciting new projects that will take their work to communities the length and breadth of Scotland.

We are working with partners to develop the events and activities that will take place during homecoming 2014. It is envisaged that the programme for 2014 will feature a number of major events, a regional programme across Scotland and a celebration of key anniversaries. Announcements on the detailed programme will follow in due course. My colleague the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism leads on homecoming 2014.

I am sure that the member will make the case for that and encourage people in his constituency to grab the opportunities. The town of Dunfermline played a constructive role in previous homecoming activities, of course. Indeed, I distinctly remember fantastic artwork that involved light and candles in Dunfermline abbey. I am sure that there will be great opportunities to take that forward for 2014. One of the themes of homecoming 2014 will be ancestry, so there will be opportunities to capitalise again on Scotland’s history and diaspora—the last is important. I am sure that members across the chamber will want to grab opportunities to promote their areas, to increase tourism and to grow their constituencies’ economies as a result of homecoming 2014.

Homecoming 2009 was very successful. There was not just one event; events took place across the year, and there were key signature events. Some 71 per cent of tourism businesses stated that homecoming 2009 was a positive initiative for Scotland, and 90 per cent of organisers who delivered events stated that they would want to take part in similar events in the future. Annabel Goldie is quite right to identify issues that arose from the gathering, which was dealt with in an investigation by the Parliament, but she will, of course, remember that it was a Conservative peer who helped to develop the initiative. She is also right to question the robustness of future plans, and I am sure that she will do that as they are brought forward. However, to ensure that homecoming 2014 is a success, it is important that we build on the success of not just 2009, but the themed focus years. The year of food and drink helped to maximise the uptake and promotion of Scotland’s fantastic resources, and the year of active Scotland helped to promote the Highlands and other areas as destinations of choice for active holidays. We are now embracing the year of creative Scotland. That will culminate in another focus on ancestry after the year of natural Scotland next year. There are many positive things that we can do and we will ensure that we do them. We will work together collectively and build on the success of previous events. I reiterate that the year of homecoming will be what people make it in their local communities. Homecoming is not just one event; rather, it is a series of events. It will be so again in 2014.

The Scottish Government spoke with both the Scotland Malawi Partnership and the Network of International Development Organisations in Scotland in advance of the funding rounds for Malawi and sub-Saharan Africa being launched in December. That involved discussions about the funding priorities, timings and application papers. The priorities for funding reflect those that were set out by the Government of Malawi and our manifesto commitments to strengthen our international work in areas in which Scotland has particular expertise to offer.

I refer the member to my first answer and particularly to our manifesto commitments to help to promote areas in which we have particular expertise. For example, the Government of Rwanda’s 2020 programme and priorities set out its goals. Highlighted within that development plan are the “Inadequate and expensive electricity supply” as “a limiting factor to development” and the fact that “the agricultural sector has continued to perform poorly, with consistently declining productivity”, as well as people’s need for access to clean water and sanitation provision. In developing our programme we have taken account, under the Paris principles, of the needs of different countries. Malcolm Chisholm mentioned Tanzania, Rwanda and Zambia. They will receive greater funding under the model that we put forward, which has also had a longer lead-in in programme time. NIDOS asked us to provide that. We have consulted the sector and reflected individual countries’ interests and requirements. In doing so, we have used Scotland’s expertise and increased the funding that is available to the countries that Malcolm Chisholm mentioned.

As the year of creative Scotland, 2012 will include the promotion of a wealth of cultural and creative events and activities that will draw significantly on the cultural legacy of rural Scotland. We are working closely with a wide range of partners to use the emphasis on creativity to highlight and promote Scotland’s rich and diverse cultural life and heritage for the benefit of communities and visitors alike, particularly through the promotional and marketing tools available on the VisitScotland and Creative Scotland websites.

That is a very important question. Much of VisitScotland’s marketing is helping to attract people to other parts of Scotland, not just to the cities. One of Scotland’s attractions for visitors is its unique heritage and the warm welcome that people can receive. I was pleased to hear that the 17th Hebridean Celtic festival will take place in Stornoway—I understand that the Proclaimers, the Waterboys and Kassidy are headlining—but we need to ensure that we promote activities elsewhere. It is a great opportunity to tackle the need, which Rhoda Grant has identified, to get tourists to visit all parts of Scotland. That is one of the reasons that creativity has been used as a driver to attract tourism—not just international tourists, but tourists from across the United Kingdom. The statistics that came out last week show how successful that has been, but Rhoda Grant is right: we have a wealth of talent and fantastic scenery and heritage to promote, and it is important that we drive the advertising and marketing into those areas. Members will see from the new VisitScotland advert for the year of creative Scotland that we are certainly trying to do that.

I join other members in congratulating Joan McAlpine on securing the debate. I thank all members who have spoken in support of retaining the “Introducing in Scotland” programme on Radio 1. I listened to the programme when it was on an earlier slot, when I travelled around my constituency in my car. I am interested in some of the remarks that have been made by members. I am particularly pleased that punk is alive and well in Aberdeen, and I say to Drew Smith that we should make no apology for recognising the status of contemporary music alongside classical and traditional music. Many cogent points have been made, and I hope to pick up on some of them during my remarks. It is also important that we look at what has brought us to this situation. A number of people have made remarks about the other cuts that are happening in the BBC, and during question time earlier I made it clear that the Scottish Government has already raised its concerns with the BBC about quality, range and output, in relation to proposals for news programmes in particular. Today’s debate focuses on “Introducing in Scotland”. Joan McAlpine arranged for me last month to meet a delegation from the music industry, including artists who have appeared on the programme along with others from the wider music sector. They told me how the programme supported and fed the talent and material that can be produced and how that is then exposed on the programme. Annabelle Ewing made the important point that the programme is meant to be about delivering quality first—the BBC’s agenda—but that there is a damage in limiting the finding of tomorrow’s quality. It was important to make that point. More recently, when we issued the Scottish Government’s response to the BBC trust’s consultation on how it will operate within the constraints of the current licence-fee settlement, we were able to draw on the experience of the delegation in highlighting the real cultural impact that is made by “Introducing in Scotland”. I was impressed by the delegation I met and what the people had to say. They talked about how “Introducing in Scotland” has made a real difference to many careers of new and emerging musically talented individuals and bands, but they also talked about how the programme has supported the producers and the creative industry in general and how it has kept them informed of new and emerging bands and solo performers. The BBC has responsibility for public service broadcasting generally; it also has a leadership role in the development of creative industries, as it frequently reminds me. In that context, “Introducing in Scotland” has not just artistic and cultural value but social and commercial value, which might not have been foremost in early thoughts about cuts to BBC funding and output. The creative industries are hugely important to the Scottish economy. The sector is one of the seven key growth sectors in the Government’s economic strategy. It generates well over £5 billion annually and supports 60,000 jobs. The commercial and international success of performers such as Biffy Clyro, Calvin Harris and Franz Ferdinand, who got their first break from “Introducing in Scotland” and went on to make us proud, demonstrates that performers can come from Scotland, be exposed in Scotland initially and then have a big international impact. That relates to Annabel Goldie’s point. “Introducing in Scotland” has played a key role in giving opportunities to emerging talent. An important part of the message that we heard in the debate is that bands do not have to start out in London if they are to succeed. When I met the delegation of young performers I was struck by their energy and commitment. I am sure that if programmes such as “Introducing in Scotland” exist to give them a chance, they will seize such opportunities. For me, the case for preserving “Introducing in Scotland” is clear. It has been great to hear many other members make a persuasive argument in that regard. I will draw out three further points that are illustrated by the threat to “Introducing in Scotland”, which we all hope will soon be lifted, when the BBC reflects on the result of the consultation and the petition, which has received well over 7,000 signatures in a short time. The BBC has responded to other campaigns and I hope that it gives a good hearing to the representations that are being made. First, we should note that the threat is not just to “Introducing in Scotland” but to “Introducing in Northern Ireland” and “Introducing in Wales”. Our focus is on potential harm in relation to the promotion of new and innovative popular music from Scotland, but I am sure that all members also wish the campaigns in Northern Ireland and Wales well. Vigorous campaigns are going on in all three countries, which illustrates how important it is that the BBC live up to its duties to the nations in these islands. Secondly, the situation is by no means entirely, or even mainly, the fault of the BBC, which has been forced to make decisions as a result of the damaging licence-fee settlement that the UK Government imposed after talks that were held behind closed doors over 48 hours. That reinforces Scotland’s need for greater accountability and responsibility for broadcasting. As a result of the cuts agenda, the licence fee is being top-sliced for purposes other than the BBC’s purposes. We must think about the direct consequences of the licence-fee settlement, whether for the news or for contemporary music. We argue that the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government should have an opportunity to influence licence-fee settlements. That simple request has been made by the Scottish Government in the context of the Scotland Bill. Had there been such an approach to the licence-fee settlement in the past, we might perhaps not have the wider concerns about what the BBC delivers and the continued quality of its output in Scotland, particularly in news and current affairs, on which we have sought assurances. At a time of momentous importance for our nation, the issue is resonant. We have deep concerns about the impact of programming cutbacks and job losses. Thirdly, the issue that we are considering illustrates the risk of having only one publicly funded public service broadcaster—the BBC—however great it is in many regards. If there were greater diversity and plurality of public service broadcasters, for example through a Scottish digital network, as was proposed by the Scottish Broadcasting Commission and unanimously endorsed in the previous session of the Parliament, we would have a great opportunity to develop and preserve the kind of innovative broadcasting that “Introducing in Scotland” so well exemplifies. I reiterate my support and the Scottish Government’s support for “Introducing in Scotland” and my firm hope that the campaign to preserve the programme will be successful. The issue is not just one programme and its listeners, as we have heard, but the impact on the wider music and creative industries scenes. We should all call on the BBC, the coalition Government and others to reflect on the lessons that we can learn from the campaign. We want to create truly world-class public service broadcasting for Scotland, and given what I have heard in the debate I am sure that many members want “Introducing in Scotland” to be an integral part of that. Meeting closed at 17:44.

The year of creative Scotland is a chance to spotlight, celebrate and promote Scotland’s cultural and creative strengths on a world stage. We want to inspire our people and our visitors and to boost Scotland’s key tourism and events industries and our wider economy by embracing London 2012 and building on Scotland’s profile as a world-class tourism destination as we journey towards homecoming 2014 and beyond.

A number of events have already been planned and funded using the additional £6.5 million of national lottery funding for the year of creative Scotland. I say to organisations in Central Scotland and beyond that the final deadline for the culture and tourism opportunity and the first-in-a-lifetime award is 31 January 2012. More information can be found on the Creative Scotland website. I am sure that Clare Adamson and other MSPs will want to encourage local organisations to get the benefit of those opportunities during 2012.

Scotland has a proud heritage of architecture and place making; it also has a productive present and a positive future. Our architecture and design sector contributes about £1.3 billion of the estimated £5.2 billion per year that the creative industries generate for the Scottish economy, but that is only part of the picture. Our architecture and design sector generates work in our construction sector, and the value of construction output for Scotland last year was about £11 billion. The construction industry is a significant employer. More than 172,000 people are estimated to be in its workforce, to which are added about 11,000 people in the architecture and design sector. We can immediately see the importance in economic and employment terms of architecture and place making to Scotland’s economy.

I will move on. Each period in Scotland’s history is marked by the way in which our buildings and places have responded to challenges—whether they were economic, social or cultural. I was reminded of that on Friday when I visited the restoration project at Dunoon burgh hall. As we shape the future for Scotland’s built environment in the 21st century, the challenges at the forefront of our minds are climate change, the economy and the need to secure sustainable growth. These are challenging times, and we need to apply the commitment, vision and sense of purpose to creating places of value that can stand comparison with our successful historic places. I quote John Ruskin: “Our duty is to preserve what the past has had to say for itself, and to say for ourselves what shall be true for the future.” The debate provides an opportunity to consider why architecture and place making are such a vital part of our cultural identity and to set out the steps that the Government has taken from a policy perspective to ensure that we manage and develop our built environment responsibly and creatively. In that regard, I welcome the Labour amendment. In 2001, Scotland became the first country in the United Kingdom to adopt a formal policy on architecture, and a renewed statement was published with broad cross-party support in 2007. We are now building on the policy statements that the previous Administration published. I intend to develop a new architecture policy statement, to be published next year. In doing that, we will again engage with professional institutes such as the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland, the Royal Town Planning Institute in Scotland and the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors in Scotland. We will engage with the many other bodies and agencies that have an interest in the quality of our built environment, such as the Scottish Civic Trust and private sector organisations such as Homes for Scotland. Our new policy can also be informed by today’s debate. Through our new agenda on place making—through design, planning, construction, architecture, regeneration and development—we want to create places with which people can identify and which succeed in bringing together activities and services for people to fulfil their potential in business and in society. The story of Scotland’s places is, of course, a fascinating one. The formation of many of our cities, towns and villages has been rooted in developments of trade and commerce. The idea of planning new settlements in Scotland goes back as far as the 12th century and the burghs of David I, when the notion of planning for development, commerce and governance took root. More than 30 Scottish burghs came into being as a result, such as Dumfries, Kinghorn and Montrose. The architecture of Edinburgh’s new town reflected the values of the enlightenment, and the elegance of squares and crescents based on classical precedents was introduced to other Scottish cities. The growth of Glasgow in the 19th century was fuelled by its place at the heart of the industrial revolution. Its Victorian built legacy is testament to its economic prowess. In the 20th century, the desire for social change introduced a modernising agenda and saw the creation of new towns and comprehensive redevelopment. We also saw Scottish architects and planners take up the challenge of Sir Patrick Geddes to conserve and celebrate our historic cities within the context of an emerging focus on regeneration and communities. As we can see from those very short historical perspectives, the making and remaking of places must respond to change in creative ways. We must also take account of issues of climate change and resource usage in the 21st century. On a recent visit to Stirling to attend the Architecture and Design Scotland skills symposium, I was struck by the remarkable heritage and setting of the city, which lies at the heart of Scotland. A key challenge for Stirling now is how it can create a future that takes the wonderful heritage at the heart of the city and builds on it to create a more vibrant and successful city centre. ADS facilitated a three-day event with professionals, politicians and communities working collaboratively to express a vision of what is desired and how to achieve it. We need to see more such collaborative working taking place so that we can share our skills, vision and best practice about architecture and place making. We cannot afford to be wasteful with our existing building stock or overlook opportunities within it. We know that we have fewer resources available to us, so we need to be smarter about reusing existing buildings. A careful combination of heritage and development often provides a catalyst for success when we aim to create thriving places that bring together business, housing and recreation with opportunities to socialise in public places. There are strong social, cultural and economic arguments for adaptation and reuse of buildings. Retaining traditional buildings, neighbourhoods and landscapes can conserve valuable resources, contribute to healthy communities and help to define and protect our national identity and retain our sense of place. As the historic towns forum has noted, there is a strong “relationship between the quality of the built environment (old and new) and an area’s ability to attract investment.” Demolition is inherently expensive. Construction waste—120 million tonnes annually—is estimated to make up one third of all landfill waste in the UK. Restoration is a sustainable option, as it tends to use fewer resources but provides more employment. New construction is seen as 50:50 labour and materials; restoration and renovation can be as much as 75 per cent labour. So, for every pound spent we might get twice as much local employment and use around half the resources.

The construction industry is important to Scotland. That is one of the reasons why we as a Government brought forward capital investment, and it is why this year and over the spending review period we are investing £11 billion in capital. On the member’s invitation to meet Unite, he might want to speak to some of my back-bench colleagues who tried to have such a meeting yesterday but were, I think, somewhat thwarted. I am happy to correspond with the member. Fergus Ewing has responded to a letter that I wrote to him on behalf of my constituents, who are raising concerns that are similar to those that the member raises. I am sure that Fergus Ewing will engage on that issue. Adaptation also supports our low-carbon economy targets, as the City of Edinburgh Council’s successful pilot of slim-section double-glazing has proven. Areas that have developed incrementally over time often support a mixed business use much better than areas that have been comprehensively redeveloped within single-use zones. Refurbishment of older buildings, especially those of heritage value, usually acts as a catalyst for wider regeneration, such as in the merchant city in Glasgow and in traditional manufacturing areas such as Clydebank. Reusing and adapting older buildings also helps to foster traditional building skills. We want to establish a world-leading system of traditional skills training that meets the needs of a modern, innovative and competitive construction sector. I launched the Scottish Government’s traditional building skills strategy earlier this year and announced a national conservation centre in Stirling as the focus for raising standards in the traditional building sector. Yesterday I visited phase 1 of the project, at the fantastic new Forth Valley College campus in Stirling, where a new Historic Scotland stonemasonry training facility is being created. It will open next summer and will be the best in the UK. Our investment in the national conservation centre, together with Historic Scotland’s commitment to recruit an additional 30 apprentices over the next three years, will help to sustain and develop the traditional building skills that are needed to secure the future of Scotland’s traditional buildings and support the wider economy. The value of regeneration, renovation and reuse also has an economic impact for the construction, architecture and design sectors. The Government believes that the 20 per cent VAT on works to existing dwellings acts as clear disincentive to reusing existing buildings. That is why we are calling again on the UK Government to reduce VAT to 5 per cent for renovations, repairs and home improvements. A VAT cut would produce a stimulus for the construction sector, which would support growth and make it more attractive for people and communities to invest in homes and neighbourhoods across the country. Our request has huge backing in the country, and the UK Government should respond to it. Heritage and new design are often perceived to be in conflict, but one of the great strengths of Scottish architecture over recent years has been its ability to respond well to existing settings. We continue to support the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland Andrew Doolan award. There have been a number of winning projects, such as Dance Base in the Grassmarket, the Pier arts centre in Orkney and last year’s winner, Shettleston Housing Association, that demonstrate great care as well as innovation in fitting with their surroundings. Our recent publication “New Design in Historic Settings” highlights a number of case studies that promote an enlightened approach. Whether new or old, well-designed places and buildings should be seen as an investment that adds value. The importance of walkable, connected streets and neighbourhoods is at the heart of our policies on the built environment. In our policy “Designing Streets”, which we published last year, we encourage an approach that places great emphasis on responding to context in innovative and sensitive ways. We want to ensure that street design derives from an intelligent response to location, rather than the rigorous application of standards regardless of circumstances.

Absolutely. The Scottish sustainable communities initiative was launched three years ago with the idea of taking forward the issues associated with the charrette programme, working across Scotland to support new ideas on sustainable development. I attended the one at Lochgelly and I certainly support the idea of involving all the professionals, but, more important, having the community at the heart of the exercise—a point that is reflected in Labour’s amendment. I know that my colleague Aileen Campbell, who will wind up the debate for the Government, will want to address those issues. The idea of engaging communities in such a worthwhile way is a very exciting proposition and I am glad to have Kevin Stewart’s support. The Scottish Government was involved, along with Highland Council and others, in the promotion of Scotland’s first national housing expo in Inverness from its inception. That was a fantastic opportunity to bring the best architects together in the design of innovative, sustainable housing, showcasing the quality of our architecture and design. It attracted 33,000 visitors—including me—from all parts of Scotland, the rest of the United Kingdom and abroad, and strongly stimulated public debate about design, sustainability and place making. Within our new economic strategy, we recognise that capital investment is the key to economic recovery and we are prioritising our capital spend in order to maximise the impact on jobs and the economy. Our focus on infrastructure, development and place will harness the strength and quality of Scotland’s cities, towns and rural areas. Through our policies on architecture, planning, heritage and street design, we aim to see a new culture that respects, protects and enhances the unique natural and built environment of our country and contributes to a more sustainable future. The focus of today’s debate will be on the importance of architecture and place making to Scotland’s economy, but I close by stressing that the three key factors in place making—the economic, social and environmental concerns—are inextricably linked. Truly sustainable places are those that are successful economically because they provide a quality environment and a quality of life that attracts business, residents and visitors. Scotland’s economic success tomorrow is closely linked to the quality of places that we create today. I move, That the Parliament recognises the importance of high-quality buildings and places and the vital contribution that they make to Scotland’s economy as well as its cultural identity; acknowledges the importance of sharing skills, vision and practice in design and placemaking and the need to address the effects of climate change, engage communities and develop Scotland’s skills base; recognises this, and the previous, administration’s development of architecture, planning and design policies; acknowledges the economic benefit of reusing existing buildings, and calls on the UK Government to reduce VAT for renovations, repairs and home improvements to 5%, which would act as a significant stimulus to the building industry.

I certainly agree with the member’s sentiments, and I reassure her that the Government’s policy of no compulsory redundancies extends to Historic Scotland. I very much value the staff that she has mentioned.

On the economy, will the Scottish Conservatives support the call for a reduction in VAT to 5 per cent for renovations and repairs? If not, why not?

I am happy to get back to the member about the Lochgelly experience. We must recognise that times are challenging for developers. When the market recovers across the country we must have construction plans ready, but we need to be aware of the economic circumstances.

The member makes a good point. One of the real strengths in Scotland’s architecture just now is the ability to add new extensions to old buildings. For example, in my constituency, Linlithgow Burgh halls is a very old building, but it now has a Malcolm Fraser-designed extension that makes it more functional. We should celebrate not only the juxtaposition of old and new buildings but the juxtaposition of old and new parts of buildings.

I have not met those directors in the last month, but I will be meeting the chair of National Museums of Scotland shortly. On Monday, I met the chair and national librarian of the National Library of Scotland and I am looking forward to an event to celebrate the reopening of the Scottish national portrait gallery in late November.

As I said to the Education and Culture Committee this week, free access to our museums and galleries will continue. I also point out that, although the cuts from Westminster have made the budget settlement extremely difficult, I have managed to ensure that next year’s budget for museums and galleries will not be reduced.

A few weeks ago, when I answered the same question, the national museum had received half a million visitors. I can now tell Parliament that, since reopening, it has received more than 860,000 visitors. I cannot give the member any information about the economic impact of that particular reopening, but I can tell him that the 360 museums and galleries around Scotland attract 25 million visitors a year; generate an estimated £79 million for the economy; and help to sustain more than 3,600 tourism-related jobs.

I, too, am very excited about the fantastic find of the Viking boat and the burial site. It is of significant value and it is only right and proper that the objects remain in Scotland. However, although I am extremely sympathetic to the view that we should generate local tourism by presenting such finds in those areas, I must point out that, under the treasure trove system, Scottish ministers have no role in determining the allocation of individual finds; such decisions are taken by the Crown Office. There is a treasure trove code of practice and, if the member agrees, I will send him the provisions in writing. It is important that we celebrate our history and culture not just in our museums and cities but locally, and I hope that in the future such finds will be displayed locally. Unfortunately, as I have made clear, such a decision might not be in my gift at this time.

The third and final progress report from the Scottish Government on implementation of the recommendations of the Scottish Broadcasting Commission was published on 6 October 2011. I have welcomed the increase in the level of network programmes from Scotland to be commissioned by United Kingdom broadcasters, but have expressed disappointment that the UK Government has not engaged properly to establish a Scottish digital network.

Scotland does not get value for money from the current arrangements. That point was made clearly by the Scottish Broadcasting Commission and, earlier this year, by the Scottish digital network panel, which I commissioned and which recognised and revealed the deficit of support in Scotland. We do not receive a fair go. The Scottish digital network panel identified that the licence fee is regarded across the political spectrum as the best source of funding for public service broadcasting, but we have missed out on a number of occasions. First, the Scottish Government was not included in the hurried weekend negotiations that took place behind closed doors between the UK Government and senior BBC management on the licence fee. Secondly, funding of £76 million from 2013-14 has been allocated to the Welsh S4C network but not for a Scottish digital network. Thirdly, there is a scale of cuts to BBC Scotland that could seriously affect on-going delivery of quality broadcasting. Finally, I have serious concerns that the allocation of the licence fee for broadband does not reflect the significant challenges of delivering a 21st century broadband service in rural areas. On a number of counts, I think that we are not receiving value for money.

We do not have any plans at present to develop further social, economic and cultural links with Cuba, but we are always willing to consider opportunities as they arise, prioritised to meet the need of our purpose of increasing sustainable economic growth.

I will try to be gentle. I have met the previous Cuban ambassador on education issues. It is interesting that although some members seem to be happy to encourage ministers to seek solidarity with other countries that are seeking sovereignty and independence, they are not prepared to stand up for their own country’s sovereignty and independence. On a more positive note, I look forward to the work of cross-party groups in identifying links with a number of countries. Only yesterday I met a Kurdistani minister; we are always open to such opportunities. However, as the member will understand, those meetings have to be prioritised for Scotland’s economic needs. The UK signed the accord with Cuba earlier this summer and some of the areas in it are devolved, so we will have to look at the accord to see what links can be identified.

Next year is the year of creative Scotland, so we will be welcoming artists and art from all over the world. If the member sends me details of the exhibition, I will see whether it is possible for me to attend.

Discussions at the October joint ministerial committee on Europe covered a range of issues relating to the business of the October European Council and co-ordination between the UK Government and devolved Administrations on the eve of the negotiations on the multi-annual financial framework for 2014 to 2020.

I am pleased to confirm that I did exactly that only last week at the joint ministerial committee. There are great opportunities not only with the horizon fund, but with the £40 billion in the connecting Europe facility. On the horizon 2020 fund, if we can identify areas that will help Scottish businesses and areas where we have expertise—particularly energy, renewable energy and life sciences—there are great opportunities. There are clearly challenges in the framework negotiations that are taking place, not least in respect of the common agricultural policy and other areas, but we should work closely with our universities on the horizon fund in order to ensure that we can get the best possible result from it. I am impressing that on the UK Government and it seems to be responding to that.

Not only will I do that, but I did it at the last ministerial meeting. I was in Brussels last week when the Latvian President was visiting; Latvian farmers were protesting on the streets of Brussels—I think that farmers have protested a number of times in Brussels—and were complaining that their per-hectare percentage on pillar 2 was only 54 per cent. Scotland’s amount is 48 per cent. That point was made quite forcibly to the UK ministers, who I hope will respond and ensure that CAP reform takes Scotland’s needs, in particular, into account.

Historic Scotland has a budget of £12 million per annum available for historic environment grants. Approximately £5 million of that is made available for grants to buildings of architectural and historic significance throughout Scotland. Historic Scotland also provides £750,000 to Glasgow City Heritage Trust towards grant funding of building repairs in the Glasgow city area.

Clearly, in terms of statutory responsibilities, all local authorities have to take account of needs in their areas. As I explained, Historic Scotland works with all local authorities, including Glasgow City Council. Bob Doris can send me details of the winter gardens. I am very pleased about what is happening with Maryhill burgh halls. That is a fantastic example of what can be done. Heritage is an investment in protecting our past, but it is also important in ensuring that we have community spaces for the future, and I encourage all local authorities on that. Even within a tight budget, Historic Scotland has been able to maintain its grants provision for 2012-13.

I take it from the Patricia Ferguson’s comments that she is supportive of the places of worship scheme. Recent announcements that we made about a number of places across Scotland were very much appreciated. She will recognise that changes have affected the UK in relation to places of worship. I have had dialogue with the heritage lottery fund and I also know that Historic Scotland is looking at that scheme in particular. It is important to recognise the fantastic work that Historic Scotland is doing. In fact, it is now the biggest employer of stonemasons in the UK. Historic Scotland will have to work with local authorities and churches. It is a unique situation, but I reassure the member that I value the importance of the places of worship scheme. If there is further information about how the scheme will develop in the future, I am happy to send it to her.

In 2010-11, Creative Scotland invested £446,000 in the youth music initiative in North Lanarkshire. It also made additional grants to individuals of £6,500 in the Coatbridge and Chryston area for cultural and creative projects. In April 2011, Museums Galleries Scotland allocated more than £80,000 for the conservation of key objects in the Summerlee museum of Scottish industrial life. The money will be used to create an external exhibition space to enable more visitors to enjoy the collection.

I am not familiar with that project. As Elaine Smith will be aware, the Government does not directly fund individual small-scale organisations such as that. The member might want to approach Creative Scotland, which has set equality as one of its main themes.

I am more than happy to congratulate North Lanarkshire Council on its words 2011 festival. I understand that it included James Robertson and poetry in Gaelic and Urdu. The 40 book festivals throughout Scotland are an important part of the fabric of our cultural experience.

The Scottish Government published its creative industries strategy on 21 March, which made it clear that the creative industries partnership will ensure that public sector agencies support the creative industries effectively. Creative Scotland’s investment in projects in Mid Scotland and Fife, even excluding the youth music initiative, is worth about £1.2 million a year. Scottish Enterprise is a board member of the institute for capitalising on creativity, which is a collaboration of four educational institutions that is based at the University of St Andrews. I was delighted to attend the launch of the institute on 26 October.

I am interested in finding out more about that project. Creative industries hubs are a real prospect for the future. The Briggait in Glasgow and Out of the Blue in Leith have been successful and provide fantastic opportunities for start-up businesses in the creative sector. That is the way forward, so I am interested in hearing more about that project.

I met with Bill Matthews of the BBC trust yesterday. A range of issues were discussed, including our concern about the impact of the BBC’s proposed cuts on BBC Scotland.

We always made it clear to the BBC that it should find alternative provision for those radio stations. I reassure the member that the figures that have just been released in relation to BBC Alba on Freeview are fantastic and show how successful it has been. The BBC trust has said that, although it expected a number of complaints along the lines that the member raises, the scale has not been what was anticipated, given the complaints that were received beforehand. The member might want to direct those figures and the concerns of his constituents directly to the BBC trust.

Historic Scotland is an executive agency of the Scottish Government, and there have been regular discussions in recent months on the agency’s funding requirements as part of the preparations for the spending review 2011. Although Historic Scotland will experience significant cuts in its budget in coming years, it is reducing its cost base, significantly growing its income from non-Government sources and, importantly, maintaining its grants budgets for 2012-13.

Last week, I was delighted to announce funding support for a national conservation centre for traditional building skills in Stirling. That will be a great opportunity to make sure that we have those skills in the future. It includes Historic Scotland taking on 30 more modern apprenticeships for support for traditional building skills. That is great news and a great step forward, and I am sure that members will congratulate Historic Scotland on that initiative.

The 2014 Commonwealth games will be an exciting opportunity to engage culturally with sportspeople and visitors from across the world as they gather in Glasgow. The cultural programmes for 2014 are at an early stage of development and the delivery structures are not yet in place. However, there is a commitment to working with arts and cultural organisations from throughout the Commonwealth and to present their work as part of the cultural festival at the games. Further information will be provided at an appropriate time, once the plans are more developed.

I thank Bill Kidd for that point. I would like to see all MSPs and the whole country mobilise to help to celebrate the world’s coming to Glasgow and to Scotland for the Commonwealth games. It is a fantastic opportunity and I am sure that we will take it forward with a great deal of enthusiasm.

Scotland’s heritage is one of our greatest assets and it attracts many visitors from overseas. Scotland offers not only tremendous natural beauty but an incredibly rich history that can be observed in its iconic structures, such as Edinburgh castle and Maeshowe in Orkney; in its variety of traditionally constructed buildings, which give the country its character; and in the personal histories of its people over generations—their stories, endeavours and achievements, all of which have contributed to the nation in which we live today. People across the world want to learn more about Scotland—about its history, places, people and culture and about how all that connects to them personally. Our heritage is vital to cultural tourism. Research shows that the historic environment contributes £2.3 billion to the Scottish economy and supports 60,000 jobs. Using the most modern technologies to enhance its presentation will be crucial to sustaining that contribution. The relentless development of digital technology is fundamentally changing the world in which we live and such technology is becoming an increasingly common element in daily life. It is critical that Scotland not only keeps up with but pushes ahead of the field in that area. In September, Scotland hosted an international conference on digital documentation and visualisation and brought leading experts from all over the world to speak at that. Our world-leading technical expertise, coupled with the extraordinary wealth of our cultural heritage, places us in a stronger position than ever to lead in the digital documentation of heritage. Scotland is also a world leader in the digitisation of archival records in relation to our people and family history. Digital technology provides tremendous potential not only for increasing access to sites, archives and information but for capturing the imagination and interest of young and old alike and encouraging more visitors to Scotland. Information is ever more accessible as data becomes available online. Digitising archive collections has been pioneered by several bodies in Scotland, including the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland, through Scran and Canmore. By improving the quality of the information that is accessible online, we can encourage more people to benefit from the considerable resources that are available to them.

One thing that can be done is to ensure that the United Kingdom Government invests. When I met Jeremy Hunt only a few weeks ago, we discussed the very point of improving broadband access. Scotland has 32 per cent of the UK’s landmass, but that is not reflected in our funding from the reduced licence fee—one consequence of that cut is the job losses that the BBC has announced only today. On our contribution, as Alex Neil has said, the Scottish Government announced as part of the spending review what I think was about £68 million for broadband development. I share Jamie McGrigor’s concern, which is an agenda item that the Scottish Government will address. However, the UK Government has its responsibilities, too. It is clear that digital technology can be applied in many ways. It can be applied to entire buildings, with incredible possibilities. Many of our most treasured heritage sites are vulnerable or difficult to access. For example, the internal spaces at neolithic Skara Brae in Orkney are not accessible to visitors but, thanks to recent digital survey work, we will be able to provide virtual access. Historic Scotland’s ambitious Scottish ten project uses 3D digital scanning. Over five years, it will record Scotland’s five United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization world heritage sites alongside five outstanding international heritage sites for future generations. That project is a unique public sector partnership with Glasgow School of Art and is an example of effective collaboration to deliver something that is truly groundbreaking. I can announce that work on scanning the old and new towns of Edinburgh, which will reveal remarkable architecture in a new way, has started. Our digital heritage work is helping to build international co-operation. By working closely with international partners, we are forging stronger international links for Scotland. We are working in partnership with the United States National Park Service at Mount Rushmore; with the Indian Government to record the remarkable Rani Ki Vav stepwell; and with the People’s Republic of China on the eastern Qing tombs. Historic Scotland continues to work in partnership with the CyArk foundation, which was founded by the inventor of the terrestrial laser scanner, Ben Kacyra, and discussions are under way to develop the next project.

No, it will not. The Labour Party’s amendment raises concerns about the spend in the area. I reassure members that Historic Scotland’s front-line services will not be impacted. It is driving through efficiencies in the organisation and, more important, it is growing income from other sources. The spending review does not contain information on how Historic Scotland is helping to support its continuing spend by growing its income from other areas. We have made a commitment to digitally record not only the five international world heritage sites, but all of the 345 properties that are in the care of the Scottish ministers. That answers Ruth Davidson’s point. The records can be used for conservation, education and interpretation. Scotland will be the first country in the world to digitally document its national collection of monuments in 3D. The experience that will be delivered by the National Trust for Scotland and Historic Scotland at Bannockburn in time for the 700th anniversary of the battle in 2014 will push the boundaries of the technology. A digital survey of the battlefield will be combined with 3D motion capture and visualisation to bring the battle and participants to life. The team hopes to virtually investigate elements of the battle, such as what exactly happens when a mounted knight in full battle armour meets a tight schiltron formation of Scots spearmen. That will certainly give a new insight and will bring alive something that people might have in their imagination. In addition to our fabulous historic buildings, Scotland has an immense wealth of historic artefacts and archive materials. Our libraries, archives, museums and galleries are fully embracing the new digital age. The National Library of Scotland has already digitised more than 1 million pages, and has an impressive digital gallery of photographs and maps. The National Galleries of Scotland has a rolling programme of creating digital images of the national collection of fine art and publishing its artworks online; it has also developed mobile phone apps. National Museums Scotland has digitised more than 18,000 objects and images and is now delivering online records via its website. Museums Galleries Scotland has a digital advice service for its members, which offers free best practice advice on all aspects of digital activity. The Labour Party has singled out three organisations by name in its amendment, but I have been able to protect cultural organisations from the worst excesses of the Westminster cuts, which were originally planned by Labour and which have now been implemented by the Conservatives. As RCAHMS is mentioned in the amendment, I assure members that it has no cash cut. The census activity of the National Records of Scotland is clearly not at previous levels, so it has a significant budget reduction. As I said, Historic Scotland is making substantial efficiencies and is growing its income from other sources and so is less reliant on Government, while commitments to grants for regeneration work will continue. One of the most important uses of the resources is in support of teachers in their education of our children. In 2009, I launched Scotland’s history, an online resource that is produced by Learning and Teaching Scotland with support from Historic Scotland and our national collections. Scotland’s history, which is now called studying Scotland, charts 5,000 years of life in Scotland, which can be explored through images, text, audio, video, interactive documents and high-quality internet links, bringing history alive in the classroom. The National Records of Scotland holds historical records that cover 900 years of Scottish history, from the 12th century up to the present. That is a unique resource for the study of family and social history in Scotland. We are exploiting digital technologies to make those records accessible throughout Scotland and the world. ScotlandsPeople is a world-leading service that is provided by National Records of Scotland and which gives direct, paying access to a wide range of records for more than 80 million Scots. Digital technologies make that information available online at a must-visit centre in Edinburgh and through a growing number of local authorities throughout Scotland. The website currently has almost 1 million subscribers, and it had more than 4 million visits in 2010-11. National Records of Scotland is working to expand the ScotlandsPeople service through encouraging local authorities to develop more local centres for family history and adding new material to the databases. By combining remote access to national datasets, local archives and the local knowledge of registrars, archivists, librarians and others, those centres can provide a resource to attract our diaspora visitors out of Edinburgh to visit other parts of Scotland.

I am more than happy to recognise the University of Dundee and, indeed, all the partners. Scotland really is world leading. We think nothing of debating the low-carbon economy, our world-leading legislation relating to that and its economic impact, but the digital work that is taking place in Scotland is also truly world leading. Later this year, valuation rolls that detail every property in the country from 1855 onwards and contain tens of millions more names will be added to ScotlandsPeople. Members realise that paying rates was never popular, but the records that they have generated give a wealth of fascinating information. The related name index that we have created will allow searches of intercensus years and enhance the information that is already available in census records.

I am afraid that I will need to make progress. From next year, digital access to 3 million images of the kirk session records will be made more widely available by subscription through ScotlandsPeople. Some kirk session records go back to the reformation, but most of them date from the late 17th century. As well as the sometimes unhealthy concentration on the sexual misdemeanours of parishioners, the session clerks reported on local events—for example, on witches in the Borders and the passing through of the Jacobite army. Those records are a priceless and unique resource for both family and social history. National Records of Scotland makes available more than 50 million images of records that are held in a wide range of archive collections in its historical search room through the virtual volumes system. Those images act as surrogates for the original documents and allow researchers to view and copy information without retrieving original items. To give members some context, around 66,000 digital images were viewed in the search room in 2008; that number increased to nearly 121,000 in 2010. National Records of Scotland is investigating the wider use of those images. National Records of Scotland works closely with RCAHMS and the National Library of Scotland on the ScotlandsPlaces website, which brings together data from the three organisations. Maps, plans, photographs of sites and buildings, archaeological reports on historic and prehistoric sites, tax rolls and other related records provide the user with a unique guide to places in Scotland over time. As we know, digital history provides huge opportunities for education, and National Records of Scotland’s education service provides fantastic opportunities for connections. We should be enthused about our digital heritage and its capacity for reaching out, connecting with people, and inspiring and attracting visitors. I completely agree with the sentiment that combining that with a tourism drive is important. Indeed, that will be reflected in the homecoming drive over the next few years, particularly to 2014. As well as connecting people with past generations and places and linking up diaspora Scots, the digital services provide a real stimulus to ancestral and heritage tourism. That is a valuable and expanding market that attracts visitors who stay longer, return more often, travel more widely to see their ancestors’ places, and ultimately spend more in support of our economy. The digital future of our past is not just about conserving and recording; it is about telling our stories, and understanding more about ourselves and our people. Scotland has one of the most interesting stories in the world to tell, and our digital translation is leading the world. I am sure that colleagues agree that it is right that members should recognise and celebrate it. I move, That the Parliament celebrates Scotland’s rich and varied heritage and the contribution that it makes to the lives of Scotland’s people and to its economy; recognises the growing interest in exploring personal and family histories; welcomes steps to embrace the most modern technologies through initiatives such as the Scottish Ten, a project that uses 3D digital scanning to present and record Scotland’s five iconic world heritage sites alongside five outstanding international heritage sites, and applauds the use of those technologies to engage young people, and people around the world, in their cultural heritage.

As the member will appreciate, given her colleague’s remarks about the University of Dundee, had we named every organisation, the motion would perhaps have run to a page and a half. I am glad that she appreciates that such a wide range of organisations is involved. Given recent developments with the international conference, it was appropriate to recognise the start of the scanning of the old and new towns of Edinburgh. I completely agree that a wide range of organisations is involved and I am more than happy to have paid tribute to them all in my speech.

I am equally enthusiastic about the site. Unfortunately, when I have had meetings with the UK Government, the Conservative minister John Penrose has indicated that the UK Government does not want to recognise intangible heritage in the way that other European and international bodies do. Will the member join me in trying to persuade the UK Government that it is a fantastic resource and a very important part of our heritage?

Mark Griffin might be aware that there was a conference recently on the frontiers of the Roman empire, which was attended by visitors from Germany and elsewhere in Europe. I had the pleasure of meeting a number of people, who must be the member’s constituents, who talked about the wonderful collections. The member is right; there is an international dimension to the issue, but there can also be a very local dimension. It was a privilege to host a conference at which international visitors could discuss and visit the Antonine wall.

The debate has been very good and extremely interesting. It is right and proper that we have had the opportunity to recognise the work of all the organisations—there are many of them—that are involved in digital heritage in Scotland. George Adam never fails to get Love Street into debates. A neat connection was made between John Love, the Fountain Gardens and the Scottish ten. I was particularly intrigued by Jamie McGrigor talking about findagraveinscotland.com. I understand that we were sent an e-mail that said that it had gone live. I was fascinated by Ruth Davidson’s subtle reference to her love of dusty museums. I thought that that was a reference to what the Conservative Party headquarters might be under Murdo Fraser. I want to address some of the issues that have been raised. Our motion does not refer to any organisation. We could not reasonably do that, as many members have said. Therefore, we will not support the amendment in Patricia Ferguson’s name. However, I commend all the contributions that have been made around the chamber. We have had an opportunity to air and celebrate much of our culture. For those who are not familiar with the Tobar an Dualchais or Kist o Riches project, which David Stewart and Joan McAlpine mentioned, I had the pleasure of officially launching it. To click on a map and hear not just the songs, but the voices and accents of people from different parts of the country was fascinating.

I was going to address some of the points that Patricia Ferguson made. I genuinely think that the debate covered all the areas. In recognising that the use of technology in relation to the Scottish ten is only one example of many, we can celebrate the National Library of Scotland, the National Records of Scotland, RCAHMS and a number of other organisations. Patricia Ferguson asked about collections. She will be familiar with the artist rooms project that works with the Anthony d’Offay collection to make sure that there are exhibitions across Scotland. I am delighted that Linlithgow Burgh Halls will be hosting artist rooms shortly. Ruth Davidson asked about monitoring Historic Scotland’s budget, which I am more than happy to do. That is why I tried to give some reassurance that although the figures look quite severe, there are mitigations, particularly for the census work of the National Records of Scotland and for Historic Scotland. Willie Coffey mentioned Kilmarnock. The family history element at the Burns Monument Centre is an example of what can be done, from which other people can learn. An interesting point in the debate was about the pace of change of the digital agenda. Who knows where we might be in a few years’ time? Indeed, at the conference that I mentioned reference was made to the fact that in only a few years’ time, we could have contact lenses that could provide digitally scanned images to take people through Stirling castle or wherever else. Clare Adamson was absolutely right to refer to the passing of Steve Jobs, because his vision and his drive to develop the digital agenda have made a major contribution to the world. That must be recognised and it was right that we had an opportunity to do so in the debate. I reassure Jean Urquhart that Historic Scotland is already involved in the Scottish studies qualification. A number of people made important points about broadband. Yes, it is about infrastructure—I referred to Alex Neil’s forthcoming announcement—but it is also about participation, because, as Ruth Davidson said, places such as Glasgow do have broadband. Surely all the wonderful examples, whether song, writing, pictures or culture, would help create demand, particularly from older members of society and those—perhaps in Glasgow—who are not accessing such things now. Family history is fascinating, particularly at certain points in people’s lives. The celebration of what we have has been fantastic. I thank those who have praised the Scottish ten, which is making international as well as local links. Jamie McGrigor and Patricia Ferguson are among the few people in this chamber who have visited St Kilda. Alasdair Allan might have visited it—he is telling me that he represents it. It is a dual UNESCO world heritage site, which is managed by the National Trust for Scotland and is home to the wonderful seabird colony to which Jamie McGrigor referred, but very few people will ever have the opportunity to visit it. Is it not fantastic that the Historic Scotland Scottish ten project has digitally recorded it? The National Records of Scotland has managed to work with Hebridean Archives to conserve and digitise the last school log book for St Kilda, which provides a schoolteacher’s account of life on the island from 1901 to its evacuation and therefore documents a wonderful legacy. We have an opportunity to celebrate technology and we have great opportunities to take it forward. This is not just about culture, the economy and tourism; it is about shaping and using a technology that will offer boundless opportunities as we go forward. I thank everybody for their contributions to the debate. The passion, energy and enthusiasm that members have shown will stand Scotland in very good stead as we develop a digital future for Scotland’s heritage.

I welcome the debate that Christine Grahame has initiated on television services in the south of Scotland, and I welcome all the speeches that have been made. The Scottish Government has long been concerned about the inadequate coverage that viewers receive in the south of Scotland and we have frequently raised the matter with the UK Government. I recently met Jeremy Hunt in Glasgow and raised the matter with him again. I can tell Paul Wheelhouse and other members that I also raised channel 3 licensing. We responded to the local television consultation, we have written to UK Government ministers about the issue and other broadcasting matters, and I have established on-going dialogue with my counterparts in Westminster about the future for broadcasting in Scotland. We also publish today the third and final progress report on implementation of the Scottish Broadcasting Commission’s recommendations. Indeed, in this time of historic change for broadcasting, one of the reasons why I established the Scottish digital network panel was to enable us to be fully involved in providing constructive solutions, not least of which is the Scottish digital network, which members mentioned. The Scottish Parliament has long and unanimously supported a Scottish digital network. The Scottish Government has made it clear that the Scottish digital network would be the best option for providing the host or spine broadcaster for local television services in Scotland. Christine Grahame’s vision of a southern television service would fit well into such a model. Through the work of the Scottish Broadcasting Commission and the Scottish digital network panel, we have presented plans that were rigorously researched and developed. However, it is apparent that the UK Government has not given proper consideration to that important work. Local television offers the potential for improving television services for south of Scotland viewers by locating a station there. In our response to the UK Government’s local television consultation, we stressed the importance of including the south of Scotland in the list of potential locations for a local television service. In addition, in our recent response to the UK Government’s communications review we highlighted the clear need for better news provision in the south of Scotland on channel 3. I was therefore astonished that the anomalous situation in the south of Scotland was not addressed in the UK Government’s most recent announcement. However, I am aware that Jeremy Hunt said at the recent local television event in Glasgow that the current list of possible locations for local television is not definitive. I hope that that is the case. The UK Government is intent on making local television a purely commercial prospect, with very limited public funding, other than a contribution of £40 million from the BBC’s share of the licence fee up to 2014. In that context, the question is how we make local television commercially viable and ensure that there is quality provision—John Lamont made the point well. The Shott review, which Jeremy Hunt set up to investigate the commercial viability of local television, found that commercial viability would be difficult to achieve and most likely would result in only larger cities getting a local television service. The UK Government’s latest announcement confirmed that and suggested that only Glasgow would be a suitable option in the context of commercially viable local television. The Scottish digital network panel arrived at much the same conclusion and commented that it would be ironic if the only public support—from licence fee payers and taxpayers—to be offered to local television in Scotland was for a service in Glasgow, which it can be argued is the most media-rich location in Scotland. Potentially, local television will not reach where it is most needed. There must be a south of Scotland test when we consider local television. Jeremy Hunt has placed great store on the roll-out of superfast broadband as a way of promoting local television. He has suggested that that is the solution in relation to the Scottish digital network. The Scottish Government fully appreciates the importance of ensuring the availability of superfast broadband across our nation. That is why we announced in the spending review that the Scottish Government will at least match the £69 million of television licence fee revenue that is allocated to Scotland by the UK Government. However, we doubt that superfast broadband can address the significant deficit in public service broadcasting content for Scotland. The deficit is experienced by viewers everywhere in Scotland. Superfast broadband offers, at best, only a partial means of distributing local television across Scotland, whether that be in the south of Scotland or elsewhere. There will need to be additional provision for local television. The UK Government admits that it cannot definitely work out a timeframe for getting local television on the internet. It also concedes that a television platform is still better suited than the internet for broadcasting. Basically, people prefer to watch television in their living rooms, rather than viewing something on a computer screen. However, as Christine Grahame points out, that might change—behaviour patterns can and should change. At the moment, the position of the UK Government represents a missed opportunity to meet the needs of viewers in Scotland. Christine Grahame referred to another important aspect of broadcasting in Scotland: broadcasting responsibilities for the Scottish ministers. We made it clear in our Scotland Bill broadcasting paper that there is a set of quite sensible and workable broadcasting powers that could be devolved to the Scottish ministers. The matters that we have discussed this afternoon underscore the importance of those powers, which include the right to establish public service broadcasting institutions, such as the Scottish digital network; the right to be involved in future licence fee setting arrangements, because of the consequences of the rapid imposition of the licence fee arrangement, which has, as we have heard today, had consequences for jobs in the BBC; and the right to have responsibility for approving licensing decisions that are made by the UK Government for local television within Scotland. I thank Christine Grahame for raising the matter. The Scottish Government supports local television if it is able to deliver greater choice for viewers in Scotland. As it stands, the initiative presents more of a missed opportunity than anything else. The UK Government has not considered the option of establishing a Scottish digital network. It also has not addressed the increasingly urgent need of viewers in the south of Scotland to have access to a comprehensive Scottish news service on channel 3—points made by Joan McAlpine and others. If local television is to work, it has to work in the south of Scotland. I commend the south of Scotland alliance for continuing to argue that rational and pragmatic case, and note the cross-party support that has been expressed in this chamber. I do not think that this is the last that we have heard of the matter, but I thank Christine Grahame, again, for bringing it to the chamber. Meeting closed at 17:47.

The Government has regular contact with Commission officials and other member states, which concern a range of issues. It is not customary to divulge the content of those or any other official discussions. More specifically, I can tell the member that on 17 August I addressed more than 30 members of the consular corps based in Edinburgh, to set out the Government’s aims and ambitions.

It is quite clear, as is set out in our white paper of November 2009, that Scotland would be a continuing member of the European Union. As such, I think that the points that the member raised are superfluous.

There is certainly renewed interest in Scotland, our constitutional future and the prospect of independence. Of course, the discussions that I had took place before this week’s opinion poll, which shows public support for independence at 39 per cent, as opposed to 38 per cent against, which I think will increase interest in Scotland’s prospects.

The Scottish Government has on-going engagement with UK ministers, which includes discussions about enhancing Scotland’s influence at European Union level. I refer to my earlier reply to Helen Eadie, but I reassure the member that I have raised the issue at the joint ministerial committee on Europe and that we have sent UK ministers our proposals for a statutory right of attendance at Council meetings at which devolved issues are discussed, through amendment to the Scotland Bill.

We will have an opportunity to discuss the strengthening of Scotland’s role in Europe in the debate later today. The Scottish Government’s preference is for a statutory right. I have received support for our position from the Northern Irish, who of course are watching to see what happens with our proposal. In the past the Liberal Democrats supported such an approach and I hope that they can bring themselves to do so in the months ahead.

We issued our paper to the UK Government on 8 August and have yet to receive a reply—I think that the UK Government will reply to all requests from the Scottish Government in a package. We continue to engage in a positive way. This afternoon, John Swinney and Bruce Crawford will meet the Secretary of State for Scotland to talk about taking forward improvements to the Scotland Bill.

That is just nonsense. Arrangements are in place and we welcome an improvement under the new UK Government. However, warm words are not borne out by actions and since the UK Government came into power there has been a refusal to allow Scottish Government ministers to attend Council. The issue is very much live and has yet to be resolved, but with the support of members of the Scottish Parliament I think that we can collectively try to persuade the UK Government to remedy the situation.

I will be launching a consultation exercise on the draft national strategy in the next few weeks. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the national museum on reaching half a million visitors since its reopening.

That is a good point. That is why we need to bring all the museums and galleries together to reflect on the strategy and take the area forward. The learning that can happen across the sector will be very important, for precisely the points that the member makes.

Yes. I congratulate North Lanarkshire Council and South Lanarkshire Council in that regard. This year’s international children’s games—the 45th—were the first to be hosted in Scotland and I think that it is fantastic that the delegates had the chance to visit a number of museums in the area. Well done to the councils, and well done to all the participants in the games.

On 10 June 2011, I met Andrew Mitchell, the Secretary of State for International Development, and reiterated Scotland’s commitment to the people of Malawi. There was solid agreement at the meeting that interventions that are channelled through Scottish non-governmental organisations should continue to be directed for the benefit of people in Malawi. Scottish Government funding goes directly to Scotland-based charities working with local partner organisations in Malawi.

Clearly, that would be a matter for the Department for International Development. We remain in close contact with the department, but Andrew Mitchell was interested in the work of Scottish NGOs when he visited in the summer and I am sure that he will have taken on board the points that were made to him by the cross-party group and the Malawi partnership that he met at that time.

Aberdeen has a thriving arts scene which is supported in a number of ways. The Scottish Government pursues its aims for the visual arts through working with our partners Creative Scotland and Museums Galleries Scotland, and through supporting the work of higher and further education institutions.

I hope that the member understands that, as any planning applications for that site would come before Scottish Government ministers, it would not be appropriate for me to comment on the merits of any proposals at this time. What I can say is that Peacock Visual Arts has recently undergone a review as part of Creative Scotland’s foundation organisation review, and I can confirm that Creative Scotland is continuing funding for the organisation this year at a rate of £262,000.

The Scottish Government has demonstrated its commitment to the festivals through the hugely successful Edinburgh festivals expo fund, which has invested £8 million over four years to enable new talent and creativity to flourish. Our cultural connections with other countries are a key part of relationship building and raising our profile internationally. Each year, Edinburgh continues to welcome international delegations during the festivals. This year, I met representatives from South Korea, South Africa, Brazil, India, China, Russia, Australia, Germany and Ireland. Throughout the festival, I undertook briefings and interviews with a wide range of international media outlets. I also hosted a successful international media briefing, alongside Festivals Edinburgh, to promote and raise the profile of not only the Edinburgh festivals but Scotland to a wider audience.

I understand that there was a briefing last night by the Edinburgh international festivals to confirm the thorough economic impact study that was conducted. It showed that £261 million was generated for Scotland, of which £245 million was for Edinburgh.

The Forest fringe hosted another eclectic programme during the August period and I understand that the venue is in the process of fundraising. I would be happy to let the member know who it might be most appropriate for Forest representatives to meet at this stage of their fundraising efforts, and if it is appropriate for me to meet them that would also be a step forward. Marco Biagi has also raised the issue with me, but it might be helpful to find out who it would be most appropriate to meet, particularly at this early stage, which I think involves a fundraising effort.

The Edinburgh international film festival is an integral part of Edinburgh’s festival programme. Over the past four years the Scottish Government has supported the festival through Creative Scotland and the expo fund, this year awarding £100,000 towards the cost of workshops for nurturing young talent and honing skills and expertise. The Centre for the Moving Image, EIFF’s parent organisation, has recently undergone a review as part of Creative Scotland’s foundation organisation review. Creative Scotland is continuing funding for the organisation, amounting to £400,000 this year.

We most definitely have a viable film festival. The UK Film Council had a three-year funding package that ran out on 1 April 2011. The United Kingdom Government then abolished the United Kingdom Film Council and transferred the responsibilities to the British Film Institute, which is currently working with Creative Scotland to consider support for films and film festivals outside London. I met the director of the British Film Institute on 14 March and I have made representations for the continued support of the film festival.

The next meeting of the joint ministerial committee Europe will take place on 10 October.

I am more than happy to send the member a copy of the document I sent to the United Kingdom Government on 8 August on European representation, which we are about to debate. I reassure James Kelly that, at the most recent JMC Europe meeting, I made suggestions and representations about better representation. After I expressed concern about problems at the first JMC Europe meeting, in June last year, William Hague wrote to his colleagues to encourage them to look favourably on representations from devolved Administrations about not only attending but speaking at council meetings. We have been consistent and persistent on the matter, and I am more than happy to send James Kelly the relevant document.

Indeed. At the most recent JMC plenary meeting, in June this year, the First Minister called on the UK Government to address the importance of having an alternative—a plan B—or at least to demonstrate flexibility in its economic strategy. Three points were raised: the need for capital investment; the need for access to finance for businesses; and the need to enhance consumer confidence by prioritising growth and employment security.

The Scottish Government proposes an amendment to the Scotland Bill that would establish a statutory right for the Scottish Government to attend European Council meetings when devolved issues are being discussed. As I said to James Kelly, the paper to support that amendment was sent to the United Kingdom Government on 8 August. The Scottish Government will also seek the Scottish Parliament’s agreement this afternoon on the need to strengthen Scotland’s representation in principle.

There are of course numerous examples of member state delegations that comprise national member state ministers and ministers from federal or devolved Administrations, who each use their respective expertise to speak to the agreed member state position. Those examples demonstrate the added value of drawing on expertise wherever it sits in a member state. Aileen McLeod’s point is well made.

“Growth, Talent, Ambition—the Government’s Strategy for the Creative Industries”, which was published in March, sets out how the public sector is working to support the creative industries. Public sector support for the creative digital arts is provided through Creative Scotland, Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise. In August, I announced a £1.4 million package for the creative edge initiative to provide training to the television and digital media sector. That programme is a partnership between TRC Media, Channel 4, Creative Scotland and Scottish Enterprise.

We very much look forward to the year of creative Scotland in 2012. Annabelle Ewing is right to identify that “Scotland’s Digital Future”, which was published in February, will also provide opportunities to support creativity in the digital arts and help to drive the participation that we need in the sector. Scotland is at the leading edge, particularly in the gaming sector. In terms of our contribution, we punch above our weight. The Scottish Government has invested in the University of Abertay Dundee and there are very exciting developments among its products. I look forward to showcasing that in the year of creative Scotland.

The Scottish National Party stated in our manifesto, which helped to secure the first single-party majority rule in the history of the Scottish Parliament, that we would seek in the short term to strengthen the Scotland Bill under the devolution settlement and then hold a referendum in the second half of our term to give the people a choice on whether to proceed to independence. That is what we will do. The Scottish Parliament and Government now have more than 12 years’ experience of dealing with the EU, and our experience of specific devolved interests now makes it clear that Scottish ministers should have a strengthened role in European discussion and decision making. Although we are always learning, we clearly have areas of expertise where we can act as a mature and effective contributor to the EU. It is not just the SNP Government that thinks that is the right course of action, and it is not a new concept. Cross-party support for the concept stretches back to pre-devolution days. On St Andrew’s day in 1995, the Scottish Constitutional Convention published “Scotland’s Parliament, Scotland’s Right”. That document referred to the importance of Scotland’s relationships with EU institutions, Scotland’s representation in United Kingdom ministerial delegations to the Council of Ministers and, where appropriate, Scottish ministers leading UK delegations. In 1998, the Conservative peer Lord Mackay tabled an amendment to the first Scotland Bill that would have required—in law—the Secretary of State for Scotland to seek the views of the Scottish Parliament on any devolved issue before a UK minister attended a meeting of the Council of Ministers relating to that issue. Of course, Lord Steel also suggested a clause in the Scotland Bill entitling Scottish ministers to be part of the UK delegation and to participate in discussions in the EU institutions. Labour colleagues have also supported calls for Scotland to have direct representation. In 2004, the Scottish Executive’s European strategy included a statement from Andy Kerr that said: “Ministerial attendance at Councils will take place where there is a Scottish policy issue to pursue.” Unfortunately, years on, attendance is still being refused, in some cases. As members are aware, the Scottish Government is proposing an amendment to the Scotland Bill for powers on statutory rights to attend Council of Ministers meetings, both formal and informal, and on attendance of officials at European Commission and Council working groups at which any non-reserved matter is to be considered. It also covers areas in which Scottish ministers have functions conferred on them directly by Westminster legislation, and executively devolved functions under section 63 of the Scotland Act 1998.

There is currently no request from the Welsh and Northern Irish for statutory attendance, but they have supported my calls for attendance by devolved Administrations. Indeed, the Northern Irish have written to me expressing their interest in the case that we are pursuing. However, we are the only devolved Administration for which legislation is currently being debated in Westminster, so we have the opportunity to strengthen it. Whether the call is for statutory rights of attendance, which I am pursuing, or other means, the case for strengthening the legislation is absolute, and I am seeking agreement from the Parliament on that basis. In this debate, we are seeking consensus on the need to strengthen our role in Europe under the current devolution settlement. The amendments that are before us give the impression that, despite the growing public momentum in support of more powers, there is a danger of some parties in Scotland going backwards rather than forwards in their thinking. The Tory amendment rejects even the UK Tory Government’s recognition that our role needs to be strengthened. I will listen to Labour’s argument, but it might have held for the first Scotland Bill Committee’s work, and had the bill been yet to enter debate and the amendment stage at Westminster. However, the Scotland Bill is now being debated at Westminster, and Labour should not paralyse the Scottish Parliament by stopping debates in the chamber. I notice that it has not done so for the previous four subject areas. We need a stronger role in Europe because of our separate and distinct justice system, our climate change ambitions and our distinctive education system.

Margo MacDonald will well recognise that the Scottish Parliament needs sovereignty and the choice to make such decisions. We currently do not have that choice, but we would have it in an independent Scotland. In the meantime, under devolution, I want to ensure that the best interests of Scotland, whether in justice, climate change or education, are being pursued now, in 2011. However, Margo MacDonald’s point is about being recognised in the context of the sovereignty of choice, which treaties we would want to sign and which organisations we would want to be in. Strengthened opportunities to access Europe would give Scotland greater influence over decisions and engagement on issues that directly affect Scottish industries and Scottish legislation, and would help us to meet our full economic potential. As the member state, the UK generally speaks on behalf of Scotland, even in areas such as justice, energy and education in which we clearly have a distinct devolved interest. We have engaged and supported agendas on Europe constructively in all areas—none more so than justice. The UK is the only member state with more than one legal system. The Scottish ministers and law officers have played a key role in supporting the UK position in areas of civil, family and criminal law. Indeed, the European Commission’s vice-president Viviane Reding praised Scotland’s support for victims of crime when she met the Cabinet Secretary for Justice in Luxembourg in June, and many elements of the victims road map, which the Commission published in May this year, reflect practice in Scotland. Scotland is internationalist, responsible and engaged. Given our current limited powers, we have still been able to set world-beating climate change targets and a world-leading water policy, and to go from a near standing start to the front of the pack in our renewables capacity. In fact, the Prime Minister wrote to the First Minister on 1 August to welcome the Scottish ministers’ support for higher EU ambition on climate change, and he recognised that Scotland has good examples to share of the jobs, investment and growth potential of progressive climate change policies. The Scottish ministers were delegates at the previous United Nations climate conference in Cancun. They played an active role in the UK delegation to support higher ambition and launch important initiatives on clean energy in developing countries. We plan to do the same in Durban this December. I single out the UK minister Chris Huhne for his positive spirit of co-operation on climate change and energy. Unfortunately, he is the exception rather than the norm, which is why the Scottish Government’s view is that we need statutory provisions. The strength of the evidence from Scotland on the low-carbon economy is now being used by the UK, and the Scottish Minister for Environment and Climate Change attended June’s environment council. Stewart Stevenson was able to add real value in the council meeting as part of the UK delegation. He worked with Chris Huhne to influence sceptical EU member states to support a 30 per cent target. That shows where Scotland is making a real and meaningful contribution in council to influence the whole EU climate change agenda. We should build on that across other areas.

I really want to make some progress. We have also raised the bar by supporting minority languages. In 2010, Michael Russell spoke for the UK at the education, youth, culture and sport council using Gaelic. It is interesting that at the same council in the previous year, I observed from other countries delegations that comprised ministers and devolved and federal Government representatives with specific areas of expertise. Both spoke at the full Council as part of the delegation as well as the member state. That approach was put to excellent effect during the Belgian presidency, when Flemish ministers chaired the fisheries council, the environment council and the education, youth, culture and sport council with notable success in several areas. Those examples demonstrate the legitimacy and added value of drawing from expertise, wherever it may sit within the member state. Such thinking goes a long way towards supporting Scotland’s playing a greater role than simply attending in silence. With your agreement, Presiding Officer, I am happy to take Mr McLetchie’s intervention if my time allows me to.

Had David McLetchie—or, indeed, any Conservative member—been in the chamber during question time earlier instead of sleeping on the devolution job, let alone, as Jack McConnell said, sleeping on the job of the union, he might have heard Aileen McLeod make the precise point that there are provisions in the Treaty on European Union to allow representation by whomever the member state wants to contribute. The Belgian presidency has had Flemish ministers chairing—not just attending to make decisions—the fisheries council and the environment council. It is possible and can be done. Those examples demonstrate the legitimacy of that approach, so it is hard to believe that the previous UK Labour Government preferred to field a House of Lords representative—Lord Davies, who had responsibility for, among other things, bees—to represent the UK on fisheries at an informal council in Vigo, despite the fact 70 per cent of UK landings are by Scottish fishing vessels. We are eager to ensure our involvement and that of the other devolved Administrations before the UK position is finalised. After 12 years of playing a key role in supporting the UK position, it is time for recognition and respect for that role, by making the most of our expertise and experience. It is only fair to say that, from the outset, the UK coalition Government has offered a more constructive approach than the previous UK Labour Government. When I raised my concerns at the joint ministerial council on Europe in June 2010, William Hague undertook to write to his Cabinet colleagues to ask that they respond positively to approaches from devolved Administrations to attend and speak at council meetings. That is simply not being acted on often enough. It is disappointing that in fisheries, in which Scotland has the dominant interest in the UK, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, Richard Lochhead, has been able to speak at only one agri-fish council, in September 2010, and then only after an intervention from the Prime Minister. Our provisions for the Scotland Bill would avoid the need for the Prime Minister’s intervention. We are proposing a reasonable solution and following the thinking of previous Labour, Conservative and Liberal Democrat politicians. David McLetchie and Jamie McGrigor might want to listen to this point. We recognise that if a Scottish minister leads a UK delegation they will need to contribute to that discussion on behalf of the UK line formed after discussion with the devolved Administrations. That is reasonable. The motion is about constructive dialogue to achieve consensus to take forward the point that our representation needs to be strengthened. Achieving cross-party consensus here at Holyrood will always serve us well. That strengthening of representation can be secured in different ways, but the Scottish Government’s preference is for statutory provision. The bottom line is that it needs to be strengthened. We will, of course, hear different views presented in this debate. At the end of the day, I hope that we can agree on the principle that our role needs to be strengthened. Scotland has a lot to say and to contribute within the European Union. I hope that we will hear support for that point in the speeches that follow, but within the current devolution settlement we still need a better way to ensure that that contribution can be made. That is what this debate is about. I move, That the Parliament recognises that Scotland should have a strengthened role in European policy making; acknowledges the UK Government undertaking to respond positively to approaches from devolved administrations to attend and speak at meetings of the Council of the European Union; notes the present situation of Scottish ministers being required to write seeking permission to attend council meetings, and calls for Scottish ministers to be included in the delegation representing the UK at proceedings of EU institutions considering matters that are devolved to the Scottish Parliament or that are exercisable by Scottish ministers.

We were attacked yesterday by Annabel Goldie, who said that we were somehow relentlessly hostile to people who had a different point of view. Today, we seem to be being attacked—we can see it in the Conservative amendment—for taking the trouble to see whether there is consensus within the Parliament. I recognise that Labour perhaps cannot come to a decision because it does not have a leader, but the Westminster Parliament is now debating these points in the House of Lords and we are quite right to bring them forward. I do not think that we should be criticised for seeking what might be a lowest common denominator in our position about a strengthened role. Parliament saying that it does not respect the right of the Government to try to engage with the Opposition parties makes it difficult for us to listen and respond—and that is an issue not just for this debate, but for Parliament going forward over the next few months.

Will the member give way?

The issue is important. We might get warm words and the Prime Minister’s intervention, but the machine and establishment of Whitehall regularly refuse our requests to attend informal councils, so the matter is still problematic. There might be political will at ministerial level and warm words, but very rarely is the approach exercised by the machine. That is why we need a statutory power.

Informal councils, which I have attended, can be just as important in proactively trying to build relationships, change policies and influence things. However, we are frequently refused attendance at informal councils. Does James Kelly acknowledge that?

Hugh Henry puts his finger on the precise point that I have been trying to make. On areas such as justice or climate change, the issue is about what we can contribute and what we can do to advance the case. We recognise that it is a positive agenda to try to ensure that contributions are made and collaboration takes place in advance, so that the United Kingdom position is informed by the interests of the devolved Administrations, particularly Scotland. I think that that is the point that Hugh Henry is making, and I agree with him.

With the greatest respect, severe weather and the ash cloud influenced those events.

Will the member give way?

I have already covered the issue of the ash cloud and the weather. Our attendance has been exemplary. I might have been a bit overenthusiastic in being positive about what we can offer, but will David McLetchie please acknowledge that the problem lies in the working groups, informal councils and negotiation and collaboration in pre-meetings? Does he recognise that there is generally room for improvement? Will he please answer that very simple question?

The motion has resulted in a lively and interesting exchange. It is difficult: it seems as if we are damned if we do and damned if we do not. If we try to get some kind of consensus and come to the chamber before the event, we are accused of somehow weakening our position. If we had come and said that, regardless of what other people think, our view is that we demand a statutory provision and that that is the only basis for discussion, we would have been accused of steamrollering. I am genuinely trying to find a way of having a discussion and recognising all contributions and the need for a strengthened role. That strengthened role can be delivered in different ways. In relation to Liam McArthur’s comments, I made the important point about the pre-work that is required. That is one of the problematic areas for us that we are trying to seek improvements on to ensure the arguments are set. I want to address a number of points because very important points have been made. On whether we can make the proposed change, I should point out that it is for the member state to decide who it sends to council meetings—it is not for the Commission. The amendment to the Scotland Bill that we have suggested might not be what everybody wants—we are still supportive of it and are happy to continue to persuade people of it—but in any case it relates to the representation in the UK delegation, which is for the UK, not the Commission, to decide. I agree that we might not want to follow Belgium in some of the ructions in its politics and where it has been, but the irony of the disruption in Belgium was that, regardless of its problems in forming a domestic Government, Belgium was able to Chair the Council of Ministers and hold the presidency reasonably well. It had some successes in taking people forward in a number of ways.

No, I want to carry on and address some of the specific points that have been raised. Patricia Ferguson asked whether we submitted a national reform programme on Europe. Yes, we did, and we also contributed to the UK response. I also responded about activity on the cohesion policy. Alex Neil recently met the relevant commissioner, and there have been numerous official-level meetings on that point. That is part of our contribution. We can contribute in many different ways; the issue is really what happens in council meetings. I have been in council meetings when I have had to sit behind the UK Government minister but have seen other nations have both their national and regional Governments contributing and taking part in the decision-making process. What we are seeking—which was set out ably by a number of members; Maureen Watt, Aileen McLeod and Joan McAlpine all gave examples of other countries that have a similar set-up—is not unusual or unnatural. It happens elsewhere, and we have a lot to offer.

Margo MacDonald’s theme throughout the debate has been that the issue is about power. Of course it is about power, but it is also about how the situation can be made to work in the United Kingdom, which I acknowledge is different from Germany and Spain. We have to find our own solutions, and the issue is whether there is a better solution than what is currently available. There are a number of other areas that I want to address. We have experience, and we can contribute. We are using the JMCs, whether on Europe or on domestic issues, to inform progress. At the JMC on Europe in particular, we are constructively contributing to the process. At the moment, there are discussions on the financial framework and budget deliberations, which we are trying to influence as best we can. It is also important to recognise that there have been problems. We have a situation in which the UK speaks on behalf of Scotland in areas such as fisheries. Clearly, Richard Lochhead’s experience is valuable and is recognised as such in Scotland, and we should have a better approach in Europe. Attending or speaking at the Council of Ministers meetings should be seen as the concluding stage of a collaborative working process to advance and protect the UK’s collective interest in Europe. That is what we are trying to do, but the position has to be shaped and agreed among the devolved Administrations and Whitehall at a much earlier stage in the policy formulation process. That is another area in which we are seeking improvements. The devolved Administrations know fine what we are doing because I have talked to them about the issue. They just happen not to have legislation that can be influenced going through Westminster just now. I want to get on record the facts in response to David McLetchie’s points about Kenny MacAskill and his attendance at meetings. In February, there was snow; in April and June, we were a minority Government and ministers were required to be here to vote; and in December there was the ash cloud from the volcano. It is, therefore, a bit unfair to slight Kenny MacAskill in that way. There are opportunities to inform and influence. Unfortunately, regardless of the political support that has been given—for example, in words from William Hague—which I have acknowledged even in the motion, there is still a blockage to our ability to attend, which is why we are trying to establish a process to ensure our attendance as part of the delegations. Some members seem to be confusing attendance as part of a delegation with leading a delegation. That is not what is being called for even in our proposed amendment to the Scotland Bill although, in some cases, that would be appropriate. I quote somebody who has a reasonable point to make: “We might want Scotland’s rights guaranteed. It should be able to participate in the discussions in the Council of Ministers. ... On matters that are the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament, but which have a wider UK interest and concern, we propose that the right should be established in law that members of the Scottish Executive can participate in the discussions. ... where non-reserved matters affect only Scotland and not other parts of the United Kingdom, we would argue that Scottish Ministers should be the sole representatives. ... Salmon farming is almost an exclusively Scottish interest, and therefore when it is dealt with it should be led by a Scottish Minister.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 30 March 1998; Vol 309, c 926.] That was Jim Wallace speaking in a Westminster debate on the Scotland Bill in 1998. It is not a new concept that we should have that representation. Given the maturity and experience of the Scottish Government, is it not reasonable for us to have the right not only to attend as part of a UK delegation but to be able to inform developments, particularly in areas in which we have experience and expertise? I am not sure what the other parties fear. If we are confident that we can co-operate, we should have no problem with that. The Conservatives do not seem to know whether they want more power. They want independence for themselves but not for their country. Labour might not have a leader, but that does not mean that Labour members cannot take a lead in the Parliament. Debates are already taking place at Westminster and, according to one of the lords who used to be a member of the Scottish Parliament, there is the worrying situation that they might not even respect our Scotland Bill Committee. Patricia Ferguson said that we should wait for the conclusions of the Scotland Bill Committee that is currently sitting. However, somebody who used to be a Deputy First Minister has said in the debates in the past few days that Westminster might not even accept the views of this Parliament’s Scotland Bill Committee.

Sorry—I have already taken an intervention. Now is the time and this is the place to be debating this. We must try to inform the process now, as there will not be another opportunity to influence the current devolution settlement. We are being constructive and positive, and we have come up with a reasonable position. I hope that members have confidence in their own arguments. I admit that what we are asking members to vote on today is simply about strengthening Scotland’s position. If members vote against the motion, they are voting against strengthening Scotland’s position—it is a very straightforward motion. I accept Hugh Henry’s point and am more than happy to come forward with the line-by-line experience, although I do not want to bore members to tears with the detail in the process. I am happy to do that, but surely to goodness we can have a bit of confidence that we have something to offer through attendance on European delegations. I ask members please to have a bit of confidence in themselves, confidence in this country and confidence that we can have a stronger role in Europe.

I am delighted to lead the debate in my new position as Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs. I will set out my thoughts on my responsibilities to Scotland for who we are in terms of promoting Scotland’s cultural identity or identities, where we are in promoting our cultural and economic interests, and where we want to be as a nation. The Government has made significant progress over the past four years, and I will set that out. I also intend to set out a clear direction of travel for the next five years, spelling out what we plan to do. This week alone, we had a trio of exciting events that showcase Scotland’s culture, creativity and international impact. This morning, I opened the refurbished marble Scotsman steps artwork in Edinburgh, designed by Turner prize-winning artist Martin Creed and supported by the Government through the Edinburgh festivals expo fund. On Tuesday evening, the First Minister and I hosted a reception at Edinburgh castle for guests from the film and screen industries who are in Edinburgh for the 65th edition of our world-renowned international film festival. We will explore options for holding an investors night in Scotland to bring together the business community and film makers to encourage investment and create opportunities for the film industry to flourish. This week, the National Theatre of Scotland showcased a 24-hour rolling programme of more than 200 five-minute plays written by people in Scotland and across the globe and broadcast over the internet to mark the company’s fifth anniversary. That emphasises the dynamic and creative nature of one of our national performing companies, as it uses digital media creatively to engage throughout Scotland and the wider world, promoting our creativity to a potentially huge audience. The Government’s achievements over the past four years have been substantial. We established Creative Scotland to deliver benefits for the arts, screen and creative industries. We established the Edinburgh festivals expo fund, with £8 million of funding over four years, to support Scottish work at the world’s biggest arts event. Government support for the festivals is crucial. They have grown to generate more than £250 million-worth of tourism for the Scottish economy. We also supported the increasing domestic and international success of the national performing companies with a new, closer relationship. We have made significant capital investment in museums and galleries, including £15.2 million for the redevelopment of the royal museum of Scotland, which reopens in July; £7.1 million for the redevelopment of the Scottish national portrait gallery, which reopens in November; £10 million for Anthony d’Offay’s artist rooms; and, of course, £8.6 million for the development of the Robert Burns birthplace museum, which was officially opened in January. We doubled our international development budget to £9 million. We established a track record of attending Council of the European Union meetings and we developed a more strategic, all-Scotland approach towards the promotion of Scotland overseas. We delivered the 2011 census, and I pay tribute to all workers who were involved in that. It was a great success, with the response rate at least equalling the level that was achieved 10 years ago. We delivered the restoration of Stirling castle’s James V palace—a three-year, £12 million project that included reuniting the Stirling heads for the first time since 1777 in their stunning new gallery, brought to life by modern, Scottish digital technology. As those achievements demonstrate, this is a culturally ambitious and outward-facing Government. The election result demonstrated the Scottish people’s faith in our approach, and the fact that I am now Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs demonstrates the importance of culture and external affairs to the Government. In bringing the two portfolios together four years ago, the Government recognised the potential to leverage our rich cultural assets to enhance the promotion of Scotland overseas. My ambition is to build on that synergy and bring together culture, trade and tourism to deliver ever greater benefits for Scotland’s economy. My role is to support the fantastic range of cultural activity that happens throughout Scotland; to champion Scotland’s cutting-edge technology and architectural design; to get the best from Scotland’s major events, portraying Scotland as the perfect stage; and to act as a voice of Scotland beyond these shores, representing the Government’s interests around the world and promoting Scotland as a modern, dynamic nation. Being cabinet secretary is not just about making decisions on investment, although significant capital projects such as the Victoria and Albert museum in Dundee make a major contribution to our ambitions. It is about championing, supporting and providing leadership, identifying synergies and encouraging everyone to work together for the benefit of Scotland. We are a creative nation with a rich heritage. We have an unrivalled historical legacy in creativity, and we have used our nation’s capacity for innovation to share worldwide some of the key inventions that have proved to be indispensable in the modern era. Scotland has a fantastic and vibrant contemporary culture that is epitomised by the Edinburgh festivals as the world’s largest arts event, and by our national performing companies as they tour international hits such as “Black Watch”—which was in New York for Scotland week—around the globe. We have a remarkable and long-standing international reputation for fantastic built and natural heritage, as well as original engineering and building design, with examples of world-renowned iconic structures such as the Forth rail bridge and Glasgow school of art. However, our culture is not just our music, our theatres, our dance and our art. It is also our science, our design, our architecture, our cutting-edge technologies and our languages. All those shape and bring joy to the lives of the people of Scotland and the wider world. We have built significantly on our historical reputation. We continue to deliver cutting-edge innovations into the global order—for example, initiatives such as the Scottish Ten project, which was developed by Scots to record and document the built heritage and is now used the world over to record iconic landmarks such as Mount Rushmore. I have been privileged to witness other exciting developments such as the application that uses musical therapy to aid recognition for people with Alzheimer’s, and the cutting-edge, eye-catching and award-winning fashion designs that are coming out of Edinburgh College of Art. Our creative industries spur on our technological innovation and make us an attractive place to be. Dundee is gaining a deserved reputation as a hub for creative industries on a global scale. The creative industries account for 4 per cent of Scotland’s gross domestic product and 3 per cent of its employment, which is 63,000 jobs in total. Over the past decade, the creative industries have grown more quickly than the economy as a whole and they have a key role to play in supporting Scotland’s economic recovery. All that ensures that Scotland is a progressive nation with a global reach. We are a dynamic, modern nation, contributing to the world in which we live. We are keenly aware of our place as a long-standing nation in the wider world and of our responsibility as a citizen in the community of nations. Promoting a nation of 5 million people in countries such as the USA, Canada, India and China is no mean feat but, of course, Scotland is no ordinary country. We will strengthen and deepen existing relationships, using the many tools at our disposal to ensure that our culture and creativity remain our unique selling point in the world. We will engage with our priority countries to deliver economic benefits and encourage broader and deeper engagement with those who wish to live, work and study in, travel to and do business with Scotland. Our wealth of experience will continue to benefit the international community, and in particular key partners throughout the developing world with whom we are building enduring partnerships. Scotland is aware of its responsibilities to the wider world and, in particular, of our special relationship with Malawi. We will continue to contribute towards international development through our grant funding programmes, protecting spending that helps to make a difference to some of the world’s poorest and most vulnerable people. We will build on that support, working with our partners in the developing world to address challenges in areas such as climate change in which Scotland can bring expertise to bear. Presenting an enlightened, outward focus, leveraging our historic and cultural assets, and promoting innovation and building enduring relationships will be the basis on which Scotland positions itself in the world as a modern dynamic nation. Earlier, I set out what the Government has achieved. I now turn to our ambitions for the next five years, as set out in our manifesto before the election. We will seize the once-in-a-lifetime opportunity that is presented by the second homecoming year in 2014, when both the Ryder cup and the Commonwealth games will come to Scotland, to bolster Scotland’s international image.

I think that that is an endorsement of promoting a second year of homecoming as the correct thing to do. I recognise the member’s concerns about the gathering. The people who are organising the events for the year of homecoming can certainly determine whether such an event is appropriate. However, do not underestimate the opportunities that we have to reach out and promote Scotland. Glasgow in particular has a fantastic opportunity to showcase what it has to offer to the wider world. We need to bolster Scotland’s international image as the place to be for international events. We will also deliver a rich legacy that boosts tourism, cultural participation, the economy and public health and wellbeing, while showcasing Scotland to the world.

There are many fantastic ideas about how we promote culture and creativity in relation to the Commonwealth games. I am certainly attracted by that idea. This week, an exhibition by Richard Demarco will be held in the Scottish Government’s office in Brussels, which will showcase his work and his important connection to promoting Scotland and its relationship with wider Europe. We will introduce a young Scots fund, which will be focused on sport, enterprise and creativity and will aim to provide enriching opportunities for our young people. We will also build on the highly successful Edinburgh festivals expo fund to ensure that more artists can experience the opportunities that it has provided. We will deliver our ambitious strategy for the creative industries. We will support and celebrate our culture and creativity and build on the powerful role that it plays across all the Government’s ambitions by establishing a national book week, a new music initiative to help to support the contemporary development of flourishing new musical artists in this country and more apprenticeships for traditional arts. We will contribute to the legacy from the Commonwealth games in 2014 by promoting Scotland and by getting Scotland dancing as part of the drive to improve the nation’s health and wellbeing. We will continue to utilise Scotland’s rich heritage, tremendous cultural assets and worldwide reputation to increase exports, tourism and economic growth through our strategic approach to the promotion of Scotland and our engagement with the international community. We will build on our innovative approach to the promotion of Scotland following the establishment earlier this year of a Scotland office in Canada, which brings together the resources of the Scottish Government, Scottish Development International and our tourism agency as one. We will develop proposals to sharpen the focus in our international development work on the areas of policy expertise to which Scotland’s academic and scientific institutions, businesses and civic partners can best contribute, such as water, renewable energy and climate change. We will develop a national strategy for museums and galleries, which will focus on how the sector can best use its tremendous skills and resources to ensure a sustainable future for the sector. We will capitalise on the success of the globalscot network by mobilising key segments of the diaspora to act as powerful advocates for Scotland. We will encourage the public to engage in the process of architectural design and increase understanding of the planning system. We will deliver improved visitor facilities for the battle of Bannockburn site in time to commemorate the 700th anniversary of the battle in 2014. I believe that all that demonstrates an ambition for Scotland that will deliver success over the next five years. I look forward to hearing members’ ideas and contributions on their priorities. I encourage them all to support Scotland as a creative nation with a rich heritage, which is contributing to the world as a modern dynamic country.

Does the member recognise that there were no cuts in 2010-11, because we did not pass on the Westminster cuts for that year? That protected our national companies in 2010-11.

Only this afternoon, on a community-based broadcast after the broadcast of First Minister’s question time, I gave an interview setting out my commitment to community radio. If the member wishes to tune in, the station might have a record of that.

Will the member give way on that point?

Kezia Dugdale makes an important point about the balance between helping to support and promote writers within Scotland and being unafraid to champion the export that she mentions. It is helpful to know of her support and that of other members in the chamber. We must have that opportunity to showcase our writers, so I very much welcome her comments.

We have a number of existing funds to help to commercialise ideas from students and graduates, but I am happy to consider a proposal. She might be aware of the Scottish six, which is a proposal to invest in new talent and emerging ideas, particularly on product design such as Jenny Marra described.

I, too, congratulate Mary’s Meals. I had the opportunity to speak to the Malawi Government about its desire to extend Mary’s Meals and the principle that it represents to all primary school children in Malawi. From that start in Argyll, an impact has been made on thousands upon thousands of Malawian children.

This has been an outstanding debate. I have attended many debates on culture and external affairs in the 20 months for which I have held my post and, if the speeches that I have heard today are anything to go by, the Parliament will have a great opportunity to promote the importance to us of our cultural offering and international reach. A number of contributions have extolled the experience that people have had in Scotland and its influence on their cultural identities and who they are, on where we want to contribute, on where we are internationally and on where we want to be as a nation. We have spoken of the themes of cultural excellence, vibrant creativity and cutting-edge innovation, for which Scotland has a worldwide reputation. We are a creative nation with a rich heritage that contributes to the world as a modern and dynamic country. Scotland is about the old and the new, the traditional and the contemporary, and the historic and the modern. Scotland is about our magnificent past, our dynamic present, and our journey to a promising and exciting future. We have heard stories that may be parochial but which I think are very important. They tell us about the shape of Scotland in the past and how that is being interpreted in the present. The passion with which individual members have spoken about their constituencies shows the importance of culture in contributing to tourism and local economies. I congratulate Hanzala Malik on an excellent first speech. He brought insight and challenge. I liked his phrase about Scotland being “open for business”. It reminded me of William Wallace’s Lübeck letter, in which he told continental Europe at the time that Scotland was open for business. It is a strong message that the Parliament can communicate collectively. Today’s debate demonstrates the consensus in the chamber about the importance of Scotland’s culture—yes, it faces a number of challenges, and I will come back to the specific points that have been raised. We talked about our creativity and about external affairs. Everyone understands that we are facing challenging times, but that does not stop us being creative; indeed, it makes it more important than ever that we should be creative. That is why we have fought hard to ensure that culture is viewed not as a luxury but as a central component of a successful and vibrant society. That is why we continue to invest in our artists, creative practitioners and cultural institutions to ensure that they thrive and excel, and to ensure that our nation’s great cultural offering is respected and enjoyed around the world. I want to cover a number of points that members have made. If I do not cover them all, I will try to get back to members later. I point out to Patricia Ferguson that the Scottish Government, through Historic Scotland, has invested in Maryhill burgh halls and I understand that the investment covers public art. She also talked about Kelvingrove museum. When I first went to the University of Glasgow, I stayed a hop and a skip from the museum and spent many a Sunday there. It has inspired generations and it will continue do to so, whether through the Glasgow boys exhibition, its standing exhibitions or indeed when I took my then 5-year-old to the Dr Who exhibition. It is interesting to note that the Glasgow boys exhibition outsold even the Dr Who exhibition. Patricia Ferguson also talked about council budgets, which are an issue that we will need to come back to at another time. Obviously, one issue is the integrity and independence of councils in setting their own budgets. Patricia Ferguson was correct in identifying the amount of investment in culture in different areas. We heard the passion of a former leader of Renfrewshire Council about the importance that Renfrewshire places on its cultural assets. We can be heartened when we hear about other cities and what they do. Joan McAlpine talked about Richard Florida, whom I was pleased to hear speak several years ago when Universities Scotland put on a lecture. His ideas about city regions and the creativity of cities have inspired Edinburgh, for example, for a number of years. We need to keep a close connection with what is happening with council budgets, but we also have to respect councils’ independence. I politely say to Jenny Marra that I have had the Labour manifesto checked and it does not talk about free music tuition; it talks about free support for primary 5 and primary 6 pupils, supported by the youth music initiative. When councils such as my own, West Lothian, continue to provide free additional support for music tuition outside school, it is important that that is supported. I hope that, along with me, Jenny Marra will try to persuade other councils of the importance of free music tuition.

The member’s point is well made. That is an area on which members can get together to explore collectively. It gets to the nub of a problem with the national outcomes, which is that if we have a separate, significant cultural outcome, we might not treat culture as being embedded in health and wellbeing or crime and justice, with the result that it will become a discrete, extra luxury that it is easier to cut. Should we ensure, therefore, that culture is implicit and embedded in all other areas? I hope that that is a debate that the Education and Culture committee will come back to. I reassure Patricia Ferguson that I support free access to museums. As regards the Commonwealth games, a number of extensive developments are taking place. For example, I have already agreed to provide investment for the Royal Scottish National Orchestra’s new building at the Glasgow royal concert hall and for the development of the Theatre Royal. I saw a magnificent Scottish Opera performance involving primary school children in Glasgow in preparation for that development. In talking about her experiences, Ruth Davidson touched on the Commonwealth games, and I would like to come back to the chamber to expand on the developments that are taking place in relation to that. Collectively, we have a great opportunity to showcase what we have to the world. Jim Eadie made an interesting speech, in which he mentioned tax evasion and brought to our attention the difficulties with international accounting. My perspective and that of the Government is that tax dodging can have a devastating impact on the global economy, as it hits the most vulnerable in developing countries the hardest. We, too, believe that companies should be transparent and accountable when it comes to the tax that they pay in the developing countries in which they operate, and I would be happy to make that point in any discussions that I have with the UK Government or the European Commission. In a highly thoughtful contribution, Kezia Dugdale talked about crime fiction. I, too, have seen “Dunsinane”, which I thought was a fantastic production. The Edinburgh festivals expo fund has been used by the Edinburgh book festival to take Scottish authors such as Ian Rankin and Eleanor Thom to the international festival of authors in Toronto. That was a case of taking Scottish writers to the wider world. A similar exercise was conducted in India in recent times. Clare Adamson made an excellent speech, in which she made us think more deeply about our identity as Scots. She talked about Maya Angelou and her love of Burns. Anyone who saw the interview that Maya Angelou gave in Loudon halls, in which she spoke about how Burns had influenced her at a very difficult time in her life, will recognise that it showed that the humanity of Burns reached across not only generation but gender. Imaginatively, Clare Adamson also managed to get “Sex and the City” into a parliamentary speech, which I think is the first time that that has happened. With their experience in Brussels, Aileen McLeod and Jenny Marra will bring a great European perspective to our debates. I agree that we need to have representation and participation in Europe. In fact, I have represented the UK, not at a formal council, but at an informal council on creative industries, in Barcelona. I managed to explain to sundry ministers from all over Europe that Scotland was home to the fastest-selling entertainment product of all time in “Grand Theft Auto”, which Ruth Davidson mentioned. Our digital companies are extremely important and need to be supported. I have visited Dynamo Games, which Joan McAlpine mentioned. She was right to accentuate the importance of tax and other incentives that other countries offer. I want to reflect on Hanzala Malik’s call for encouragement to be given to internationalising our economy, particularly for our new companies. Only this week, we had the national economic forum, which involved the First Minister, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth and a range of cabinet secretaries engaging with Scotland’s economic leaders and influencers. The session that I chaired was about internationalising our economy and improving exports. An interesting point that came out of that was that, although other companies in some of our key sectors have more experience in that area, there are smaller companies in burgeoning areas such as the creative industries that are interested in exporting. As Joan McAlpine identified, we need to ensure that we provide more mentoring or other support, and helping them to understand regulation in other countries is part of that. I thank Joan McAlpine for bringing that to our attention. Derek Mackay was passionate about Renfrewshire. The Renfrewshire renaissance is interesting. I am not sure that Paisley would have been the first place that all of us would have thought of as a tourist destination, but he showed why celebrating our culture and our tourism is so important. I am delighted that the Cluniac conference is coming to Paisley as I attended Paisley abbey when it was first discussed, and of course the Mod is coming to Paisley in 2013. We have talked about our achievements, but we have also talked about what we want to do in the future. Put simply, we want to ensure that our country is seen as a great place to live, work, study, visit and do business. We have ambitious plans for international activity. We have a global reputation as a place of innovation and imagination, and we have world-class further and higher education. We heard much about what we can do with our young people—for example, from Hanzala Malik—and further and higher education is vital in that regard. As Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, I was delighted to ensure that the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama, which is to become the royal conservatoire of Scotland, managed to secure degree status for its dance course. Also important are our drama qualifications and those in other areas. We have cultural icons and a broad cultural offering. We make a significant impact on the international stage. That creates opportunities for investment, for people to come here, and for us to play our part as citizens of the world and as a modern, dynamic nation. We continue to punch above our weight on the global stage. Earlier this year, Vice Premier Li of China came to see the innovative and cutting-edge engineering approaches that we are supporting to harness wave and tidal power. We also managed to give him a cultural offering at Edinburgh castle, which reflected some of the interesting associations of Chinese and Scottish music, for example. We have to ensure that we continue our strategic engagement with a number of countries around the world, from Europe and our near neighbours to North America, China, India and Russia, and also Malawi and Pakistan. In an impassioned speech, Christina McKelvie spoke about the importance of that and discussed why we still want to reach out and have connections with countries such as Malawi. Our interest in other countries reflects our value system as a nation, and even at difficult times we should champion that. We should also champion our historical and contemporary culture. I talked about the Scottish Ten and, as I speak, we are investigating and developing interpretation of world wonders such as the Rani ki vav step well in India and the eastern Qing tombs in China. We have big plans for the future. We want to deliver ambitious strategies for our creative industries and our museums and galleries, and we have flagship cultural capital projects such as the V and A in Dundee. However, I appeal to Jenny Marra that doubting the V and A does not help with its fundraising. I appeal to her to join us and other Dundee MSPs to ensure that we all come together to champion what will be a first-class site. The establishment of a Scottish digital network will help to provide the cultural sector in Scotland with significant creative outlets. The introduction of the young Scots fund will deliver benefits by harnessing the creativity of our young people. We will seek to secure a place at the top table for EU meetings. Presiding Officer, as I reach the end of my extended 20-minute speech, will you tell me how long I have to go?

I hope that I have reflected the many and various contributions that were made in the debate. I thought that it was a first-class debate. Many people have a lot to say about how we can contribute going forward, and if this afternoon’s debate is anything to go by, Scotland’s reputation in the world and our nurturing of our cultural creativity will be things that we can be proud of in the five years to come.

I welcome Patricia Ferguson and Ruth Davidson to their front-bench positions. I look forward to working with them and other MSPs to support culture in Scotland. This is a crucial time for digital technology and broadcasting in Scotland. Eight days ago, the pilot project to deliver next-generation access broadband to the Highlands and Islands entered its procurement phase. On the same day, BBC Alba was made available on Freeview—the first time ever that a channel featuring primarily Scottish content has been universally available in Scotland. It has already made accessible a major event—the RockNess festival—which other channels would not have been able to find time to cover. We are also in the final week of the digital television switchover. By 22 June, all viewers in Scotland will have entered the age of multichoice viewing, which many people have taken for granted for years. There could not therefore be a better time to debate broadcasting. In addition to setting out the challenges that we still face, it is fair to reflect on some significant achievements that we have shared during the past four years. Four years ago, the Scottish Government decided to establish the independent Scottish Broadcasting Commission. Chaired by Blair Jenkins, the commission included leading broadcasting and creative industries experts, such as Elaine C Smith, as well as respected members of major political parties, such as Chris Ballance, Lord Fraser, Henry McLeish and the late Baroness Michie. The commission’s final report highlighted low and declining levels of commissioning by United Kingdom television networks, a lack of plurality in Scottish public service broadcasting, a strong desire from audiences in Scotland for more Scottish programmes, and concerns about the range and quality of the current radio and television services in Scotland. It also presented 22 recommendations for addressing those issues. In the past four years, much has changed for the better, often because of the strong parliamentary consensus around the commission’s report. BBC Alba is an obvious example. Parliament consistently and unanimously supported its availability on Freeview. Indeed, the BBC trust explicitly referred to that support when it decided to place BBC Alba on Freeview. Last week marked the culmination of a long process in which the chamber played a full part, and which will benefit viewers throughout Scotland. Network commissioning is another example. In 2008, 3.7 per cent of BBC network television commissioning came from Scotland. In 2010, the figure was more than 7 per cent. In the same time period, Scotland’s share of Channel 4 television commissions increased from 1.5 per cent to more than 4 per cent, in addition to its digital media and film investment. More can and should be done, but those increases, if they are maintained, will be worth approximately £30 million annually to the Scottish economy. The Scottish public sector is also now more active in developing and supporting our television production industry. Major investment has been made in skills. Scottish Enterprise account manages 18 television production companies; and during the past year, Creative Scotland has developed partnerships with the BBC, MG Alba, STV and Channel 4. During the past year, the UK Government also took constructive steps on accountability structures in relation to the BBC trust member for Scotland and the board of MG Alba. We expect to see that reflected in the Scotland Bill. That demonstrates the value of the consensus on broadcasting at Holyrood, which has given added authority to the Scottish Government’s dialogue with broadcasters, the Office of Communications and the UK Government. However, significantly more can and must be done. When Jeremy Hunt launched the UK Government’s local media action plan in January, I was struck by his recognition of the “painful truth” that the UK probably has “one of the most centralised media ecologies of any developed country.” That truth resonates especially painfully here in Scotland. My view is that the current framework for accountability in broadcasting contributes directly to the centralisation that Jeremy Hunt condemned. The main evidence for that is the current fate of the Scottish Broadcasting Commission’s key recommendation on the establishment of a Scottish digital network. That recommendation was based on the crucial importance of ensuring sufficient competition with the BBC for Scottish public service broadcasting content. It was also firmly based on the evidence that the commission had taken from viewers, which convincingly demonstrated the appetite for more quality Scottish content. It was unsurprising, therefore, that the idea of a Scottish digital network was explicitly welcomed when the Parliament unanimously endorsed the commission’s final report in October 2008. In March 2009, Ted Brocklebank went as far as to say that the establishment of such a network was the “settled will” of the Parliament. Earlier this year, we received the findings of the Scottish digital network panel, a group of experts that I set up to investigate how a network could be established and, more importantly, funded. The panel—which, like the Scottish Broadcasting Commission, was chaired by Blair Jenkins—set out the many benefits that a digital network could bring, including greater opportunities for our creative economy, greater accountability for devolved institutions and, significantly, greater choice for viewers in Scotland. Importantly, the network’s online content would boost digital connectivity in Scotland. As the panel’s report says, “New and attractive forms of Scottish content could drive take-up just as the Scottish Government is seeking to lead the UK in connectivity.”

I fully agree. Indeed, that point was made in the Government’s digital strategy, which we launched in March of this year. The member is absolutely right. We can provide a supply, but if the demand is not there, we face another challenge. Improving the content, particularly the Scottish content, would help in that regard, particularly in areas such as Glasgow and Lanarkshire, where the issue that needs to be addressed is not availability but take-up. The panel reached the firm conclusion that a fairer redistribution of television licence fee income would be the most appropriate method of funding a new network but, in the event that it proved impossible to reopen the current licence fee settlement, it proposed an alternative, interim funding mechanism, which would involve a ring-fenced share of revenues from the auction of cleared spectrum after digital television switchover has been completed throughout the UK in 2012. We have proposed both methods to the UK Government, and we will continue to press the issue of spectrum auction revenues, in particular, but, so far, we have not been able to make any progress on that important recommendation. I want to highlight two other areas in which I believe that our lack of power over broadcasting has had, or could have, damaging consequences. The first of those is the television licence fee. In October of last year, the UK Government negotiated a licence fee agreement with the BBC trust that will last until 2017. That agreement will have long-lasting consequences in the devolved nations, beyond the budgetary constraints that it will impose on all BBC services. In Wales, it implemented a new method of funding the Welsh language channel, S4C, through the licence fee. Among other things, the new arrangement will ensure that S4C in Wales will receive £95 million a year of support from licence fee payers from 2013 onwards. The equivalent figure for BBC Alba is only £8 million a year. For Scotland, the settlement had the effect of closing off a possible source of funding for the digital network for the next five years. It is unfortunate that last year’s licence fee agreement was negotiated over a period of a few days behind closed doors. Nobody outside the BBC trust or the UK Government even knew that the discussions were taking place. The final area that I want to talk about is local television. Current UK policy on local television is a bit unclear, following an apparent reversal of direction two weeks ago. We are still waiting for further details, which we expect to get towards the end of July. However, as things stand, the UK Government can make decisions on local television in Scotland that would have a major impact on Scotland’s media scene without any discussion with the Scottish Government or the Scottish Parliament. As members have raised previously, that could have a knock-on impact on advertising revenue and the viability of Scottish newspapers. We have had meaningful discussions with Jeremy Hunt, Ed Vaizey and Sir Nicholas Shott, as he wrote his report. The UK Government may choose to consult us, but it is not required to do so, and discussions to date have been at the initiative of the Scottish Government. As we have an interest in the Scottish media scene, our media companies, the newspaper industry in Scotland, advertising revenue and availability in that market, it is concerning that we might not have any right to consultation.

I am not criticising the Scottish Government because we are the Scottish Government.

We went proactively to the UK Government when it was making its local television proposals and said, “Look, the Scottish digital network could sit within that.” At one point, the question was whether there could be a mixed or private market. Those are exactly the discussions that we had with Sir Nicholas Shott. We want to continue to engage with the UK Government on the subject, which is why we are approaching it. We think that it is important that it consults us on such issues. The issue is about not just the availability of local television in Scotland but the economic impact that it might have on Scottish companies in other media, whether that is newspapers or other media companies. There must be a dialogue about the issue, because it is not black and white; it is not just about what is reserved and what is devolved. That is why, in our motion, we call for an investigation of the options to transfer some powers, even if that is just consultation on the issues. It is very important that Scotland has a voice in relation to local television. The past four years have demonstrated conclusively that this Parliament can use its influence, if not its power, to change broadcasting in Scotland for the better. I have set out examples of that. However, I believe that further changes to how broadcasting decisions are made are now necessary. The minimum steps would be the welcome provisions on the BBC trust and MG Alba, which are already likely to be included in the Scotland Bill at the request of the Scottish Parliament and Scottish Government. There are, however, other areas in which broadcasting issues need to have further Holyrood input. We need to be able to ensure the establishment of the Scottish digital network as a public service broadcaster with a remit within Scotland and with guaranteed spectrum that can make it available to everyone in Scotland. We need to be consulted on subsequent television licence fee settlements and the use of that revenue when it has knock-on impacts on Scotland’s media scene. We could have a responsibility for, or at least an involvement in, decisions made by the UK Government about local television stations that will broadcast within Scotland. Any such stations could have an impact on the viability of Scottish media companies, as I said—for example, when they compete for a limited advertising market. Those were the clear conclusions of the Scottish digital network panel and Sir Nicholas Shott. They are important live issues. I hope that the Parliament comes together with the UK Government to support the investigation into how we can exert influence, whether that is through transfer of powers or other options in the areas that I outlined. Broadcasting’s cultural importance is a key reason why, during the 1990s, so many of the proponents of devolution from all parties believed that broadcasting should be a devolved issue. In 1995, the final recommendations of the Scottish constitutional convention envisaged a significant role for this Parliament in relation to broadcasting. Now is the right time to renew the dialogue on whether Scotland should have more responsibilities for broadcasting. I acknowledge that our motion stresses investigation into more powers; but it does not commit this Parliament to support full devolution of broadcasting—although we might want it to do so, those are not the terms of the motion. I have proposed three sensible and proportionate measures that would do much to improve the current accountability framework for broadcasting in Scotland. In the near future, we will publish a paper setting out those proposals in more detail and highlighting other areas in which a consensus might be achievable. For example, it is surely appropriate for devolved Administrations to have a say on the list of sporting events that must be shown live on free-to-air television. There is also a strong case for Scottish ministers to be consulted on local cross-media mergers. Let us remember the economic importance of that for different communities and sectors in the economy. I hope that other parties, and the UK Government, will contribute proposals of their own. Scotland needs to have a stronger voice in discussions on broadcasting and it needs to have powers to address matters such as the digital network that are a priority at Holyrood, but which may not be a key focus for Westminster. The consensus on broadcasting at Holyrood so far has served us well during the past four years. I look forward to hearing from all parties this afternoon, and afterwards, so that we can build on that in the coming session. I move, That the Parliament welcomes recent developments in digital infrastructure and broadcasting in Scotland, such as BBC ALBA becoming available on Freeview and cable, the introduction of the final stage of digital television switchover in Scotland and the success of the bid led by Highlands and Islands Enterprise for UK Government funding to pilot the introduction of superfast broadband roll-out in rural areas; recognises that much more needs to be done, particularly to realise the vision for a Scottish Digital Network as set out by the Scottish Broadcasting Commission in 2008, which would make quality public service content available to all of Scotland on television and online; welcomes the work undertaken by the Scottish Digital Network Panel to explore options for the funding and establishment of a Scottish Digital Network, and encourages the Scottish Government to continue to explore opportunities with the UK Government to deliver a digital network and to investigate options for transferring further responsibilities for broadcasting to the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government.

That is a very important point. Our digital strategy, launched in March, set out that we want to see significant progress by 2015. We also have a commitment for a fund to help with infrastructure. We are supporting the south of Scotland communities in particular for the next level of bidding, and Richard Lochhead convened a summit for rural communities to take forward that issue. My colleague Alex Neil will lay out the plans for roll-out in the near future.

Ruth Davidson talks about future proofing and price. Surely a publicly funded Scottish digital network, with free access to all and available on television and online, would be a helpful development in that regard.

It is a very important point. I refer the member to the evidence that Blair Jenkins gave to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee in the previous session of Parliament, in which he said that any suggestion of the use of BBC Alba would have to be by invitation, not instruction. I strongly support that view, so I reassure her and the Parliament on the point.

I agree with all the comments that the member has made, but it is important to accentuate the fact that the Scottish digital network is not just about programming and television channels; there are also great opportunities for public service delivery. That is where future proofing and considering how we want to include participation, which has already been mentioned, come in. There is a wider avenue than just programming.

Will the member give way?

I, too, congratulate HIE on the Highlands and Islands pilot. Does the member agree that the fibre optic backhaul that Alex Johnstone referred to is exactly what is being put forward in the HIE pilot, as advocated by the Royal Society of Edinburgh?

I appreciate the point that the member makes, but does she not recognise that there must be another broadcaster with a public service remit so that the BBC does not have a monopoly of public service broadcasting? In the years ahead, we will have negotiations on channel 3. Does she not recognise that it is an important democratic aspect of broadcasting anywhere in the world that no one provider has a monopoly of public service broadcasting?

The debate has been valuable. It demonstrates that the Parliament is likely to approach broadcasting in a constructive and practical spirit. As we have heard, differences will exist, but what came across was how important the connectivity arguments and the wider issue of the digital network and broadcasting are to all members. I congratulate Angus MacDonald on an excellent first speech. I am sure that he will be a powerful advocate not just for Falkirk East but for Gaelic. We were informed by the experience of Ken Macintosh and Ruth Davidson. We could describe her as a strong defender of the BBC or its cheerleader in chief, but she certainly brought to the debate her insight as a previous BBC employee. We also benefited from Joan McAlpine’s insightful journalistic analysis. The debate explored areas in which the Parliament might seek to have more influence and/or power. I set out three areas that I believe we need to address. One is a Scottish digital network, and I was pleased to hear support for that from the Labour benches and the Conservatives. I also want to address the television licence fee and local television. The Scottish Government will publish a paper setting out our proposals—for example, on local cross-media mergers and the list of sporting events that must be shown live on free-to-air television. I recognise that this is a moveable debate and that things are developing as we speak. However, I say to members, including Helen Eadie and Ruth Davidson, that the UK Conservative Government has already top-sliced the licence fee to fund S4C and local television. It is not yet clear whether Scotland will benefit from that top-slicing. Our discussions with the UK Government, at our initiative, are about the need for it to recognise that whatever it provides will have to provide local television for Scotland—not least in the south of Scotland, which, as many members said, is an area that needs addressed. I acknowledge that the extent of our influence and/or power will be debatable, but we really do need to influence what Scotland can achieve as a result of the existing top-slicing of the licence fee for local television provision. I want some of that to come to us as funding support for the Scottish digital network. If we can find a mechanism by which the UK Government’s plans and proposals for local television can chime and align with what we want to do with the Scottish digital network, that will be proof of a creative approach, with the Scottish Parliament working constructively with the UK Government. I will expand on some of the issues that were raised in this afternoon’s debate. I entirely agree with Patricia Ferguson that having a skilled workforce is essential to the development of our television production and broadcasting industry, and the Government will support Labour’s amendment. Although I agree that there is more to be done, I note that we have achieved some progress. I will give just two examples. In 2009, I was delighted to announce the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council’s investment to support Skillset’s screen and media academy network in Scotland. That investment, which is worth £5.8 million over five years, has already made an impact. It has provided enhancements to industry-standard facilities at the six colleges that comprise the creative loop collaboration. In addition, Skillset, BECTU and BBC Scotland have jointly developed a drama training programme that is designed to secure Scotland’s future drama production capacity in line with anticipated growth. That fund was launched in 2010 and it will be worth approximately £500,000 over two years. I think that it was Patricia Ferguson who made the point that recurring drama represents an opportunity to provide on-going skills development and that it is to be supported. We heard in the debate that there is a tension, but we should perhaps not be too precious, because we can meet a number of objectives in providing investment in skills and training. Yes, we need recurring drama in particular to ensure that we have skills and training, and I agree that some of that content can be exportable. We should also recognise that the content does not always have to be Scotland-based. It can be world-class Scottish content that will appeal to a wide variety of international media. At the same time, however, we should acknowledge that we can and should expect content that reflects Scotland as it is now and as we want it to be. I do not think that there is necessarily a tension within that. Some members seemed to find a tension there, but I do not think that that needs to be the case.

That might be a rather unfair assessment. I believe that content should reflect our society, as Joan McAlpine set out, for example, but as the Scottish digital network panel report said, the network’s remit should clearly include bringing more international content to Scotland. Patricia Ferguson made that point very well in her speech. On the Scottish digital network, I stress that the reason why I cannot support Ruth Davidson’s amendment is that I believe that we should, at the very least, investigate options for transferring further responsibilities for broadcasting to Holyrood. The Conservative amendment would remove the reference to that option for investigation. I largely agree with the Conservative amendment’s statement that a new network should not compromise existing broadcasting capability and it is worth stressing that a digital network need not and would not do that. It would not mean losing existing programmes that are enjoyed by Scottish audiences. There is no intention or proposal to restrict access to the programmes that are currently provided by the BBC, ITV, Channel 4 and others. This is about adding to choice, not reducing it. I want to stress the other benefits that a network could bring. In particular, a network would provide not only a linear television channel, but online content, which would be a core part of its services and would make it an integral part of our ambition to put Scotland at the forefront of the digital revolution. I agree whole-heartedly with those MSPs who stressed the importance of broadband connectivity, especially in rural areas. The point that Alex Johnstone made about ensuring that it is scaleable is important. It is important that connectivity can be upgradeable to meet future requirements. In respect of speed, we seek to meet European targets, as requested. That is why we are committed to developing a national broadband plan in collaboration with Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and local authorities. Doing so will ensure the roll-out of next generation broadband to all parts of Scotland, with particular emphasis on rural areas. A digital network would also help to promote broadband uptake by making quality Scottish content available online, and it would promote the delivery of public services. The Scottish digital network panel noted the potential for a network to be an integral part of services such as digital healthcare services, and noted that “Partnerships with local authorities, higher education institutions and wider civic society would be not just appropriate but essential.” That is an important part of the debate that some members have perhaps, with our concentration on broadcasting and television, omitted to mention in their speeches. If the UK Government establishes a network, that is well and good; if it does not, we will need to explore having the legislative power to do so ourselves. That is the only way in which we can give public service broadcasters the formal remit, the guaranteed independence from Government, the access to spectrum and the electronic programme guide status that such an important network would require. Indeed, on the point that Ruth Davidson made, it could have a remit that includes digital inclusion and participation. We will continue to make the case for access to appropriate funding sources, as identified by the Scottish digital network panel, whether from spectrum auctions, future licence fee settlements, or both. In my opening speech, I proposed that Holyrood could have a role in local television and future licence fee settlements. The reason for that is that decisions have been made or are being made in both areas that will have a lasting impact on Scottish media. On the recent licence fee settlement, the Culture, Media and Sport Committee at Westminster judged that “it is vitally important that both licence fee payers and Parliament should have some involvement when far-reaching decisions about” the BBC’s “funding and ... responsibilities are taken. It is regrettable ... that the opportunity for this was lost, thus undermining confidence in both the Government’s and the BBC’s commitment to transparency and accountability.” Perhaps that is something that the Scottish Parliament’s committee might want to reflect on in setting out its programme. In my view, the interests of transparency and accountability require devolved Parliaments to have a say in the licence fee settlement as well as in the licensing of local television. The current broadcasting arrangements are not meeting the needs of the viewing public in the 21st century. We need to have more influence and/or powers in those areas. Views on the extent of that influence or those powers will differ across the chamber in the different parties, but there is consensus in the Parliament that we should have a Scottish digital network. We have set out the reasons and rationale for that, and I hope that the debate will continue in the constructive manner in which it has begun. Until the Scottish Parliament started to take a closer interest in broadcasting following the setting up of the Scottish Broadcasting Commission, problems in broadcasting were simply not on the political radar. The steep decline in network production was a matter of concern. My view is that there should be a natural and logical fit between the digital era and devolution. Both are improving and extending the range of choices that are available to citizens and consumers, and bringing services closer to the lives of the people who use them. The Scottish digital network will be an ambitious and creative embodiment of the move towards a digital Scotland. With the right mix of powers, the Parliament will make it happen.

I wish everyone, particularly the Irish diaspora in Scotland, happy St Patrick’s day. There are lessons that we can learn from Irish experience. For example, Ireland sends a number of ministers across the globe to promote Irish culture, trade and industry on St Patrick’s day. That is not possible to the same extent for a minority Government that requires always to be in attendance at Parliament.

There is no legal or statutory definition of a public holiday in Scotland, but momentum is building around the importance of celebrating our national day, St Andrew’s day, throughout Scotland. On Anne McLaughlin’s latter point, I congratulate Enda Kenny on his appointment as Taoiseach. On solidarity with Ireland, it is important to reflect that the International Monetary Fund forecast in October showed that the Irish economy is expected to grow at a faster rate than the United Kingdom’s. Indeed, in 2009, the gross domestic product per capita in Ireland was 12 per cent higher than that in the UK. More important, the Irish people are close neighbours of ours, and as they come through their difficulties it is better to stand shoulder to shoulder with them in solidarity than to trade insults, which some members seek to do.

Indeed I will. I was pleased to attend a St Patrick’s day event yesterday with the consul general from Ireland. I understand from her that she is attending the Coatbridge event and that it has been going for nine years. I am sure that the Parliament will want to congratulate the people of Coatbridge on delivering that. The Scottish census in 2011 will contain an Irish ethnicity tick box, which I hope will provide a baseline for the number of Irish in Scotland. I encourage those with an Irish identity to reflect it in the census.

Amendments 1 to 4 follow on from amendments that were agreed to at stage 2 that replaced references to the keeper of the records of Scotland approving plans with references to him agreeing plans. Amendments 1 to 4 pick up on remaining instances of the terms “approval” and “approved” and change them accordingly. The amendments address the concerns of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities that the language of the bill focused too much on failure. They change the emphasis to one of collaboration and improvement. The amendments have no effect on the situation of the keeper, who will still require to be content with plans, otherwise he will return them. I move amendment 1. Amendment 1 agreed to. Amendment 2 moved—[Fiona Hyslop]—and agreed to. Section 4—Agreement of plans Amendment 3 moved—[Fiona Hyslop]—and agreed to. Section 5—Review of plans Amendment 4 moved—[Fiona Hyslop]—and agreed to. Schedule—Authorities to which Part 1 applies

Amendment 5 is a technical amendment that updates a reference in the schedule. The schedule currently refers to “Safeguarders Panels (that is to say, panels established under section 30(1) of the Children’s Hearings (Scotland) Act 2011 ...)”. That reflected the Children’s Hearings (Scotland) Bill at the time when the Public Records (Scotland) Bill was introduced. After the introduction of the Public Records (Scotland) Bill in October 2010, the Children’s Hearings (Scotland) Bill was modified at stages 2 and 3 so that the Children’s Hearings (Scotland) Act 2011 now makes provision for a single safeguarders panel, in section 32. Amendment 5 will change the entry in the schedule to reflect that. I move amendment 5. Amendment 5 agreed to.

It gives me great pleasure to open the stage 3 debate on the Public Records (Scotland) Bill and to invite members to agree to pass the bill. I thank members of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee for their hard work and careful scrutiny of what is in essence a technical bill. I also thank members for their comments on the bill during its passage and the organisations and individuals who provided oral and written evidence to the committee and briefings for members on the provisions. The bill is about improving the management of public records by named authorities. It amends the Public Records (Scotland) Act 1937 in relation to court records. It is the first bill about Scottish public records in more than 70 years. As I said during the stage 1 debate, the bill has its origins in Tom Shaw’s report on the historical abuse of looked-after children, which was published in 2007 and was accepted by all the parties in the Parliament. Tom Shaw’s powerful and compelling evidence on the bill to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee showed the human cost of record-keeping failures. He repeated his recommendation on the need for new legislation to cover all public records. That is why we introduced a comprehensive bill that covers all the functions that are carried out by the public authorities that are listed in it. The bill will not mean that authorities need to keep everything—far from it. Good records management involves identifying the records that are important and have long-term value and drawing up agreed schedules that say how long particular records should be kept. When authorities engage private or voluntary organisations to carry out functions on their behalf, the records that those organisations create will be covered by the bill. That addresses a key element of the Shaw report. The bill provides a definition of “public records”, which is necessary to ensure that those responsible for managing records know which records fall within the bill’s scope and know the obligations that will be placed on them. The definition also ensures that the keeper of the records of Scotland, who will produce guidance on the form and content of plans and who will have powers to scrutinise their implementation, knows which records an authority’s plan should cover. Only then can the keeper assess whether the plan makes proper arrangements for the management of those records. Nowadays records can be kept in a variety of formats, the range of which clearly could not be envisaged by the 1937 legislation. The definition therefore ensures that the bill is future-proofed, as it must cover records in any format. In its stage 1 report, the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee agreed to back the bill’s general principles, taking the view that there was a strong moral obligation on public authorities to manage personal records effectively. It agreed that Tom Shaw’s report and the experiences of former residents of residential schools and care homes in trying to trace records formed a persuasive argument for legislation to address known deficiencies. That view was fully endorsed by Parliament’s unanimous support for the bill at stage 1 and I am grateful to members of all parties who spoke in that debate. Before stage 1, both the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the voluntary sector argued that the bill should focus only on high-risk records and that the definition should be removed or narrowed. However, although it makes sense in practice to concentrate on high-risk records, managing only certain records within an organisation is not good records management practice. The keeper would find it difficult to agree a records management plan that took such an approach, as it would create uncertainty about which records were covered and who decided whether they were low or high risk. Instead of excluding types of records, the bill allows authorities to assess levels of risk and to make provision in their own records management plans to manage different records differently. The Government responded to concerns that were voiced in evidence to the committee and during the stage 1 debate. At stage 2, Elizabeth Smith and Ken Macintosh made important points about the need for the bill not to be disproportionate or to create a heavy burden on public authorities, particularly the voluntary sector. To address those issues, I moved 28 separate amendments, all of which I am pleased to say were accepted. The Government also accepted 25 non-Government amendments lodged by Elizabeth Smith that, along with the amendments that I have moved and the Parliament has agreed this morning, further improve the bill’s language and tone. I think that Elizabeth Smith probably holds the record for the number of Opposition amendments that the Parliament has accepted to a bill—she might want to check that—but together all of the amendments seek to emphasise our aim of encouraging partnership working and continuous self-improvement rather than dictating solutions. The stage 2 amendments made it clear that the keeper will not seek to impose a one-size-fits-all approach in every case. The Government’s intention has always been that the keeper should work closely with authorities to ensure that the records management regime takes account of particular sectors’ needs and respects their judgments about risk. Different sectors will have different records management plans based on individual needs and their assessment of the risks that they face. The bill permits professionals in the various sectors—child care, policing, health and the other areas—to make such decisions within an overall management framework. Moreover, named public authorities across Scotland including the Scottish Government, Scottish Parliament, local authorities, the Scottish courts, the national health service and others will be required to produce and implement a records management plan to be approved by the keeper. The improvements for record keeping enshrined in the bill will, I believe, address the problems identified in the Shaw report and provide a solid framework for improving records management in Scottish public authorities for many years to come. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Public Records (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I thank members for an informed, interesting and constructive debate. The debate demonstrates the extent to which members agree on the importance of and good intentions behind the bill, and the process has demonstrated how we can work collectively to ensure that we produce good legislation. I hope that future committees of the Parliament will reflect on practice in relation to this bill’s progress, in particular. I am struck, as I was at stage 1, by members’ recognition of the importance of the bill, particularly in safeguarding the interests of vulnerable people. Although the bill cannot put right what has gone wrong in the past, it can help us to avoid the same problems in future, as Elizabeth Smith said. We owe it to former residents of care homes and survivors of abuse, and indeed to all future generations in this country, to make the necessary improvements to the way in which public authorities deal with records, to safeguard people’s rights and identities as individuals—Pauline McNeill made that important point—and to secure our collective memory. It is my sincere hope that, in future, people who have been in care will never again experience the grief and frustration of discovering that records about their earlier lives are incomplete, inaccurate or simply not there. Kenny Gibson provided a poignant reminder of the human aspect of record keeping. Given tight Parliament and committee timetables, I had to prioritise legislation. Although I wanted—and still want—to legislate to improve provision on the National Library of Scotland, for example, the human and moral dimension of the issue meant that the Public Records (Scotland) Bill had to take priority. It is important to recognise that public records, as part of our collective memory, form the basis for individual rights and obligations. The bill will strengthen transparency and accountability of public authorities and it will help to secure the records of vulnerable people. It aims to create a common and consistent standard of record keeping, which will protect the rights of all members of the public by ensuring that records and information about them are managed properly. The opportunity for members of all parties in the Parliament to acknowledge the importance of record keeping has been a plus in the bill process. As Hugh O’Donnell said, record keeping is perhaps not the most high-profile issue, but without records much cannot be done, or done properly. I agree with some of the concerns about common good asset registers, which local authorities should keep. The bill creates a framework for good and effective record keeping. However, there is an issue about how we help local authorities to ensure that they include public records of their common good assets in their records management plans. Members from all parties raised that issue, but we need further legislation to make it happen. We are creating an agenda for the next parliamentary session in that regard. I thank members of the Parliament and all the members of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee for their constructive comments and invaluable support during the bill’s passage. Moreover, I extend my thanks to other organisations—particularly COSLA and, in the voluntary sector, the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, Barnardo’s Scotland, Aberlour Child Care Trust, Children 1st and Action for Children—for their input. They all made constructive contributions, and I look forward to including them in continued dialogue. Dialogue with stakeholders throughout the process resulted in consensus on a number of important issues. The keeper’s powers to agree and return an authority’s records management plan, and the impact on contractors’ records, remained issues of concern throughout the process. I will clarify one matter. The keeper must issue guidance and a model records management plan to authorities. The guidance and the model plan must cover contractors’ records where those contractors perform a function of the authority. How contractors’ records are managed is likely to be closely based on the contractual terms that the authority and the contractor agree. Therefore, the bill strikes a delicate balance. Although the guidance and the model plan will cover contractors’ records, I do not consider it appropriate for the keeper to go further and seek to dictate how authorities and contractors regulate their relationships. The bill places the onus on authorities to manage their records. It does not impose duties on contractors; nor does it interfere, or give the keeper power to interfere, in the existing relationships between authorities and contractors. The terms under which a contractor may carry out functions on behalf of an authority are for those two parties to agree separately. I consider that the bill fulfils the Government’s stated intention that the legislation should be light touch. It was clear from responses to the original consultation and discussions with stakeholders that the dissemination of guidance by the keeper will be crucial to the successful implementation of the bill. Claire Baker made that point. Any guidance that is issued will be developed in partnership with stakeholders. To that end, a new stakeholder forum has been set up in which those issues are being discussed and addressed. The keeper views that forum as integral to the process of formulating and agreeing guidance and the model plan. He and his colleagues have been immensely impressed by the contributions that the voluntary sector and authorities have already made and they look forward to working further with them. I thank the keeper of the records of Scotland and my bill team in the National Archives of Scotland for their hard work throughout the legislative process. The bill team demonstrated responsiveness and engagement. Not only has that resulted in a better bill, but it will improve the bill’s implementation. As I noted in my opening speech, the bill addresses problems with the management of public records and key findings of Tom Shaw’s important report. It will make improvements in existing record keeping and ensure that, where important records are created, there are proper mechanisms and structures in place for accountability for them and for their future preservation. I am confident that the new legislation will provide a framework that will allow sufficient flexibility so that the needs of individual sectors can be addressed well into the future. In voting for the bill, we reaffirm our commitment to the appropriate care, management and future preservation of our unique public records and recognise their importance to organisations, individuals and the wider Scottish community. This might be an opportune moment to remind members that Scotland is known not only nationally but internationally for its ability to keep records well. In the previous debate, which was on the Certification of Death (Scotland) Bill, the importance of record keeping was mentioned. The historical record keeping of medical information in particular is one of the reasons why we are at a competitive advantage in life sciences and other developing industries. Record keeping reaches beyond the bureaucratic—it can have other impacts. It is important for this generation and future generations of Scots. The bill’s approach is attracting attention from other jurisdictions around the world. I ask that members support the motion to pass the Public Records (Scotland) Bill.

As it is a statutory non-departmental public body, the expenditure of Creative Scotland will be monitored through the statutory requirements that apply to it, principally through the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Act 2010, which requires it to exercise its functions in accordance with the act, audit its annual statement of accounts, lay an annual report in the Scottish Parliament and prepare a corporate plan.

I have already met Creative Scotland and reminded it of its duty, which other bodies also have, to ensure that public spending provides value for money for the public purse. I point out that our world-leading creative industries support 60,000 jobs and generate £5.2 billion each year for the Scottish economy. I was frequently asked during the passage of the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill, which I think the member was involved in, to reassure the Parliament that as a minister I would not interfere in artistic decisions made by Creative Scotland. Unless the Labour Party is now backtracking on its commitment to artistic independence, the member may want to reflect on his question.

The arm’s-length principle was enshrined in recent legislation and supported by all parties in the Scottish Parliament. Policing and censorship by Government of individual artistic expression or of decisions made by artists or by Creative Scotland, as the body responsible for artistic grants, would be of some concern to the cultural community in Scotland. I agree with the member that we need to be cautious and careful about the arm’s-length principle.

Following the decision to refuse listed building consent on 21 May 2010, there have been no bilateral meetings between the Scottish Government and Historic Scotland about the Odeon cinema site.

As a former minister, the member will be familiar with the rules relating to planning applications. If there is a live application currently with the council, the matter is with the council for determination. She will also be familiar with the process under which there may, in future, be reference to Historic Scotland. We must reflect on where the application that is currently before the council is in the process, and I understand that no decision has been made in the past few days. The member will appreciate that we must abide by due process. I am aware of her and other MSPs’ concern about the building; however, as I said in my answer to her first question, listed building consent was refused on 21 May 2010, which was the last time that there was involvement by Scottish ministers in the case.

I place on record my acknowledgement of Shirley-Anne Somerville’s firm interest in the case. She invites me to provide support from Historic Scotland and the Scottish Government for the campaign; however, I ask all members to reflect on the fact that ministers are not in a position to support a campaign when they might have to make decisions about a listed building consent. There are procedures that we have to follow. In this instance, the ball is firmly in the council’s court and it is the council’s responsibility to make a decision at this time. I recognise the efforts that are being made—the local campaign group has kept me informed of its activities—but it would be wrong of me to prejudge any decision that might be required of the Scottish ministers in the future.

Through Historic Scotland, the Scottish ministers work closely with local authorities to protect and enhance our country’s historic environment. That work is carried out through a wide range of legislation, policy and guidance. The importance of historic buildings, individually or collectively, can be recognised by Historic Scotland through the listing process and by local authority designation of conservation areas. When change is proposed, the planning system ensures that the desirability of protecting a historic building’s particular character is a key part of the wider consideration of an application. Regulations are in place within the planning system to ensure that the Scottish ministers, through Historic Scotland, are involved at the appropriate stages in the oversight or handling of certain types of case.

The member raises a number of issues. In my first answer, I said that protecting the character of the historic built environment is a key part of the wider consideration of an application—it is not the only consideration, but it is a key one. In a number of cases, including that of the St Mary’s Street building to which the member refers, Historic Scotland has taken a view on whether account of that has been taken in that wider consideration. As for good examples of communicating with absentee landlords or owners, I am more than happy to identify good practice and share it with the member if that would be helpful. One of the aims of the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill, which was recently passed by the Parliament, was to provide mechanisms whereby duties could be placed on those who do not want to improve or take care of the historic environment for which they have responsibility. The bill gives more powers to local authorities, rather than Historic Scotland, to intervene to ensure the financing of improvements, although in some instances it gives Historic Scotland powers of easier intervention that allow it to go into certain properties to ensure, for example, that repairs are made. The member might want to look at that piece of legislation, which we have just passed. I am also more than happy to identify examples of good practice to pass on to her.

I am conscious that the former Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution, Michael Russell, is sitting beside me. I have been in post for somewhat over a year now, and I can inform Ted Brocklebank that no new application has been submitted for Castle Tioram. However, active discussions are taking place with the owner, and Historic Scotland is working closely with him and his team to establish a new way forward to serve the castle’s best interests.

Indeed I do. Since 2007, £16 million has been awarded to 34 locally run schemes. I understand that, in Portsoy, the £500,000 that has just been announced under round 4 of CARS is funding work surrounding the quay and is aimed at providing economic drivers and enhancing tourism. There are also wider social benefits, such as youth development skills that will be acquired through the repair of facilities that are to be used by local boat builders in the provision of after-school opportunities. The funding is about not only regeneration and conservation but services that can have wider benefits for communities. I am delighted to agree with Stewart Stevenson on that point.

The Scottish Government supports the right to free speech, to peaceful protest and of people to choose their own Government. We are keeping the situation across the region under review and stand ready to help where we can. That approach was demonstrated in relation to Libya when we worked closely with the United Kingdom authorities to assist Scots who were trapped in the country. I will also write to the Secretary of State for International Development, Andrew Mitchell, adding our voice to the United Nations call for access for humanitarian agencies to areas in Libya that are affected by violence.

The Government has already expressed its support for the international community’s condemnation of, and action against, Colonel Gaddafi. If Robert Mugabe is offering support to him, that only serves to strengthen the concerns that the Government has previously expressed about the situation in Zimbabwe. There is no legitimacy in ruling a country—whether Zimbabwe or Libya—through fear, intimidation and force.

The Administration has established productive links with the Governments of central and eastern Europe. That includes meetings between the Scottish ministers and visiting heads of state, ministers, ambassadors and consuls general. I am also delighted to tell Parliament that the Romanian ambassador opened a new consular office in Edinburgh last month.

I reassure the member that we have extensive and regular contacts with a number of countries. She should remember that three countries are represented here by career diplomats—Poland, Romania and Ukraine—and that we have honorary consuls and consuls general of Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Slovakia and Slovenia. We were pleased to meet the Czech ambassador recently, and the Czech foreign affairs committee is here in the Parliament today. We have been discussing a number of issues, particularly in relation to energy, electricity and business. I therefore reassure the member on that point.

The Scottish Government places great importance on community arts in providing opportunities for participation in and appreciation and enjoyment of arts and culture throughout Scotland. Creative Scotland funds a number of community arts activities through the awards for all, inspire and cashback for culture programmes. Projects that are supported include the Village Storytelling Centre in Pollok, in the member’s constituency, with a programme of storytelling events for children, young people and their families in that area of Glasgow.

I very much support the sentiment of the member’s question. It is one reason why we have maintained Creative Scotland’s budget through difficult times. Many of the community arts projects are supported by councils, but her point about preventative spend is well made. Shona Robison, the Minister for Public Health and Sport, and I co-chaired a conference specifically on health-related issues. Mental health patients in particular and those who suffer from mental health problems can very much benefit from support. The inspiring change project, which has provided support for prisoners to try to prevent reoffending, has shown evidenced research. If there is anything else that I can identify, I will let the member know.

The Scottish Government has been extremely constructive not only with the bill committee but with the UK Government. We have made 30 different suggestions for improvements in the bill. Surely the member recognises that that is constructive engagement.

This debate is a staging post in the Scotland Bill process, and the Scotland Bill is a staging post on the constitutional journey to achieve more powers and responsibilities for the Scottish people. The SNP Government has been constructive in its approach. Our motion in December welcomed the general principles of the transfer of powers, and our motion last week and amendment today agree to further consideration of the bill, apart from four areas of reservations and transfer of power away from this Parliament. Today is an opportunity for Parliament clearly and unequivocally to call for the bill to be improved, building on the work of the Scotland Bill Committee. We regret that the bill is a missed opportunity. It could do so much more to benefit our nation, with greater transfer of financial responsibility to achieve economic growth and jobs for Scotland. We have continuing concerns about fundamental flaws in the financial provisions, which will need serious surgery to work. However, there are seven years before those provisions are expected to come fully into force, and in that time we expect the Scottish people to demand far more fundamental economic and constitutional powers to build a better nation. Today is an opportunity for the Parliament to make clear, as the committee has, that we need to consider the bill again in our next session. Further consent will be needed once Westminster shows how far it will go to improve the bill.

We still think that there are fundamental flaws in the income tax proposals, not least because we have no idea how the Treasury will adjust the block grant. There is a danger that the Parliament could support a pig in a poke, unless there is an opportunity over the next seven years to improve that aspect. The bill can be improved. Consistent with our motions in December and last week, and our amendment today, the Government will back the motion if its amendment is unsuccessful. In the meantime, the Scottish people have an opportunity in May to influence the bill. If they want the bill to be stronger, with more financial responsibility, they can vote for the SNP. If they just want a funding mechanism change, they can vote for someone else.

I am moving on. The Scottish Government has provided the impetus for the current national debate on the way in which Scotland is governed. Our position is clear—only independence would allow Scotland to reach its full potential. Jeremy Purvis rose. However, we recognise that some, including Mr Purvis, have other sincerely held views. Hence our national conversation provided a detailed and ambitious vision of greater responsibility for Parliament and for Scotland and its people. We have produced detailed proposals for a referendum, including a three-way referendum embracing devolution max as one of the options. A schism, a split, a chink of light in Conservative unionism, in the shape of Margaret Mitchell, shows that some people might be persuaded. The Scottish Government is committed to giving the people of Scotland the right to have their say—a choice that Opposition parties wish to deny them. We are therefore happy to support Margaret Mitchell’s amendment if ours is defeated—unless she is about to say something that I disagree with.

The member might want to look closely at her amendment, because it talks about fiscal powers. The Government has taken the Scotland Bill on its merits. We support those parts that would benefit Scotland and resist those that would not. I acknowledge the work of the Scotland Bill Committee. The Government agrees with a number of its recommendations. I am pleased that the committee has agreed—in full or in part—with 10 of the 19 improvements to the bill that the Scottish Government suggested in its LCM in December. However, as with the bill, the Government disagrees profoundly with parts of the committee’s report. We remain of the view that full financial responsibility is the best way, short of independence, for Scotland to improve its economy, increase jobs and fulfil our potential. It is regrettable that Pauline McNeill, with satisfaction, tried to imply that there is a question about whether fiscal responsibility can improve the economy. The evidence that was provided showed that the opportunity to improve our economy has two elements. One is that the mix of tax and benefits would allow integration and provide a one-off improvement. The second aspect, as Reform Scotland clearly said, is what we do with the powers. In contrast, under the Scotland Bill, responsibility for key taxes would remain reserved. Corporation tax, green taxes, fuel duty, North Sea revenues and excise duties would all remain outwith Scotland’s control. However, I am encouraged by the committee’s recognition that the bill can be only the first steps. I am particularly encouraged by the committee’s comments on higher rates of income tax and corporation tax. The Government is clear that the financial proposals in the bill in their current form have an inherent deflationary bias. I reassure Pauline McNeill that that is the view of the office of the chief economic adviser. I would be cautious about casting aspersions on such professional advice. The proposals would have cost the Parliament £8 billion since devolution. No self-serving assumptions about the future, selective analysis of historic trends or vague half-promises about there being no detriment can alter that fact. The only assurance or comfort that Pauline McNeill offers is that, somehow, in a period of slashing and burning of public finances in the next four years, the income tax proposals in the bill become attractive. Perhaps the member would like to explain why that is any justification whatever.

As far as I remember, 1999 was the year in which the Scottish Parliament was established and devolution began. The projections that were provided to the committee showed that there would have been a £10 billion deficit under the proposal and that, rolling forward, there would be an additional problem to 2014-15. The member might have benefited from reading some of the evidence that was provided.

I am moving on. It is important to point out that, although the bill seeks more powers for the Scottish ministers, it provides a net loss of powers to the Scottish Parliament. The Parliament stands to lose three powers and gain only one. The Government has argued against the proposed reservations in principle, for which we make no apology, and in the specific cases. On insolvency, it is clear that the rules for which the Parliament has competence are an integral part of Scots law. It makes no sense for those to be decided at Westminster, and the Calman commission did not make such a recommendation. I am pleased that the committee agrees with the Scottish Government that social landlords should be removed from the provisions. That is why it is unfortunate that, on Monday night, before this Parliament has had a chance to support the bill committee’s report, the Westminster Parliament took a decision and voted against the committee’s recommendation. On health professionals, the committee proceeded under a misapprehension that the current situation is an “unintended consequence” of the drafting of the Scotland Act 1998. The current arrangements, including the role of the Parliament, were codified in the UK Health Act 1999, which was introduced as a bill in January 1999—shortly after the Scotland Act 1998 was passed—and which received royal assent before we assumed our full powers. That shows that the current system was understood and intended at the time. The current system ensures consistent regulation throughout the UK and, crucially, it ensures that the content of regulations reflects Scottish qualifications and systems. The issue is not minor. The careers, qualifications and futures of individual health workers in Scotland will be affected, as will their employers’ plans. It is therefore no wonder that, in evidence, the health professions whose regulation is currently devolved unanimously supported the Parliament’s current role. There are other parts of the report that the Scottish Government welcomes and which reflect the Government’s evidence to the committee. For example, we welcome the recommendations on the need for clear proposals on reducing the block grant; the early establishment of the joint finance committee; more flexible borrowing powers; joint governance of Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs; and greater powers for the Parliament on drink driving, speed limits, the Crown Estate, MG Alba and marine conservation. I am grateful for the committee’s attention to our arguments on those points. The Government also welcomes the conclusion that clauses should be removed from the bill, especially proposals on international obligations and, as I have said, social landlords. However, I must alert the Parliament to the fact that, again, on Monday night, Westminster voted against the committee’s recommendations in that regard. I have other concerns but, primarily, we have to reflect the fact that the bill represents a missed opportunity. There is consensus on the need to develop our constitutional settlement and there is consensus about the need for greater financial responsibility for this Parliament. Further, there is a UK Government that is committed to decentralisation and localism and which contains a party that is committed to home rule. Therefore, we face an opportunity to rebalance the political and financial relationship within the United Kingdom to ensure that Scotland pays its way not for 15, 25 or 33 per cent of its expenditure but for 100 per cent. That is what responsibility is all about. The bill could give the Scottish Parliament the power to make its own judgments about its own competence through a process that would be similar to the democratic process that we have just seen in Wales, where our colleagues, with the support of the Welsh people in a referendum, have decided to extend their legislative competence. For the Government, the Scotland Bill Committee, this Parliament and the people of Scotland, the bill represents a staging post and unfinished business. First, the Scotland Bill Committee has identified changes that should be made to the bill and has suggested immediate action on important issues—the establishment of a joint Exchequer committee and more detail on the block-grant reduction mechanism, as it is essential for the Parliament not to sign up to a pig in a poke. Secondly, the committee has identified areas for greater devolution outwith the bill, in relation to the Crown Estate, marine conservation and benefits policy. Thirdly, the committee has identified areas where the financial powers can evolve, in relation to higher rate income tax, corporation tax and other new taxes. Fourthly, this Parliament should become responsible for the big issues that affect Scotland’s future, such as the economy, jobs, poverty and welfare, energy and the environment. The Scottish social attitudes survey that was published in December 2010 found that 62 per cent of people favour significantly more powers for the Scottish Parliament and that, on tax and on welfare benefits, 57 per cent and 62 per cent of people, respectively, want the Scottish Parliament to make the decisions for Scotland. The people of Scotland are far ahead of the Calman commission, the Scotland Bill, the UK Government, and the Opposition parties. They are ambitious for their Parliament and their nation. This Government is, too, and will continue to press for the Scottish people to be allowed to govern their own affairs as a nation equal among nations.

I am closing now. Throughout the process of constitutional debate that was initiated by the Government in the national conversation, we have been open to ideas that would benefit Scotland, wherever they have come from. We continue that approach with regard to the Scotland Bill and the report of the committee. As detailed in our amendment, we believe that the Parliament should not support parts of the bill. Most important, we believe that it is vital that the UK Government and the UK Parliament respect the will of this Parliament. The ball is now firmly at the feet of the unionist parties in Westminster and, in their votes over the next 12 days, we will see whether they are prepared to pay any attention to this Parliament and its committee or whether they need a firm reminder at the election of their need to do so. However we vote on the Government amendment, we must all unite to support the committee’s conclusion that the bill must come back to this Parliament once it has been considered by the UK Parliament so that we can consider it as a whole before deciding on final consent. I move amendment S3M-8114.1, to leave out from first “the Bill” to end and insert: “Scotland is best served by a Scottish Parliament that has the full range of powers and responsibilities necessary to improve Scotland’s economic performance and promote sustainable economic growth; agrees that the current provisions of the Scotland Bill do not provide those powers and responsibilities; recognises the improvements to the Bill suggested by the Scotland Bill Committee but is of the view that further improvements are needed to provide the financial responsibility that Scotland needs and to address other flaws in the Bill; nevertheless agrees that the UK Parliament should consider the Bill, apart from the provisions that reserve insolvency and the regulation of health professions (clauses 12 and 13) and allow UK ministers to implement international obligations in devolved areas (clause 23) and partial suspension of Acts subject to scrutiny by the Supreme Court (clause 7), and further agrees that, given the amendments requested by the Scottish Parliament, the incoming Scottish Parliament should consider the Bill as amended by the UK Parliament in a further legislative consent motion before the Bill is passed for Royal Assent.”

Does the member acknowledge that to rely on only one tax—income tax—is a heavy risk? This year alone, we raised £2 billion from the bank levy and £12 billion from the VAT increase. There is also the £3 billion from the increase in national insurance payments and £500 million from the increase in fuel duty. In this year alone, such tax variations would diminish the tax take for Scotland under the Scotland Bill provisions. Does the member acknowledge that there is a risk in relying on income tax alone?

Will the member give way on that point?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

As I said, the amendment today is completely consistent with what we put forward last week. If the member looks at what we said last week and in December, he will see that we want to improve the financial provisions. Will he point me to where the Scotland Office has explained the block adjustment? How can he be confident, with any certainty, that the five pages of explanation are good enough? Does he agree with the committee that we need more detail?

The member makes an important point about the degree of spending autonomy that we have in Scotland. Does he agree with the bill’s proposals on the proportion of revenues? Currently, Scotland has 7 per cent. The bill will take it to only 15 per cent of the revenues of Scotland being under the control of this Parliament. Does he believe that that is sufficient or, like Wendy Alexander, does he believe that the proportion should grow to include, for example, excise duty and other arrangements?

Can the member point to anything in the Scotland Bill that will help to promote growth in the private sector?

I watched the debate in the United Kingdom Parliament on Monday. I think that the Advocate General finally agreed to share his initial draft clauses as a result of interventions by the SNP and the Labour Party. I hope that those draft clauses can be improved, but that provides a good reason why, as Cathy Jamieson says, a further LCM will need to be considered in the next parliamentary session.

Will the member give way?

I, too, pay tribute to Wendy Alexander, whom I shadowed in 1999 when she was the Minister for Communities, and to Peter Peacock, whom I shadowed when he was the Minister for Education and Young People. I share the desire for equality to allow women to choose their own future, and I wish Wendy Alexander well in that regard. I would like to extend that choice to the rest of the nation and allow everyone to choose their own future, but we might disagree on that point. As I said in my opening comments, the Government’s position is clear: we believe that only independence will allow Scotland to reach its full potential. However, we recognise that others in the Parliament and in Scotland hold other views. Since we took office, we have initiated and encouraged a national debate on Scotland’s constitutional future in the national conversation, through the Government’s white papers, with the UK Government on the bill and now in the committee and its inquiry. I point out to Pauline McNeill that the committee states: “Both governments—UK and Scottish—have provided substantial amounts of information and evidence to the Committee at various stages of its work.” I refer those who want to find out more about the arguments, proposals and framework for full financial responsibility to the following Scottish Government publications: “Fiscal Autonomy in Scotland: The case for change and options for reform”; “An Oil Fund for Scotland: Taking forward our National Conversation”; and “Your Scotland, Your Voice: A National Conversation”. I am happy to acknowledge—as I did in my opening remarks—that the committee made valuable recommendations to improve the bill. I was especially happy that many of its suggestions reflect the positions that the Scottish Government has advanced throughout the development of the bill and the committee’s consideration of it. However, I have reiterated the Government’s view that the bill needs to be improved, especially to provide incentives for economic growth. We believe that further improvements and amendments are needed to provide the financial responsibility that Scotland needs. Wendy Alexander said that the Parliament needs opportunities to propose a graduate tax, environment taxes and alcohol duties. However, those are not in the bill, although they could be. Indeed, as it stands, all of those would require the agreement of the UK Treasury—despite people’s best wishes, that agreement does not exist in black and white from the Treasury. Liberal Democrat members have talked about the arguments for home rule and the Steel commission. Tavish Scott’s evidence to the Calman commission talked about a range of taxes. We have a Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition UK Government, and the Conservatives, as Alex Johnstone said, believe that Scotland should pay its own way. They understand the importance of those provisions. Why are the Liberal Democrats so limited in their proposals, given the opportunity that we now have?

It is, indeed. The member will have plenty of opportunity to find out more about the proposals in the publications that I cited. Today’s debate is not the end of the story for the Scotland Bill, never mind the Scottish Parliament; it is, however, a milestone in our efforts to secure a Scotland Bill. David McLetchie was correct to quote the First Minister, but he should perhaps have checked the Official Report more carefully, as the quotation comes from a debate in December 2010. Indeed, it is very important that the public have the opportunity to influence the strength of the bill, as the choice is clear: is it about more financial responsibility or is it about implementing a new funding mechanism to provide accountability? I think that we should be seeking accountability, but it is not enough to grow the economy. I will come back to that in a second. We believe that the Scottish Parliament having responsibility for poverty and welfare, energy and the environment, taxation, jobs and the economy is the best way forward if those decisions are to be taken in the interests of the people of Scotland. In my opening remarks, I talked about some of the committee’s positive recommendations. On the financial side, we agree that improvements are needed. We agree with the committee’s proposals for doubling the revenue borrowing limit, for improving the flexibility of the capital borrowing regime and for seeking earlier capital borrowing powers and the power to issue bonds. We also agree that some of the non-financial aspects—particularly the European convention on human rights arguments—need to come back to the Scottish Parliament in a legislative consent memorandum, as Cathy Jamieson said. On the other hand, we are disappointed that there is no proposal in the committee’s report to give the Scottish Parliament a formal role in commencing the financial provisions, in particular. That is important, because the lack of detail on crucial issues at the heart of the bill—such as the exact mechanism for adjusting the block grant and the operation of the no-detriment policy—is serious indeed. As I said to Robert Brown, the Scotland Office’s proposals were only a five-page document and came with the caveat that the mechanisms were just illustrative. That is a very important reason why we need to reconsider them. Tricia Marwick made an important point about the cost of implementation and administration for the UK Government’s proposals. Alex Johnstone talked about accountability, but the issue is the cost. Robert Brown rose— I am tight for time. If the Parliament is to bear a cost of £145 million, we must ensure that we question that. It is a dangerous precedent. We are examining the bill’s financial proposals and, in particular, the committee’s acceptance of its income tax proposals. They are one of the flaws that must be addressed in improvements. Peter Peacock talked about income tax being stable. The problem with the committee’s report is that it has completely removed VAT from its analysis of the relationship between income tax and other taxes. Since 1965, tax in the UK as a share of GDP has grown by 6.2 per cent but income tax has grown by only 0.9 per cent. Between 1978-79 and 2009-10, income tax grew by 2 per cent, public spending by 2.3 per cent, fuel duty by 3 per cent, corporation tax by 2.6 per cent and North Sea revenues by 3.1 per cent. That is why there is an automatic deflationary bias in the income tax proposals and they must be improved to ensure that the Parliament can continue the spending that it needs to improve society. The committee’s key conclusion is that the bill is unfinished business and that the Scottish Parliament should consider it again in the next session. The Government is of the same view. We pay tribute to all those in the Parliament and wider civic Scotland who have joined the Scottish Government’s pressure for improvements in the bill. We welcome the support of all parties and the support for a further LCM—Cathy Jamieson in particular made that point—to consider changes to the bill before it can be passed for royal assent. The most important thing to happen now is that the UK Government does not merely note, consider or even seriously consider the Parliament’s views: it must act to change the bill. In agreeing to the motion or the Government’s amendment, members will make sure that their successors in the Parliament can ensure that the UK Government has fulfilled that obligation.

Will the member give way on that point?

If the provisions were extended from 1999 to 2014-15, the deflationary bias would be £10 billion rather than £8 billion. Surely to goodness, the cuts from a Tory Government should not be an excuse for the bill.

I am pleased to open the debate on the general principles of the Public Records (Scotland) Bill. I thank those who gave evidence and thank the convener and members of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee for their detailed scrutiny of the bill at stage 1. I welcome their support for the general principles of the bill, and I will seek to address some of the key issues that they highlighted. The bill has its origins in Tom Shaw’s report on the historical abuse of looked-after children, which was published in 2007 and accepted by all parties in Parliament. Tom Shaw underlined the lessons of his report in evidence on the bill that he gave to the committee. His powerful and compelling evidence showed the human cost of record-keeping failures. He repeated his recommendation on the need for new legislation to cover all public records. That is why we have introduced this comprehensive bill, which covers all functions that are carried out by the public authorities that are listed in it. The bill is not only about past problems. As a minister who previously had responsibility for children, I am familiar with the outcome of the Kerelaw inquiry in 2009. It found instances of lost records, files that were difficult to locate and problems in accessing older electronic records. I am conscious that, if there had been improvements to records management such as those that we now propose, the findings would have been different. Some people have argued that we do not need to legislate, because a voluntary approach will achieve the same result. However, the existing system is essentially voluntary, and had it worked properly we would not have had the Shaw and Kerelaw findings with regard to records management. Therefore, I am pleased that the committee agreed to back the general principles of the bill and took the view that there was a strong moral obligation on public authorities to manage personal records effectively. The committee expressed concerns about the representations that it received that the bill was disproportionate and would create a heavy burden on public authorities, and particularly on the voluntary sector. I emphasise that, from the outset, our approach has been light touch and we have produced a tightly drawn bill. It is about only the management of public records, not their content or how long they are to be kept, which are matters for individual authorities and existing regulatory bodies. For example, the getting it right for every child programme means that decisions about what is kept come from the professional specialists in child protection and health, therefore Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland, the national health service and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities should lead on the content of records. The bill is about how to manage records once they exist. Decisions about what records are to be created are for the authorities that create them. The keeper of the records of Scotland will determine the model records management plan to assist public bodies in preparing their own plans to improve their records management and will take advice from different sectors. I recently discussed with COSLA my keenness for it and others to advise on what should be in the model plan for local government, for example. The keeper and his staff will work in a complementary partnership with sector specialists. My officials are considering an amendment at stage 2 to make that clear, and we are reviewing the language in the bill to emphasise our aim of encouraging self-improvement as opposed to dictating solutions. I note the concerns that the committee raised about the obligations that will be placed on public bodies, and the genuine concerns that we heard from people in the voluntary sector, as contractors for public authorities. I am committed to working with public authorities and contractors to address those concerns. I also note the committee’s concerns that the bill might place an administrative burden on contractors and that public authorities might overimplement their obligations under a records management plan, which could incur record-keeping costs for small organisations. However, let us not forget that small bodies often do important work and generate important records. We need to find ways to make that easier for them and to give them confidence about what they need to do. The model records management plan and the keeper’s guidance will help to do that. Concerns were expressed about being forced to keep everything by risk-averse public authorities. The bill does not place any direct responsibility on voluntary or private sector contractors and it does not give public authorities any power to force contractors to do anything. Public authorities must ensure that records of contractors are managed in accordance with their records management plans. Approval of those rests with the keeper, who can refuse to approve them. The answer is partnership between the authorities, voluntary sector providers and the keeper. That dialogue is already under way. The detail in plans is for each authority to determine, but I expect there to be a great deal of convergence. It simply would not be efficient for every authority to develop its own plan, and the keeper will emphasise that in the guidance. The bill allows for common plans, which may be appropriate where authorities’ work is similar. Work is already under way to draw up generic retention schedules, for example. The Government’s role is to facilitate dialogue between COSLA and the voluntary sector to ensure that a commonsense approach that is based on best practice is taken. Issues relating to confidentiality and access have been raised. Let me be clear: the bill is not about freedom of information by the back door. It is entirely silent on access, which is dealt with in other legislation, and it does not interfere with confidentiality in any way. If authorities already have good records systems in place—as many do—costs will be minimal. That has already been recognised by records professionals working in local authorities, who support our proposals. However, there is scope for sharing and pooling resources. Records management is an ideal area for imaginative co-operation and joint working between authorities. There is a cost in not making improvements. Keeping too many records for too long is a needless waste of resources. We will continue to engage on the bill with sectors and organisations. The dialogue to date has been positive, and it is continuing. Records are not just boring data; they are memories of people and what has happened to them—they are the only memories for some people—and they need to be managed properly. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Public Records (Scotland) Bill.

That is an important point, whether the duty for public delivery and public functions lies with the local authority, the health service or others. If we are moving into an area of public service reform in which we can ensure that the best providers can provide the best services—which in many cases will be from the voluntary sector—it is important that we have a robust system that is accountable and in which there is proper record keeping. There is therefore in the bill a responsibility and an opportunity for the voluntary sector, so the sector should not just be defensive about being overburdened with activity. We need to get that balance right and to be proportionate.

That is possibly a misunderstanding. In the background to the bill, £60,000 is the cost to the keeper and the public expense that will accrue to the Scottish Government. We are not saying that expense will not be incurred if organisations have to employ new people, but many organisations already employ people who will be able to undertake the functions. Perhaps the position has been misunderstood; I just wanted to clarify it.

It is important to make a distinction here, in that the bill would not determine the content of what is kept. In the situation that Ken Macintosh has just described, the question of what is kept, and the ability of people to maintain their efforts in front-line services and in providing the care services, would be determined by the health or care, or other, professionals, not by what is in the records management plan.

I thank all those members who have spoken in this thoughtful debate. I will try to address as many of the issues that have been raised as I can. The bill is essentially a simple one—it is about improving the management of public record keeping. Records form an important part of our lives, but we tend to ignore them until something goes wrong. The origins of the bill lie in Tom Shaw’s report, which shows precisely what the impact is when record keeping goes wrong and why the bill is important and necessary. Many members have reflected on that. Hugh O’Donnell alluded to the fact that records are about people’s lives, and if records are not kept and dealt with properly there can be a human cost. The bill was supported by the lead committee, which agreed that Tom Shaw’s report and the experiences of former residents of care homes and residential schools in trying to trace their records formed a persuasive argument that legislation is required, and that a voluntary scheme, which is effectively what we have now, would not address known deficiencies. The bill will fully complement existing regulatory requirements, many of which relate to which records should be kept; that is the point I made to Ken Macintosh. Tom Shaw pointed out to the committee the need for organisations to evidence whether they have delivered services properly to individuals, and the bill will provide for that. Claire Baker and other members made the point about the need for accountability with regard to public funds, and a number of members noted the points that COSLA raised. We have been engaging with COSLA, and we will continue to do so. There are issues around the keeper’s role in producing the model plans and guidance, and we will try to ensure that by stage 2 we have enough assurances that there will be consultation and engagement. We can look at the wording on that, and ensure that we have regard to it in any consultation. The bill is not a one-size-fits-all approach: different sectors will have different records management plans based on sector needs and their assessment of the risks that they face. It is for the professionals in the sectors—in child care, policing, health and other areas—to make those decisions within an overall management framework provided by the bill. For example, I would not expect the National Museums of Scotland, although they would be operating in the same regulatory scheme, to have records management plans similar to those of child care providers. The Scottish Parliament is named in the bill to give an assurance of the memory of democracy in Scotland; we would expect archiving and responsible management from the Parliament, and I am sure that it has an effective records management plan in place as we speak. Ian McKee touched on the important aspects of health and patient records. Although much of the debate has focused on provisions that relate to child care, which are the source of the concern that Tom Shaw expressed in his report, it has been quite wide ranging with regard to the areas in which the bill will have an impact. Policies and procedures for the management of patient records in the NHS are well established. The keeper was involved in the development of the NHS code of practice on records management, and we are seeking to do that for other areas. We would not expect any change to the records management process in that area, precisely because strong procedures have been developed. Some members, including Ted Brocklebank and Sandra White, have asked why the bill does not identify specific types of important records. Sandra White mentioned the issue of common good assets, which was raised with the committee. I am pleased that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth is sitting beside me at this point, because the guidance that he issued in 2007 is important in terms of what people are expected to keep. I am sure that there is a common expectation that local authorities should keep records of such assets. However, as I emphasised in my earlier remarks—and as the committee’s report reflects—the content of records is a matter for the authorities, and it would not be appropriate to deal with and define a procedure for common good assets in the bill. I return to Ted Brocklebank’s point about which records are kept. There are different ways of dealing with that. We could, in the next session of Parliament, introduce a uniform bill that lists the records that should be kept, but we should perhaps consider individual pieces of legislation. For example, the issue of land management, which Ted Brocklebank raised, could be dealt with in that way. With regard to children, the Looked After Children (Scotland) Regulations 2009 already specifies that records should be kept for 25 years, so that issue is being kept under that piece of legislation. Claire Baker highlighted the need for the keeper to consult public bodies in preparing the model plan and guidance. I give her an assurance that we will seek to address that and see what we can do at stage 2. Chris Harvie made the important point that the bill is not just about child care, and he gave an interesting analogy with transport records and noted the ability to save money if one knew what existed already. He mentioned future proofing, which is one of the reasons why the public records definition is as it is. We do not know in what shape or form, or diskette, we will find public records in the future, so it is important that we have a broad definition that allows future proofing. To sum up, the bill cannot put right what went wrong in the past, but it can help us to avoid the same problems in the future. We owe it to former residents of care homes and schools and survivors of abuse—indeed, to all future generations in this country—to make the necessary improvements to the way in which public authorities deal with records. In that way, we can safeguard people’s rights and their identities as individuals, and secure our collective memory. Scotland has been operating under a public records act that is now over 70 years old. While it remains relevant, that legislation needs updating to carry us through into the modern records and information age. The improvements to record keeping that are enshrined in the bill will address the problems that Shaw and the Kerelaw inquiry identified and provide a solid framework within which to improve records management in public authorities for many years to come. Karen Whitefield referred to dialogue that currently takes place; I confirm that that will continue. I agree with Karen Whitefield and others that bodies that are in receipt of public funding should keep records properly. She, Ken Macintosh and Alasdair Allan made the point about accountability. That is another aspect. However, the moral imperative that brings us to the Parliament on the issue cannot be forgotten. I am pleased to have the Parliament’s support in going forward, and I seek to work constructively with the committee at stage 2.

The inscription in 2008 of the Antonine wall as a world heritage site was a springboard for partnership working between the five local authorities, heritage bodies, museums and local community groups to promote the wall. The partners have recently made progress on several fronts. In December, they appointed a full-time co-ordinator to drive the implementation of the management plan; an interpretation plan based on an evaluation of visitors’ perceptions and requirements is now complete; an access plan will be delivered in March; and Learning and Teaching Scotland’s Scotland’s history website was launched last October. The partners remain committed to delivering future projects and, although all of this has to take account of the current financial climate, we expect them to come forward with sustainable action plans to be delivered as resources become available.

Government support, including Historic Scotland funding, is fundamental to all the actions that I have mentioned. I, too, recognise and support the work of Friends of Kinneil. After all, this is as much about the involvement of voluntary groups as it is about the work of statutory agencies. There is a real energy about what we are doing. Great opportunities are emerging across the range of authorities, and we see our responsibility as co-ordinating the different local authorities and agencies.

I know that members throughout the chamber are enthusiastic about having a physical centre to promote Roman history in Scotland, but there are other ways of having centres of excellence. Indeed, Learning and Teaching Scotland’s Scotland’s history website contains great opportunities for teachers to look into Caledonian, Pictish and Roman history; extensive information about Roman sites in Scotland; resource packs; audio and video clips; and databases of information from the National Museums of Scotland, the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland, the Hunterian museum and the British museum. However, I hope—indeed, I am sure—that the enthusiasm that has been expressed throughout the chamber for exploiting all the opportunities can be realised not only in local campaigns for physical centres but in promoting what is already available on websites.

The member is behind the times; I used his quotation about the Romans when we last discussed this issue. There are important lessons to be learned, not least the importance of bringing different agencies together. As we have seen in Edinburgh, as well as with the Antonine wall, efforts to win world heritage site status are not the possession of any one group or campaign. I know that there are many campaigns for different heritage sites but, as the member knows, I cannot express a preference for any of them. However, he is absolutely right and I am very keen to learn lessons from the experience of Edinburgh, the Antonine wall and other areas for any new heritage site that might be secured in Scotland.

Scotland has a special link with Malawi, which remains central to the Scottish Government’s international development policy. As part of a programme of events in November 2010 to mark the fifth anniversary of the signing of the co-operation agreement between Malawi and Scotland, the Scottish Government held a trade event to promote trade links with Malawi and a networking event for current Scottish Government Malawi grant holders to promote links between projects and the sharing of best practice. We also provide funding for networking organisations such as the Scotland Malawi Partnership, which helps organisations in Scotland to build and strengthen links with their counterparts in Malawi. In February last year, I visited Malawi to see how Scottish Government funding is making an impact. I met ministers and officials from the Government of Malawi during my time there to strengthen the already strong Government-to-Government relations.

I am pleased to welcome Constance Kilimo, and I was pleased to take part in activities during the previous Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Scotland branch visit in February last year to build links at the parliamentary level. I am keen to support such links, and I look forward to meeting members of the more recent cross-party delegation to find out lessons. I reassure David Stewart that one of the strands of our relationship with Malawi is governance issues, and work with the Scottish Prison Service has already taken place. Michael Matheson raised the issue with me previously. As far as I recall, some of the programme funding supports work in prisons. Obviously, we would be interested to hear further about the member’s concerns and whether anything that relates to the on-going programme can be done to help colleagues in Malawi. We recognise that there are big challenges, but we have made progress in some areas. We are already addressing conditions in prisons as part of our support programme.

It is clear that there are frequent meetings that relate to the oversight of the agreement and frequent exchanges, and there is a lot of co-operation between policy officials in the Scottish Government and the Malawi Government. We think that the relationship between CPA Scotland and the National Assembly of Malawi is a strong way of building on the Government’s strands; indeed, I have discussed that with colleagues previously. We as a Government are keen to help to promote funding from different sources for that agreement. If the Malawi Government makes requests for more exchanges on a more permanent basis, we will be happy to entertain them, but it is important that we recognise that our co-operation agreement with the Malawi Government is based on there being an equal relationship and that we would not want to impose exchanges that it did not request.

Liam McArthur is right to focus on our people-to-people links and strengths. When I talk to other Governments and when I have discussions in the European Union, people are struck by the strength of the people-to-people and community-to-community relationships, which must be recognised and supported and which go back decades, if not longer. Even now, we probably underestimate the number of school-to-school and church-to-church relationships. We support the Scotland Malawi Partnership and we encourage people who have relationships with Malawi to be part of that organisation, which provides the opportunity for voluntary organisations to network and share their experience and practice. That is one way in which we support the people-to-people link with Malawi.

North Lanarkshire Council has developed that partnership itself and is to be commended for it. Much of our support for the Network of International Development Organisations in Scotland and for non-governmental organisations that work in the area relates to capacity building and learning lessons from elsewhere, as Elaine Smith knows. Many of the positive links concern teacher training and have been beneficial both ways. The Government can support several avenues. There is a bidding round. In 2010-11, £5 million of Scottish Government funding—way above the baseline funding of £3 million to which we are committed—was spent on supporting initiatives in Malawi. It is important that we hear about and support good initiatives. Many of them are conducted on a tendering basis. We would need to think carefully about what North Lanarkshire Council was doing and to avoid displacing what is obviously a good scheme.

On my visit to Malawi in February last year, I was pleased to meet some MPs who planned to be part of the twinning arrangement. It is important that the twinning arrangement succeeds. I know that demand for it exists. One member of the Malawi Parliament—an energising woman from Chiradzulu—was keen to join when I visited, but the initial capacity of 10 had been reached. I am pleased that Ted Brocklebank has promoted the scheme, which he should talk about with his colleagues. I am interested to hear about members’ recent visit, as I suspect are other members. I encourage the cross-party delegation to invite members to a meeting to hear about the visit and to encourage those who are elected in May to engage in the twinning arrangement.

From festivals to ceilidhs, traditional cultural events and activities the length and breadth of the country play a valuable economic role and a vital cultural role. Celtic Connections, which concluded last weekend, had another successful year, with ticket sales topping 100,000 for the fourth year running. Last year, the event’s economic impact study concluded that the festival was worth £11.9 million to Scotland’s economy in 2010.

The measure of cultural events is the demand for tickets and the attendance figures. The festival involved a range of cultural contributions, international stars and talented people. It is important to recognise that, when we pull in the likes of Sir Tom Jones, Rosanne Cash, Justin Currie and the Waterboys for sell-out concerts, the measure is audience participation. It would be dangerous for any culture minister to judge the quality of cultural performances. Bill Wilson will respect the fact that to do so would be to go beyond my responsibilities as a minister.

I did. It was to do with traditional music. I am happy to answer the question.

I have not directly been involved in discussions regarding the Scottish Government’s purchasing decisions in relation to fair trade. Responsibility for the issue lies with the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. The Scottish Government remains committed to raising awareness and promoting the fair trade agenda in Scotland. My officials work closely with colleagues in the Scottish procurement and commercial directorate to ensure that fair trade options are made available within existing contracts, while still complying with European Union procurement legislation.

I will try to tease out the issue, Presiding Officer. I do not have information to hand on the proportion that is involved. I will see whether we can locate that. In terms of EU procurement, it is important to stress that similar restrictions are placed on specifying fair trade as are placed on specifying Scottish producers. The member asked about building in fair trade principles. We are not allowed to put the principles of fair trade within procurement policy. I can, however, send the member guidance that was issued in 2005 and supplemented in 2009. We have to work within EU state aid and procurement rules in supporting fair trade. As a Government, we encourage and support our suppliers in that regard. I will get as much information as I can. Certainly, in Scottish Government buildings and in what we provide, we can ensure that procurement achieves fair trade supply. I hope that the member recognises some of the challenges in delivering that.

Yes, I will. If, as I am hoping to, I have the opportunity to speak directly to the European Commissioner for Development, I will raise the issue with him, to try to overcome some of the constraints that we currently have to abide by.

As members may be aware, today marks the start of the Chinese new year—the year of the rabbit. I therefore want to take the opportunity to wish everyone a happy Chinese new year. I would also like to put on record this Government’s appreciation of the valuable support that we have received from Consul General Madam Tan Xiutian, who will be moving diplomatic posts later this month. The success of Vice Premier Li Keqiang’s visit to Scotland last month is a clear demonstration of the value of our strategic engagement with China, as are the benefits that are accruing to Scotland from the First Minister’s meeting with Vice Premier Li on 9 January. That is strong evidence of the fruits of our long-term commitment. In implementing the China plan, we will take forward a number of initiatives that were discussed during the visit.

A number of exciting initiatives are under way. There is support for the whisky industry, which now has access to the Chinese market. We are already talking to salmon producers about the opportunities for trade links that exist. On education, we are discussing further roll-out of Confucius institutes. On tourism, there is a fantastic opportunity for discussions with the Chinese Government about supporting parents of the many Chinese students who stay here. Edinburgh zoo’s connection to conservation work with pandas is another exciting development. The member should not worry—there are plenty of opportunities going forward, in the year of the rabbit, to strengthen the relationship.

The Administration has established strong relations with key commissioners. Most recently, Richard Lochhead met the fisheries commissioner in November; Roseanna Cunningham will see her again in 10 days’ time. In September, I had productive talks with the education and culture commissioner, and met the humanitarian aid commissioner. In early February, Michael Russell will meet the research commissioner.

I am not aware of any pending meetings with the relevant commissioner in Brussels, but I will ask my ministerial colleagues who are responsible for transport whether they have raised or can raise those points in any meetings or whether they can raise them in forthcoming correspondence. I will advise the member accordingly.

I am aware that my colleague John Swinney has raised energy issues with commissioners in the past. Scotland is an energy-rich country, but we are penalised with respect to our domestic and transport fuel prices by not having responsibility for our own energy policy. Other countries can give us lessons, one of which is to have control over our own energy policy. However, I appreciate the points that the member makes. Until Scotland has control over its energy policy, we are happy to learn lessons from other countries.

Yes. On 22 November, ministers discussed the dispute resolution protocol. We agreed to find ways for an independent third party to provide advice on issues that were not resolved earlier in the process. I hope that that will allow us to move quickly to find agreement on the Olympics issue, on which the three devolved Administrations are united in the view that Barnett consequentials should be applied.

The no-detriment clause in the Scotland Bill is a blank cheque for the Treasury. Experience shows that we should pin down the Treasury before the legislation is passed.

Before I open the debate, I signify that there is Crown consent to the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill. For the purposes of rule 9.11 of the standing orders, I advise members that Her Majesty, having been informed of the purport of the bill, has consented to place her prerogative and interests, so far as they are affected by the bill, at the disposal of the Parliament for the purposes of the bill. It gives me great pleasure to present my bill to members for stage 3 scrutiny, and I am very happy to propose that the Parliament should pass it. I thank members of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee for their hard work and careful scrutiny of a very technical bill; MSPs for their comments on it during its passage through the Parliament; and the organisations and individuals who provided oral and written evidence to the committee and briefings for MSPs on the bill’s provisions. The bill deals with complicated technical issues, and I am sure that all members acknowledge the helpful comments and advice that were received from the organisations that contributed to the parliamentary process. The bill addresses specific gaps and weaknesses in the current heritage legislation framework. Those gaps and weaknesses were identified during extensive discussions with stakeholders in 2007 and in 2009, when a draft bill was subject to a full public consultation. The bill will, for example, harmonise aspects of ancient monuments and listed buildings legislation and historic environment legislation with the planning regime. It will also improve the enforcement toolkit and the ability of regulatory authorities to work with developers. The bill is the result of a genuine consensual approach to legislation. I take the opportunity to highlight the key role that stakeholders played in helping to shape the bill and refine its provisions as the process progressed through the pre-consultation, consultation and parliamentary phases, and thank the individuals and organisations that contributed to the various working groups and seminars that were set up by Historic Scotland. Those working groups and seminars helped to shape the bill that is before us today. The engagement process that has accompanied consideration of the bill, which the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities described as “a model of stakeholder engagement”, has contributed to the bill’s relatively smooth passage through the Parliament. That is reflected in the level of support and good will that the bill has attracted from all parties since it was introduced on 4 May 2010. I want to touch on some ways in which the parliamentary process has helped further to refine and improve the bill and elucidate its policy context. When we debated the bill’s general principles at stage 1, I gave a commitment to write to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee and MSP colleagues to provide them with further explanatory material about certain provisions in the bill. That was done, and I hope that the committee and MSP colleagues found the information helpful and informative. In my correspondence, I commented on the process associated with issuing retrospective scheduled monument consent; provided practical information on the types of monument that the bill is specifically designed to bring within designation; touched on the certificates of immunity process; and provided details about the operation of scheduled monument enforcement notices and stop notices. I can confirm that the material that I sent to the committee on those issues will inform a revision of the Scottish historic environment policy and Historic Scotland’s operational guidance. The stage 1 report recommended that the Government should consider the issue, which some stakeholders raised, that expertise must be available to interpret information on the historic environment. I wrote to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee on 7 December and noted its comments in relation to the modification of the defences in the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979 by section 3 of the bill. In my response, I confirmed that those provisions relate solely to scheduled monuments and invited the committee to note that Historic Scotland, acting on behalf of Scottish ministers, deals with all matters affecting scheduled monuments, including the designation and associated consents processes. I also confirmed that Historic Scotland is the main source of advice and expertise on those matters. At stage 2, I lodged a number of minor technical amendments that clarified a few of the provisions, and I thank the committee for its support. I also thank the Subordinate Legislation Committee for its useful and careful scrutiny, which led me to consider some of the changes that were made. I think that I reflected at the time that it was important that we acknowledged the work of the Subordinate Legislation Committee, and, indeed, I moved amendments following its recommendations. The bill has clearly benefited from parliamentary scrutiny, so I thank those who contributed to the process. In setting the policy framework for the bill, the Scottish Government directed that it should be drafted with the intention of avoiding placing significant new burdens or duties on private bodies or individuals, and that, in the current financial climate, the implementation costs should be kept low. I am happy to note that those overarching policy aims have been met. Finally, although this is a very technical amending bill, I believe that it will enhance the ability of Scottish ministers and planning authorities to manage sustainably Scotland’s rich historic environment by providing authorities with a much-improved legislative toolkit to help protect and enhance our historic environment for the benefit of future generations. As we reflected in the stage 1 debate, members have a great deal of passion for and interest in Scotland’s built heritage. I hope that that can be reflected in some members’ speeches, but it is important, in carrying out our legislative duties, to ensure that the enjoyment of our built heritage for years to come is supported by legislation that is fit for purpose and that we progress all our responsibilities effectively. I think that the bill will do that, so I commend it to Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I am aware of the Law Society’s interest. The same concerns were raised at stage 1 and considered by the committee, which took the view that there was no pressing need to address them. There always is a risk of somebody objecting to listing. A listing exemption could be granted. What kind of frustration would there be if the objector somehow had the listing granted? It would be counterproductive. I appreciate those concerns, but they have been fully exercised and debated in the committee.

I thank members for a lively, informed and interesting debate. Although we send Pauline McNeill our best wishes, I think we benefited from Des McNulty’s experience and his recollections of the experience of Glasgow. He made the point, as did Ted Brocklebank, that whatever criticisms there might be of the scope of the bill, it contains practical measures. Indeed, he reflected that, had those measures been in place 10 or 15 years ago, some of the practical issues that he mentioned would have been addressed. The debate has been constructive and the discussion has clearly demonstrated the extent to which we all care about the appropriate protection and management of Scotland’s historic environment. I have been struck, as I was at stage 1, by members’ affection, passion and loyalty to their sense of place in their communities, and by how, as MSPs, they seek to promote their areas. That is important. I am happy to note that there is broad support for the bill throughout the chamber and I have enjoyed listening to the comments that colleagues have made. I want to comment on the information that will be provided about the bill. I reaffirm that the legislation will be accompanied by an awareness-raising and education programme, which will be taken forward by Historic Scotland. The process has begun. Members might be interested to know that, as part of the programme, the Scottish Government has produced an information booklet in liaison with key stakeholders called “Managing and Protecting our Historic Environment: What is Changing? The Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill Explained.” The booklet provides readers with an overview of the existing historic environment protection regime and sets out the changes that will be introduced by the bill. It can be found on the Historic Scotland website. We will also target owners and occupiers of scheduled monuments to raise awareness of the bill’s modifications to defences with regard to unauthorised works affecting those monuments, and my officials will consult stakeholders on the most effective and efficient methods for taking all that forward. However, in closing, I want to address some of the points that have been raised in the debate. Karen Gillon, Margaret Smith and others touched on the central philosopical issue of telling the story of Scotland and the relation between people and a sense of place. Buildings reflect the story of the people in a place and we must ensure that we bring those forms of identity closer together. Indeed, that is one of the reasons why I promoted and chaired a Historic Scotland seminar called “My Home - My Place - My Scotland” that brought together the different people who can tell the story of Scotland through the built environment. If we can mobilise everyone in an area to do that, we can make a big difference.

As part of my leadership in this area I have insisted that Historic Scotland looks at how it behaves and what it is doing. I want to reassure the member about its evident approach to some of the areas of interest that members have highlighted. The organisation’s officials are more than happy to meet members of this chamber and local authorities and, indeed, have recently done so in relation to Crail and the St Andrews case. I also reassure Jamie McGrigor that although the case for Castle Tioram has been rejected in the past and although I cannot prejudge the result of any discussions, Historic Scotland has made a fresh approach on the issue and is actively engaging with the owner on a number of solutions. It is important to put that on the record. As for the need for legislation, I think Iain Smith might be in danger of misinterpreting George Reid’s comments, which were specifically about the governance of the National Trust for Scotland. The subject of battlefields is very interesting, because the issue there is not just the structures themselves but the fact that they are catalysts for tourism. Indeed, the references to the US civil war and Alasdair Allan’s point about the Western Isles demonstrate what could be delivered in that respect. I am sure that Karen Gillon is aware of this, but the factors to be taken into account in listing and scheduling decisions are set out in the Scottish historic environment policy document. However, there must be more openness, transparency and understanding in that respect and, indeed, the ability to challenge decisions must exist. It is not that we simply seek to stop things happening, but that we have a better understanding of what is going on.

I take the point, which is why, with regard to scheduled monuments, the bill contains a provision to proactively ensure that people who are known are contacted. I believe that that represents a sea change. I thank the Parliament and my colleagues on the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee for their invaluable support during the bill’s passage. Moreover, I extend thanks to all the organisations that have made constructive contributions and look forward to including them in continued dialogue to revise SHEP, and to working with them as partners in the bill education programme. We will also consult on the suite of regulations that will be introduced to accompany this bill once enacted. I want in particular to thank my bill team in Historic Scotland for their hard work throughout the legislative process. The committee has acknowledged their responsiveness to certain issues that were raised during stages 1 and 2. As I noted in my opening speech, the bill addresses the specific gaps and weaknesses in the current heritage legislation framework that were identified during extensive discussions. It will make a good system better and improve the regulatory authorities’ ability to work with partners to manage Scotland’s unique historic legacy. In voting for the bill, we reaffirm our commitment to the appropriate care, protection and management of our rich historic environment for this and future generations. However, we cannot and must not be complacent; we must ensure that we channel our passion for our built environment constructively and always look at how we might improve provision. After all, we are stewards of that process and must take that responsibility seriously. I ask that members support the motion and approve the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.

The decision to close any school lies with the relevant council. The Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010 ensures that when councils propose the closure of a school, a robust, open, transparent and fair consultation process is followed. The legislation also enables ministers to call in decisions, and ultimately block them, should a council not adhere properly to the process. Since the act came into force last year, councils in the Highlands and Islands region have closed a number of schools and therefore Scottish ministers have received representations from many interested parties, requesting that certain of those decisions be called in.

As part of  the budget deal with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, local authorities have agreed to provide sufficient vacancies for all probationers who successfully complete the induction scheme in June 2011 to apply for. Of course, no individual can be guaranteed a post, and the posts will be available to all teachers who seek employment through fair and open competition. The deal also provides for further vacancies to reduce longer-term teacher unemployment. We have provided local authorities with an additional £15 million in the settlement to help to meet those teacher employment objectives.

As I said in  this morning's debate, I very much regret the reduction in the number of teachers who are employed in our schools since 2007. However, economic circumstances have changed since then in a way that could not have been predicted. We also need to recall that the 2007 level was artificially high and unsustainable at the best of times, let alone in the present financial circumstances. However, I stress that evidence now shows that we have turned the corner on teacher unemployment. That provides a solid foundation for achievement of the teacher employment objectives in our budget agreement with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities.

I am delighted to have the opportunity to speak to the amendment in my name and to set out the Government's excellent record on education. However, before I go any further, I stress my sincere wish that both here today and in moving forward, we can have a positive, civil discourse about Scottish education. That should not be beyond us, given that we have an education system that is based on settled principles enshrined in the curriculum for excellence, on which there is now little, if any, disagreement, despite last year's attempts by all the Opposition parties to create disagreement. That political consensus is long standing, and I believe that it will survive. That marks a significant strength in Scotland in comparison with other countries, and it is incumbent on us all to nurture that broad consensus rather than risk losing it. We should look forward to a vigorous civil discourse and debate in the run-up to the Scottish election, based on vision and achievement rather than negativity. The debate must be based on two other prerequisites, one of which is the bringing forward of clear policies. I regret that it took Mr McNulty 11 minutes to get to a policy, and that all the policies that he mentioned in the final minute of his speech are already happening. Secondly, the debate must be based on truth. I regret that even the former leader of the Labour Party has difficulty with matters of fact. In his new year message in the Wishaw Press , Mr McConnell said that there is "growing anger at the Scottish Government's abolition of EMA's". Education maintenance allowances have not been abolished. I hope that Mr McConnell will withdraw that statement prominently in the Wishaw Press and perhaps even in the chamber. Let me put the matters that are raised in the motion into a factual light, as opposed to the rather dismal and dim light that Mr McNulty has shone on them. I will start with teacher numbers. I cannot deny that teacher numbers have fallen over recent years, but I regret that. Members are well aware, of course, that teacher recruitment is a matter for local authorities. I have some sympathy for local authorities as far as teacher numbers are concerned and strong sympathy for the young  people who have been affected, whom I support. However, to put things bluntly, it is not realistic for anyone to suggest that we or any other Government might aspire to restoring the numbers to the 2007 levels. Employing 3,000 teachers, which is roughly the number that local authorities have shed, would cost in the order of £120 million a year. I challenge those who are so critical of the current position—which none of us wishes to be in—to point to where that funding will come from. Back in 2007, authorities employed record numbers of teachers, and that was a problem in itself. Those numbers were unsustainable in any circumstances, let alone in the financial circumstances in which we now find ourselves. The motion seems to overlook completely that we have, fortunately, turned the corner as far as teacher employment is concerned. Most people in the profession have welcomed that. There were hints and signs of that happening a few months ago, but they have now grown into compelling evidence. The first sign was in September 2010, when—for the first time for more than two years—fewer teachers claimed jobseekers allowance than in the same month a year before. That was reinforced by the October and November figures, which again showed that there were fewer jobseekers allowance claimants than in the corresponding month of the previous year. Indeed, in November 2010, the figure was lower than the November figures in 2009 and 2008. One swallow does not make a summer, but three consecutive months of fewer JSA claimants certainly amounts to more than just a ray of sunshine.

I, too, thank Bob Doris for lodging the motion and highlighting the importance of the Irish community in Scotland. We have heard about the impact on Scotland of the Irish diaspora, which is part of the story of Scotland for members. The debate has been a great opportunity to reflect on that. People have migrated between Scotland and Ireland for centuries, and our histories are entwined for ever. I recognise the Irish diaspora's contribution in shaping Scotland. Arthur Conan Doyle, Sean Connery, Brian Cox and Susan Boyle are just a few in the ranks of the Irish Scots. The connections work both ways. Many members have referred to James Connolly, who was one of the most important figures in the struggle for Irish independence. He was born to Irish parents in the Cowgate in Edinburgh. As with most mass migrations, the Irish came to Scotland in the hope of a better life. That is a familiar tale that is echoed in the experiences of diaspora communities down the ages and across  continents. Migration continues to benefit Scotland economically and culturally. The contribution of the Irish and other diaspora communities over the centuries has a direct economic value, which can be quantified for recent immigrant communities. Between 1999-2000 and 2003-04, the total revenue from immigrants increased by 22 per cent. The Irish were one of the earliest groups to settle, and they made a strong contribution. They worked on farms and down mines, as we heard from Elaine Smith, and in Dundee's jute factories, as we heard from Joe FitzPatrick. They built industrial Scotland alongside native Scots and other immigrants—mainly English. They constructed railways and canals and brought with them their own culture, religion, language and a legacy as a living part of Scotland. Irish artists and performers participate in festivals throughout Scotland—in the Edinburgh festivals, at Celtic Connections, and in the StAnza poetry festival, the word festival and the Wigtown book festival. Celtic Connections, which begins in Glasgow tomorrow, continues the tradition with some of Ireland's biggest names in traditional music performing, including Paul Brady, Brian Kennedy, Sharon Shannon and Shane MacGowan. I wish all the performers and everyone else involved all the best for this year's festival. The strength of the Irish cultural community in Scotland directly contributes to our economy throughout Scotland. Thousands of children learn Irish dancing. As we have heard, Glasgow has hosted the world Irish dancing championships three times in the past 10 years, including in 2010. That contributed £9.4 million to Glasgow's economy. I was pleased to write to support the visit last year. No assessment of the contribution that the Irish have made can be complete without mentioning sport. The Gaelic Athletic Association, which promotes sports such as hurling and Gaelic football, has a number of clubs in Glasgow, Edinburgh and Dundee and adds to the richness and diversity of sport in Scotland. Of course, the role of the Irish diaspora in founding Celtic and Hibs is well known. As an MSP who represents the city of Edinburgh, I am delighted to have heard Pauline McNeill acknowledging that Celtic would not be Celtic if it were not for Hibs. Gaelic has been an important cultural and linguistic bridge between Scotland and Ireland for the past 1,500 years. Scots also has a long and important history in Scotland and gives Ireland and Scotland a shared cultural heritage. Our languages are often fragile, and speakers of them are sometimes few in number, but they are a key aspect of our history, heritage and identity, and they have the potential to enrich our current  cultural life. In both Scotland and Ireland, we need to find the most effective strategies for promoting our minority and lesser-used languages. We have taken steps to raise the status and appeal of the Irish and Gaelic languages through the arts and by making them more visible. That is a key area in which we can learn from each other. I see that as a shared challenge and an opportunity to learn from each other's strategies and initiatives. Close co-operation and partnership will help to ensure that we can create a secure future for languages that have been an important part of our cultural background for many years. Mary Scanlon mentioned the British-Irish Council. I led the Scottish delegation in the Isle of Man. I report to the European and External Relations Committee, but would be delighted to write to her or answer questions about what has been happening with the council's current role and connections. In reflecting on the contribution that the Irish in Scotland have made to the preservation and development of Irish culture, I cannot help but draw parallels with our own diaspora. Last year, the Scottish Government published a diaspora strategy, with a view to learning from the successes of the Irish, in particular, in working with their diaspora. I was interested in the comments that Bob Doris made in that regard.  Both Ireland and Scotland have a diaspora that is measured in tens of millions. Around 20 per cent of the people who were born in Scotland or Ireland live outside their country of birth. I pay tribute to the many Scottish societies and members of Scotland's diaspora around the world who play a key part in the continuing health of Scottish culture, just as I pay tribute to the Irish community in Scotland for the additional richness and diversity that it has brought to Scotland. It is important to be proud of and confident about one's identity. As others, including Hugh Henry and Frank McAveety have said, that often involves a journey, which is changing for each generation. Perhaps the children of the Scots-Irish people of today will have a different relationship with their roots from the one that members have spoken about in the debate but, nevertheless, that Celtic thread that connects us will be strong and will bind us together for many years. It is a thread of diversity, but it is also very much part and parcel of the fabric that makes Scotland what it is. I am delighted to have been able to respond for the Scottish Government in what has been an important debate.  Meeting closed at 18:51.

I am grateful for the opportunity to make a statement on proposed school closures in Argyll and Bute. Long before I was an MSP, I was involved in campaigning for rural schools and I have championed the cause of rural schools for almost my entire political career. Rural schools are critical to fragile communities: they anchor the future of such places because young people are the future. The continued health of rural schools is about much more than education. It might even be said that the cause of rural schools goes to the heart of why the Parliament exists, because we are here to serve the interests of all the communities of Scotland, no matter how small, and to do so without fear or favour. I know that many other members share that view. For example, in the first session, Cathy Peattie was the rapporteur for an inquiry that not only saved some schools, but presaged the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill. Murdo Fraser introduced a bill on the topic, and Jamie McGrigor and Jackie Baillie have been working effectively to oppose local closures. Let me make two points clear at the outset. First, this statement has been requested by the Opposition parties and is therefore a ministerial statement, but any and all of the actions that I took in relation to the proposed school closures in Argyll and Bute were not taken as a minister. Moreover, that point was made clear at every stage of the events that I shall describe. Secondly, the moment that there was the prospect of school closures in Argyll and Bute, I took the correct steps to insulate myself as a minister and, in keeping with official advice—which I had sought—put in place arrangements for another minister to take decisions on and to act in all capacities concerning the matter. Those arrangements were announced on the very day on which a formal process was started. I will now give the details of the Argyll and Bute school closure proposals. In late October 2010, Argyll and Bute Council released a list of 26 schools that it proposed should be closed. That list was met with consternation locally—it represented  almost one third of local schools. Many people believed that it would be a significant—perhaps fatal—blow to the entire diverse and disparate area. The final decision on the proposals was due to be made at a council executive meeting on 2 November, but that meeting demurred and instead asked officials to bring back revised proposals to the full council on 25 November. Instantly, the school closure plan became the single biggest local issue. I received numerous requests to meet councillors and parents, but from the outset I made it explicit that I could do so only as the prospective parliamentary candidate for the area, and in that role alone. In that capacity, on 5 November, at the request of the local councillor and during a visit to Kintyre, I met parents of pupils of Glenbarr and Southend primary schools. On 13 November, again at the request of the local councillor, as well as of the parent council, I met the community on the island of Luing, whose school had been raised with me five days earlier in this chamber by Des McNulty. On 20 November, while I was undertaking local campaigning in Rothesay, I met parents from North Bute primary school who were running a street stall. On 27 November, while I was campaigning in Dunoon with a local councillor, I visited a coffee morning in Strone where, yet again, the school issue was on everyone's lips. On 13 December, when I visited Ulva and Lochdon on Mull, I was accompanied by no fewer than four councillors, including one independent Liberal and one independent. Later that evening, I was at Barcaldine with two councillors. In addition, I had the issue raised with me in shops, in pubs, at events and in the streets across the area. I even had it raised with me in neighbours' houses because, of course, I live in the constituency and in a community that was threatened with the closure of its primary school. In every one of those meetings and in every conversation, I made three things clear: first, that I could speak only in my capacity as a prospective parliamentary candidate; secondly, that given my governmental office, I could not and would not take a position on the closure of any individual school; and finally, that the only help I could give was to ensure that everyone was fully familiar with the rights of parents and communities under the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010. That is what I said—or to put it another way, let me quote one of the parents I met, Mr Robert Millar of Southend, who last weekend told Scotland on Sunday : "He made that quite clear before he started. He said I can't comment about the school and say anything with the job I've got." I was very touched to be contacted yesterday morning by another member of one of the affected  communities, who made it clear that the parent council on the island of Luing would be willing to say exactly the same thing. When I entered schools, those visits were arranged by and were at the invitation of local councillors, the local teachers or the parents themselves, and I did so as a local candidate. As members know, I am not exactly a shrinking violet. Consequently, I was accompanied on a number of visits by local journalists who covered the discussions. Their reporting, for example in the Campbeltown Courier and in The Oban Times , confirms what Mr Millar said. As a local candidate, I met local people to discuss local issues that were of concern to them. At the meeting on 25 November, the Scottish National Party group in Argyll and Bute Council refused to back a list of closures that had only one change and consequently withdrew from the council administration. That was a decision for the council group and one that it reached after listening to its constituents. However, other councillors had not listened to their constituents. The six Liberal Democrats immediately joined the administration, backed by the two Tories, and voted through the list of 25 school closures at that very meeting, by 19 to 17. If they had not, the closures would have fallen. [ Interruption .]

We will protect Gaelic language and culture by ensuring that all key elements of Gaelic development remain in place and continue to operate effectively in promoting Gaelic in the current economic climate. For that reason, we have worked hard to protect Gaelic bodies and minimise reductions in the area. We are confident that all key Gaelic activities will continue to operate, and Gaelic will remain a key priority for the Scottish Government. I am sure that all members will join me in welcoming the announcement yesterday from the BBC trust that BBC Alba will soon be available on Freeview. That is good news: it is fitting recognition of the success and achievements of BBC Alba and it will allow many more people in Scotland to have access to BBC Alba's quality programmes.

That is certainly a position that we support. As the member is aware, we asked Bòrd na Gàidhlig to produce a Gaelic action plan. Its focus and emphasis, particularly in early years and education, was not necessarily on a legislative right at this time, but I think that the direction of travel is as set out by the member. We just have to find the mechanism that we can use to support people, particularly considering the financial constraints. For example, the Scottish Government made an announcement recently about supporting Gaelic development at Glenurquhart primary school, and we are very supportive of moves in the city of Edinburgh to ensure that Gaelic education is promoted, developed and improved.

Indeed—and I will ensure that the full information is made available to the member on the accessibility of BBC Alba. In the past year, 50 per cent of all the independent productions in Scotland were commissioned by BBC Alba. That shows that there is an economic argument to support BBC Alba, but it is also good news for independent television production companies.

I agree completely with the member: we should promote the success of the Gaelic school. I reassure him that only this week I announced that the Government would support funding for the development of Gaelic education in Edinburgh, particularly for a stand-alone school. I have already announced that this week.

I have no direct responsibility for the decision on whether any gathering event will be repeated in future years. Although the company that delivered the gathering event encountered serious financial difficulties, the event itself was a huge success. It generated £10.4 million for Scotland's economy and attracted 47,000 visits, with attendees coming to Scotland from around the world. On that evidence, consideration will be given to any staging of future events such as the gathering. The Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism has mandated EventScotland to initiate planning for Scotland's next year of homecoming in 2014. A strategic group is being established, and it will consider the part that any gathering-type event may play in making that year just as successful as our first year of homecoming.

I certainly do not recognise the latter part of George Foulkes's question. The role of the diaspora is essential in the promotion of Scotland and it was part of the success of the overall homecoming year. The Government will build on that. I am pleased to inform the member that I will make some announcements shortly about how we can further promote Scotland's diaspora both at home and abroad in promoting Scotland's interests.

Scotland is a warm and welcoming country, and we are looking forward to the hogmanay celebrations, which will see hundreds of thousands of people descending on Edinburgh and other parts of Scotland to celebrate. Any opportunity to promote Scotland is welcome. The year of homecoming was particularly successful, and many other countries are looking to our experience to see what they can learn in doing likewise. We should acknowledge success when we see it and build on it. Undoubtedly, we should learn lessons, but we must also build on our success.

Our international development activity and funding support is based on the principles that are enshrined in the Paris declaration on aid effectiveness. Specific elements have been addressed within our funding criteria, where possible, to build the quality and impact of Scotland's contribution to international development.

I agree with the member that allegations of corruption should be fully investigated. I take any allegation of corruption involving Scottish companies very seriously. It might not be appropriate for me to offer advice to the UK Government on its choice of special representatives for trade investment, but the Scottish public will expect anybody who performs those functions to do so to the highest possible standard.

The Scottish Government welcomes developments that support the languages of Scotland. The "2010 Brussels Declaration on Sign Languages in the European Union", which was put forward by the national associations of the deaf of the member states of the European Union and its affiliated members—Iceland, Norway and Switzerland—is an important development. The declaration was signed on 19 November 2010, but the resolution has not yet been considered by the European Union.

I am well aware of the bill proposal that Cathie Craigie has put forward and of her long-standing championing of the issue. As with all members' bills, we must await the results of the consultation on the bill. We will look closely at those results, which will influence the bill as introduced. I assume that it will have to be introduced in the next session of Parliament. The Government recognises the importance of BSL and has always treated it as a language  rather than as simply a means of communication support and we have provided significant funding for the training of tutors and interpreters. We see that as an important contribution towards protecting the language. When the United Kingdom Government recognised BSL as a language in 2003, the Scottish Government felt that it was not necessary at that time to take any further action, on the basis that, in the activity that we were doing around the issue of language recognition in Scotland, we were treating BSL as a language. I reassure the member that that issue of language recognition in Scotland is currently being explored.

The Maid of the Loch is an important part of the heritage of the Loch Lomond area. The Scottish Government has assisted the Loch Lomond Steamship Company in making contact with Community Enterprise in Scotland, which is helping the company put together an application for consultancy support to develop its financial strategy.

I reassure the member that we are supporting the project. She will be aware that our consistent advice is that we are unable to offer Scottish Government staff time free of charge to third parties, so secondments tend to be on the basis of mutual funding. On the basis that no financial strategy is in place for the Maid of the Loch, we have provided every support. Indeed, on 16 December, I received correspondence from John Hughes to reassure me that he had met the relevant organisations in order to put forward plans to ensure that that financial strategy is put in place. It is important that it is. I reassure the member that Scottish Enterprise has contributed £5,000 to a viability assessment to  find out whether the plans to sail the Maid of the Loch on Loch Lomond were viable. It has confirmed that it is in regular contact with the LLSC and has met the company as recently as 18 November to explore whether forthcoming refurbishment plans fit with that viability study. It will continue to work with the company. I hope that the member, rather than being critical and negative and sniping from the sidelines, will support the Scottish Government's on-going work to support the initiative.

Having a strong financial strategy will help any bid for lottery funding. The fitting of any new boiler will be dependent on that financial strategy. That is why the support that the Government is providing in relation to Community Enterprise in Scotland and Scottish Enterprise is important.

I understand that the Department for Culture, Media and Sport expects that an announcement revealing which sites have been successful in their applications for inclusion on the new United Kingdom tentative list will be made before the dissolution of the Scottish Parliament in 2011.

We are working with the UK department on that, and we were consulted on the selection of assessment panel members to ensure that knowledge and understanding of the Scottish sites are part of the panel's skills base. I congratulate those who have been campaigning for Arbroath abbey, but Alex Johnstone will appreciate that I have agreed with  UK ministers to refrain from promoting any particular site. I also congratulate St Andrews and those who are campaigning for the Forth bridge, the buildings of Charles Rennie Macintosh, the crucible of iron age in Shetland and the flow country, so that I can treat all the applications equally.

Activities in Antarctica are regulated by the Antarctic Treaty, which was signed on 1 December 1959 by the 12 nations that were active on the continent at the time, including the United Kingdom. Antarctica is not explicitly reserved by the Scotland Act 1998, and observing and implementing international obligations is excepted from the general reservation on foreign affairs. However, as part of our Government-to-Government dialogue, Scottish ministers agreed some months ago that in the case of licensing expeditions and related activities under the Antarctic Act 1994 the UK Government should continue to exercise the relevant functions. In line with that approach, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office will continue to deal with applications and licences in respect of British expeditions, including those that are based in Scotland.

Re-reservations are to be regretted, particularly when it is clear that they are not necessary in terms of administrative agreement. The idea of having a Scottish commissioner for the Antarctic is interesting. I understand that Sir Michael Forsyth is currently en route to Antarctica as part of a charitable expedition; I am not sure whether he had advance notice that the position might be available. I am sure that members on all  sides of the chamber wish him well in his expedition.

That is broad and wide ranging. Perhaps the experience of Antarctica, whether for expedition or research purposes, has been well learned in Scotland in recent days. There is an important point about resilience. Many communities throughout Scotland went ahead with a number of events despite the weather problems. Some events had to be cancelled, but many are being rearranged. I acknowledge Cathie Craigie's point about funding, but there is a point at which Scotland has to get on with the job. We are open for business, and we can get on with things. A number of the winter festivals that were cancelled will go ahead in January and February—although I particularly regret that the Christmas songs that some of our pupils have diligently learned might have to be replaced for January and February concerts.

The Scottish Government supports and promotes young pipe bands through the youth music initiative and through our partners Creative Scotland. The Scottish Government recently announced that the youth music initiative will continue to be funded at the previous level of £10 million per annum through 2011-12. Organisations can apply directly to Creative Scotland in respect of 20 per cent of the fund, which is for independent and national music and arts organisations that provide activities that are designed for young people outside school or nursery.

That is an important point. I am happy to take the issue forward with Creative Scotland.

When local authorities propose the closure of a primary school, they must undertake a consultation, using the updated and robust process that is set out in the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010.

The Scottish Government has held discussions with all local authorities to discuss the budget settlement for 2011-12. Those discussions have included consideration of the implications for education budgets, and, within that, plans for teacher employment.

The Scottish baccalaureate has been recognised by many universities, in their prospectuses and, more generally, in developing the knowledge and skills that are necessary for higher education. The number of centres that are approved to deliver the baccalaureate has doubled this year to 140. As uptake of the qualification increases, I expect recognition by universities also to increase.

At least we got out of bed.

Today, we arrive at the next and most significant staging post thus far in the debate on the long-term funding of universities in Scotland. A discussion that I initiated in March with people in and around the sector, and which has been taken forward by the sector with vigour, now fully enters the public arena with the publication this afternoon of our green paper, a paper that I hope will help to shape a uniquely Scottish solution to the issue. Of course, as in all areas of public expenditure, the cuts that have been imposed on Scotland by the Westminster Government have had to be shared by the university sector. However, our institutions are rising to the difficulties that are inherent in the draft budget for 2010-11. I welcome their commitment to work with us on that task and I pay tribute to the principals and Universities Scotland for that approach. They have made it possible to maintain core university places in the next academic year, a commitment that will be of enormous practical help to the coming generation. The scale of that help is significant. It has involved positive action and good will from many people, including college principals, because some 20 per cent of our higher education is delivered by the college sector. We had almost 280,000 higher education students in Scotland in 2008-09—a rise of 20,000 in less than a decade—and nearly 85,000 HE qualifications were obtained. In the first 10 years of devolution, expenditure on higher education rose 78 per cent in cash terms and 37 per cent in real terms. With its 20 higher education institutions, Scotland has more universities per head of population than most other countries. Our higher education tradition is distinguished and it is acknowledged across the globe. That tradition is based on access that is determined by ability to learn, not ability to pay. In the 18th century, Daniel Defoe observed that in Scotland even "the poorest people have their children taught and instructed". Our history is full of the successes of the lads an lasses o pairts—

The employment of teachers is a matter for local authorities. However, the budget agreement that we have secured with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities will ensure, among other things, that there will be sufficient posts for all those who leave the induction scheme in June 2011 to apply for. Of course, no one is guaranteed a job and the posts will be available through open and fair competition to all teachers who are seeking employment. Beyond that, the agreement will secure posts for all probationers who require a place under the induction scheme in August 2011 and further  posts to achieve a reduction in the number of unemployed teachers. Local authorities have been invited to sign up for the package of measures that are covered by the agreement, and I hope that Michael McMahon will encourage Labour authorities to do so.

The debate has been informed and engaging. I particularly appreciated the reflections on the role of Professor Neil MacCormick and Ken Munro in Scotland’s contribution to developing European constitutional  policy. I also appreciated the thoughtful comments from Chris Harvie and Frank McAveety. It is important to reflect that we can take on more roles and responsibility and be proactive with direct EU engagement. I welcome the Parliament-wide strategy for European engagement and scrutiny. The debate has involved confessions. We had a confession from Pauline McNeill that she cannot change a plug, but she made a relevant point about how we can ensure that people can relate to decisions that are made by Europe. We had the confession that Iain Smith is one of some 20 MSPs who have at one point been a member of the European and External Relations Committee. I confess that I am not and have never been a member of the European and External Relations Committee, but I very much appreciate the work that it does. The introduction of new competencies and the extension of existing ones has required a great deal of cross-organisational response from the Scottish Government and Scotland’s public bodies. We have recently discussed with sportscotland, VisitScotland and Creative Scotland how to take full advantage of the opportunities that are available, such as those on the EU’s new sport policy, and how to co-ordinate responses to Commission consultations, such as the recent consultation on the future EU programme for culture. We have stepped up engagement with the European Parliament and our MEPs, particularly on key interest areas. For example, our engagement on common agricultural policy reform has included hosting a visit to Scotland from Paolo De Castro, the chair of the European Parliament’s Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, and regular contact with George Lyon MEP. We have worked closely with the UK Government on freedom, security and justice issues for many years, providing input from the Scottish perspective. We will continue to build on that experience and ensure that our interests are properly and positively represented. Although snow prevented the Lord Advocate from attending last week’s justice and home affairs council, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice attended the November council. The Parliament now has the opportunity to comment on whether the Commission’s legislative proposals adhere to the subsidiarity principle when they concern areas of devolved competence. Together, we can ensure that we have early intelligence gathering and that we have robust systems in place to do that. On openness on our engagement with the UK Government, the Scottish Government has already taken steps to give the committee a better understanding of the work of the joint ministerial committee on Europe by providing summary  reports following each meeting. I have consistently said that I favour as much openness as appropriate around the process, bearing it in mind that a certain level of confidentiality is required to allow full and free intergovernmental discussion to take place. The snow on Monday meant that I could not travel to London for the recent JMC Europe but, in a telephone call with David Lidington, I raised several points on the Commission’s new energy 2020 strategy and the EU budget review. Officials who attended noted that HM Treasury and the Department of Energy and Climate Change are keen to continue their close working relationship with us on those issues. Energy is a good example. A number of members touched on the subject. It was mentioned that the strategic, proactive and focused approach through our EU action plan is delivering results for Scotland. This week, as part of the UK delegation, Jim Mather took a full part in the EU co-ordination that was central to the Cancun conference. That is another example of how Scotland is maximising our experience. Christopher Harvie’s analysis of the power proposals and, indeed the strategic direction of Europe, was interesting in terms of where Scotland can influence, particularly in relation to marine energy.  I turn to research. We are working actively with business, academia and policy makers to look at the opportunities through the next framework programme for research and development—another interest of the Parliament. In the new year, we will host an event to launch our strategic engagement approach on this area. We will provide information on the future of European research and innovation and outline the benefits of engagement in European research and innovation programmes. We will debate and discuss future priorities for Scotland in a European context. Engaging early and directly with Europe will ensure that Scotland’s voice is heard. I know that I am in danger of disappointing Jackson Carlaw in saying that I agree with Ian McKee: we want greater direct access to the European Union by bypassing Westminster. Until such time, we accept our duties and obligations as a devolved Government in taking forward Scotland’s interests. As we debate the Parliament’s new EU strategy and our engagement with Europe more generally, it is important to make Scotland’s voice louder. We will do that if we can find common ground and work together to develop a shared view across the Parliament, Government and all our MEPs. The budget review—including review of the CAP, cohesion and some cross-cutting issues on Europe 2020, energy and the single market—provides opportunities for us to do so across the parties. As well as carrying added weight in the EU and presenting a unified and positive position to the commission and EU institutions on key challenges, we can help to highlight Scotland as a valued, trusted and reliable partner in EU policy. Irene Oldfather should get a long-service medal for her perseverance on the issue. She and all members of the European and External Relations Committee should be pleased with the report and recommendations, which are a valued contribution in taking forward the Parliament’s work in this area.

I am pleased to have this opportunity to respond on the Scottish Government’s behalf to the committee’s report on the impact of the Treaty of Lisbon on Scotland. As the convener indicated, the Lisbon treaty clearly has broad implications for Scotland. Extended and new competences mean that the EU will be active in a range of new areas. We already see that in policy areas that range from energy to sport. We need to ensure that Scotland’s interests are protected and promoted under the freedom, security and justice opt-in arrangements, and that we respond to the European Parliament’s increased powers by engaging effectively with members of the European Parliament. The treaty has presented Scotland with increased opportunities to influence European legislation in new areas, and to feed into the European Union’s decision-making process on key policy areas for us such as justice, energy, climate change, agriculture and fisheries. The subsidiarity protocol provides, for the first time, a treaty-based role for this Parliament to engage in that process, too. The Scottish Government welcomes the findings of the committee’s report. We have taken a positive and proactive approach to working with the Scottish Parliament throughout the inquiry and will continue to do so. I am encouraged that a key recommendation of the report is for the Scottish Parliament to take on a more effective role in the EU policy-development process through a reinforced Scottish Parliament European strategy. The strategy involves an expanded role for the subject committees. That is a necessary step following the changes that the Lisbon treaty has introduced. Through the extension of shared and supporting competences, more of us will need an increased awareness of Europe. In September, I set out to the European and External Relations Committee the successful outcomes that we are seeing from the Government’s “Action Plan on European Engagement”. The action plan’s focused and proactive approach has delivered real results for Scotland in energy, research, justice and the marine environment. Ministers have a strong record of engagement, both in attendance at the Council of Ministers and in discussions with commissioners and MEPs. European activity is central to many of our domestic responsibilities, and such activity continues to increase. Therefore, I am pleased that the Scottish Parliament has recognised the  opportunities that the subsidiarity protocol offers and has proposed mechanisms to make the most of them. I welcome the recommendations to ensure formal co-operation with the UK Parliament and to seek a Scottish Government view as an integral part of any formal subsidiarity mechanism. I am pleased to announce that the Scottish Government’s new explanatory memoranda—EM—management system is now operational and will be piloted with the Scottish Parliament over the coming months. The new system will help to facilitate the Parliament’s new responsibility to scrutinise European Commission proposals. The Lisbon treaty introduced new fast-track infraction procedures with particular emphasis on implementing European legislation on time. The Scottish Government has made significant improvements in its handling of EU obligations and its transposition performance is leading the way among the devolved Administrations. Last month, I submitted to the committee a report that indicated that only two transposition cases were past their deadline. One has since been achieved, and the second is due to be laid before the Parliament early in the new year. The committee’s report rightly identifies freedom, security and justice—which is one of the Scottish Government’s EU priorities—as an important area of EU engagement for Scotland. Scotland is in a unique position within the European Union. The UK is the only member state that contains two legislative jurisdictions and justice systems, so it is vital that policies on freedom, security and justice  take account of the different legal system that we have in Scotland. The Lisbon treaty extends the opt-in to all FSJ matters, so we will continue to work closely with the UK Government to ensure that Scotland’s interests are properly and positively represented. I take this opportunity to update the Parliament on the European Union Bill, which is the UK’s response to the Lisbon treaty. The subject matter of the bill and its provisions appear at first sight to be reserved, but there are significant potential implications for devolved interests, especially on justice. We have been in close discussion with the UK Government in order to protect Scotland’s interests. I will continue to press to ensure that the Scottish Government’s role under the memorandum of understanding in developing UK policy in the areas that the bill covers is fully respected. We have clear and robust processes in place to ensure that.

I am very interested in referendums and I am delighted that the UK Government has an increased interest in them, whether on the alternative vote system or under the European Union Bill for when a change to the Lisbon treaty is proposed. However, we know of resistance in this place to referendums on our constitutional future. Irene Oldfather is correct to identify Scotland’s interest in relation to the Lisbon treaty. If any discussions or proposed changes to the Lisbon treaty resulted in the UK Government wanting to hold a referendum, I would be sympathetic to the proposal that the results should be distinguishable. In different parts of the UK—in Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland—different perspectives can be taken. The working time directive is a good example of a subject on which Scotland might have had a different perspective from the rest of the UK. The point is well made and important, despite my reservations in relation to a referendum by the Scottish Government. I suspect that we will return to issues that relate to the bill as it progresses through the UK Parliament and I am sure that the European and External Relations Committee will take a keen interest in what happens on that. I return to implementation of the Lisbon treaty, the proposed work programme and the changes in the Parliament. I was pleased to work with the committee throughout its inquiry and I sought to provide positive and constructive ideas about how engagement could take place. I look forward to further engagement in the months ahead.

I am interested in developments in the Scottish Parliament. What response to the initiative has there been from conveners of the subject committees?

The Scottish Government has always supported the extension of the Parliament’s powers and responsibilities. We welcome the bill and we support the general principle of the transfer of powers. However, we recognise that the bill is a starting point on which we need to build. Much work must be done to improve the bill if it is genuinely to benefit Scotland. The Scottish Government has engaged promptly and positively with the bill, on which I made a ministerial statement. Within 24 hours of the bill’s publication, I had lodged a legislative consent memorandum. The following day, I wrote to Robert Brown and other Scotland Bill Committee members to respond constructively to the committee’s request for assistance. On Monday, I lodged a Government motion for debate that supports the bill’s general principles. However, Iain Gray and the Labour Party are leading the debate with a motion that uncritically supports a Tory bill. The danger is that the bill is a Tory tax trap that will reduce Scotland’s budget, stifle growth in our economy and limit investment  in our public services. The Opposition parties want powers so that they can be accountable, to justify devolution. The SNP Government wants powers so that we can grow the economy and deliver social justice to the Scottish people. Pauline McNeill perhaps summed up the situation when she said that the bill was not about economic development.

I used those powers constructively. As a result of measures that we have taken, 600 apprentices who would have been on the dole have been re-employed. I will not take lectures on that matter. Regardless of the starting point in relation to the bill, it is important that we seek thoughtful and critical engagement on the details of the proposals. That is why the Parliament must not bounce the committee into a position by agreeing to a motion that fails to await the committee’s view. The motion cannot be supported unamended. We have supported many of the Calman commission’s recommendations—indeed, we pressed for early implementation of several of them. However, we have consistently expressed concerns about some matters—particularly the financial provisions and the proposed reservations. As the United Kingdom Government says, the financial provisions represent the most significant change to the devolution settlement. All the parties in the Parliament agree on greater fiscal responsibility, so we share a common starting point. Our responsibility now is to look at the financial package that is on offer and to consider whether we are satisfied that the provisions, as they stand, are in Scotland’s best interests. If they are not, it is for the Parliament to propose improvements to that package. We have already provided a detailed, evidence-based analysis of the proposals in our memorandum, which we expect the committee to consider in much detail. As our comprehensive analysis shows, in their current form, the bill’s financial provisions are potentially damaging to Scotland’s economy because the only significant tax power that is to be devolved relates to a proportion of income tax, and income tax receipts tend to grow more slowly than other tax receipts. There is a deflationary bias built into the bill’s fiscal proposals. Given the rate of growth of the Scottish budget to date, we have estimated that they would have cost Scotland £8 billion since 1999.

I think that we are agreed that we support the bill’s general principles. The concern is that the motion overcommits the Parliament and makes a judgment on the bill’s benefits before scrutiny and analysis have been carried out. That is extremely serious indeed. I welcome Tavish Scott’s commitment that he will look at the concerns about the £8 billion that we have raised. Wendy Alexander invited us to provide information on those concerns and on fiscal autonomy. We are happy to do so. David McLetchie said that alternatives will be considered. That is welcome. The deflationary bias in the bill must be addressed. Scotland would receive only a quarter of the income tax revenue that was raised at the higher rate and only a fifth of the revenue that was raised at the top rate. Historically, higher-rate taxpayers have accounted for a larger share of the growth in income tax receipts, but the majority of that growth would accrue to the UK Government.

I want to move on. Control over other taxes, such as stamp duty and the landfill tax, is to be devolved, but they account for less than 1 per cent of total tax revenues. Overall, 85 per cent of the tax revenues that are raised in Scotland would still flow to the UK Government. If the Scottish economy were to grow, the UK, not Scotland, would be the chief beneficiary. Iain Gray may say that he wants to see a rebalancing of devolution, but I do not think that an 85:15 split of tax revenues is a fair balance for Scotland. The key test of whether the bill will be of any benefit must be on economic growth. A point was made about borrowing powers. Peter Peacock said that the bill would bring “huge borrowing powers”, but the proposed £2.2 billion cap is significantly lower than the Northern Irish cap of £3 billion. The bill would restrict how borrowing could be allocated in a particular year and would not allow us to issue bonds. It would leave us in a weaker position than local authorities are in. In that regard, I welcome Tom McCabe’s acknowledgment that improvements can be made. As they stand, the bill’s financial provisions fall short of the ambitions that not just the SNP but other parties such as the Liberal Democrats have long expressed for Scotland. If we are to grow the country’s economy and to secure the future income of our public services, it is important that we scrutinise the bill properly.  Moving on from the fiscal package, many of the non-financial elements of the bill represent welcome extensions of the devolution settlement that will enable us to move on, but on matters such as Scottish elections, the Crown Estate and the appointment of a Scottish member of the BBC Trust, it falls far short. Tavish Scott wants us to have more powers over immigration, but that is not in the bill. Liam McArthur wants control of the Crown Estate to be devolved, but that is not in the bill. The Calman commission made other significant recommendations that are not taken up in the bill, including the proposals on the aggregates levy and air passenger duty, and there is cross-party support in the Parliament for many of those recommendations. Powers over benefits are crucial, too. Christine Grahame was absolutely right when she said that we cannot tackle social housing unless we have influence over such matters. There is much to be done on the bill. We can welcome the general principles, but if we welcome the bill without subjecting it to criticism or scrutiny we will not be doing our jobs properly.  The Scottish Government has always supported proposals to strengthen and enhance this Parliament but we cannot support measures that diminish it or could damage Scotland’s economy. In its current form, the bill is a mixture of elements that strengthen Scotland and elements that weaken it. We need to eliminate the weaknesses and build on the strengths. In an excellent speech, Alasdair Allan talked about how, together, we can make the bill better. Jeremy Purvis should read the Government’s legislative consent memorandum to understand how we can do that.  Parliament faces three challenges. The first is a challenge to the SNP Government to work constructively to enable the bill to progress; that is what we are doing. The second is a challenge to the Parliament on whether it is big enough to improve the bill. The third is a challenge to the Labour Party on whether its dislike of the SNP is enough to let it lead Scotland into a Tory tax trap and let Iain Gray be a cheerleader in chief in Scotland for the Tories. Will the Parliament and all the parties in it rise to those challenges?

The school census published on 1 December 2010 shows that full-time equivalent teacher numbers declined by 796 between September 2009 and September 2010. The drop in teacher numbers reported in the 2010 census is less than last year and provides strong evidence that the teacher workforce is stabilising.

We actively encourage schools in Scotland to build links around the world through the British Council’s twinning programmes, which currently have a total of 853 Scottish schools involved in active partnerships. We support international links through Learning and Teaching Scotland and the Scottish centre for information on language teaching and research. We are investing significantly in technology such as the glow intranet system to make it easier for schools to develop links with one another and with schools around the world. We are also encouraging schools to be international in outlook through the curriculum for excellence and the Scottish education award for global citizenship.

In the past, Murdo Fraser has advocated more powers for the Parliament and full fiscal autonomy. Derek Brownlee talked about people going backwards. Has Murdo Fraser got the confidence to go back to his previous position and support full fiscal autonomy for the Parliament?

Will the committee of which the member is the convener give full scrutiny to alternative proposals to the Scotland Bill and the provisions that have been sought in all our discussions with the UK Government to secure a better deal? Is she prepared to help the Parliament and give it an opportunity to consider the other option?

Patrick Harvie makes an important point, but we are where we are. On the basis that the Parliament can help to shape where we go next, does he agree that it is important that civic Scotland has a voice as of now on where the bill and its scrutiny goes, and that all of us in the Parliament—and the bill committee in particular—should help to enable that to happen?

The member touches on an important point about the increase in rates of income tax—especially the basic rate, which is in the Scotland Bill—relative to the rate of increase of the Scottish block overall. As Tom McCabe said, over the past 10 years, there has been an increase in the Scottish block; however, even in that period, there would have been a reduction of £8 billion if the provisions of the Scotland Bill had been applied. Surely, the member recognises that that is the bit that needs to be scrutinised.

The First Minister has already said that we welcome the improvements in borrowing, but the borrowing powers will still be less than those of Northern Ireland, which has £3 billion available to borrow, and the flexibility for bonds will be less than for Birmingham City Council. Does the member think that the bill’s borrowing provisions could be improved?

David McLetchie’s analysis is that a perfect proposal for the tax relationship between the UK Government and the Scottish Government might not be achievable. Does he concede that we might be able to produce a better proposal than is in the Scotland Bill? Is he open to the Scottish Parliament proposing that?

Peter Peacock talks about accountability, but he does not talk about economic growth. Can he point to something in the Scotland Bill that would enable economic growth for Scotland? As a Highlands MSP, does he regret that some of the Calman proposals about the Crown commissioners, which would have had a major impact on his constituents, have been left out of the bill?

Does Iain Gray accept that even under the proposals in the Scotland Bill, if there was economic growth, the UK Parliament would reap 85 per cent of the tax receipts from that growth while this Parliament would receive only 15 per cent? That is some rebalancing.

The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council has the responsibility to work with universities on the detail of the balance between funded and unfunded places. I have asked it to give universities as early an indication as possible of the planning assumptions that they should make for next year's funding. Members of the funding council meet on 10 December, when they will discuss the implications of the draft budget announcement.

In the draft budget statement on 17 November 2010, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth announced plans to protect the education maintenance allowance scheme for the remainder of this academic year and the next academic year. That is consistent with the Government's commitment to support the least well-off students in Scotland and to open up opportunities for poorer families.

I thank Jamie Hepburn for bringing the debate to the Scottish Parliament. I also thank those members who have made contributions, which have been thoughtful, informed and at times passionate. The current conflict in Afghanistan has lasted for almost a decade and has had a major impact on families and communities throughout Scotland. As we have heard, 345 troops from the UK have lost their lives since the war started in October 2001. The war has also had a life-changing impact on hundreds of others, including the families and communities of our troops. I join other members in the chamber in paying tribute to all those soldiers, including those who have lost their lives. Each and every death is incredibly painful and underlines the remarkable dedication and sacrifice of our forces. All parts of Scotland, including Jamie Hepburn's constituency of Central Scotland, as his motion notes, are touched. There is enormous public support for the troops on the ground and I put on record once again the Scottish Government's admiration for the remarkable and courageous work that they are doing. They have our full support. However, as members have said in the debate, it is time for the UK Government to give greater clarity on the future of our forces in Afghanistan. President Obama has already stated that he intends to withdraw US troops from Afghanistan by July next year. The UK Government has indicated that troops will be removed by 2015, but the Scottish Government's view is that we should work towards withdrawal by the end of 2011. It is clear that a great deal of effort will need to go into reconstruction—Pauline McNeill mentioned nation building. Too many Afghans are seeing little in the way of reconstruction, and military spending—as Jamie Hepburn outlined—still far outstrips spending on development. There must be a focus on the long-term and sustainable development of Afghanistan. Scottish aid agencies are making a remarkable contribution to that effort and I put on record the Government's support for the aid agencies in Afghanistan. Many of the key players from the non-governmental organisation sector in Scotland are active in Afghanistan. The Halo Trust, for example, has been operating there for more than 20 years and is the largest implementing agency for the United Nations mine action programme for Afghanistan. The trust is dedicated to building local capacity and nowhere is that better exemplified than in Afghanistan, where its 3,500 Afghan staff are  managed by Afghans, with support from 10 expatriate staff. Mercy Corps has been in Afghanistan since 1986 and is currently assisting more than 2.5 million Afghans to rebuild their lives by running programmes throughout the country that focus on agricultural and economic development to help build stronger communities. Since 1998, Concern Worldwide has focused on strengthening governance at grass-roots level and helping communities to manage their own development. Several members touched on the issue of governance and how to empower people to help themselves. Islamic Relief, which began working in 2001, has successfully combined long-term development with food assistance, helping villages to have a practical incentive to remain at home and easing the problems of internally displaced persons. Oxfam has established education and government programmes, making better use of agricultural training, developing Afghan capacity and improving the rights of women. Tearfund has provided humanitarian support across the country. Christian Aid is also there, empowering poor and marginalised people to improve the conditions of their own lives, be it through employment or asserting their human rights, again with an interest in promoting Afghan women's rights. It is right that we discuss and debate international issues, but we should also recognise the number of organisations that have bases in Scotland that are supporting the national development of Afghanistan by supporting people and helping them to build their own futures. As we mark the work of international agencies, let us not forget those who have given their lives. Just a few weeks ago, we received the shocking and sad news of Linda Norgrove's tragic death during a rescue operation. Our thoughts are with the parents, family and friends of Linda Norgrove, who made such an incredible contribution during her life. Her contribution to improve the lives of the people of Afghanistan and elsewhere in the world has a legacy that we, as a nation, can be proud of. We should also not forget that we have a duty to look after our veterans from conflicts such as Afghanistan, and the Scottish Government continues to develop a policy to meet the needs of veterans and improve and deliver services to them. We have taken forward a range of work in the health, housing, education, employment and transport sectors, and that will continue. Much work is going on, details of which will be provided in our next report, to improve support to armed forces and veterans communities, and that is expected before Christmas.  A serious point in the debate is how we build democracy, how we intervene to build capacity and how we face up to the responsibilities of the UK's involvement in Afghanistan. A lot of wise words have been said. We are not the only people in the world who are discussing and debating the issues, but we have a right and an opportunity to voice our concerns and it is right that the Parliament is used to voice the concerns of many people about what is happening in Afghanistan, why we were there in the first place and, indeed, activities since. We must support our troops and our Government has put that position on the record, but that does not prevent us as parliamentarians from expressing our view on what should happen. The Scottish Government supports withdrawal by the end of 2011 but, importantly, we are also committed to doing what we can to support the efforts of those who are building long-term peace, stability and economic success.  Meeting closed at 18:32.

The United Kingdom Government published its Scotland Bill yesterday. The Scottish Government welcomes many aspects of the bill and the further devolution that it provides. However, it is no secret that the proposals in the bill do not meet the ambitions that the Scottish Government and many people in Scotland have for Scotland. The proposals for additional devolution are limited. For example, the bill would give the Scottish Parliament limited additional legislative competence in matters such as landfill tax, stamp duty and air guns. It would take away legislative competence in three other areas, including insolvency and the health professions. It does not even implement fully the recommendations of the Commission on Scottish Devolution. The key test for the Scotland Bill is whether it will help the Scottish economy to grow, protect jobs and ensure that our public services have the investment that they need. With that in mind, the legislative consent memorandum that we lodge today provides a first detailed analysis of the proposals in the bill. As all parties have recognised, proper scrutiny of the bill is essential. The Minister for Parliamentary Business has lodged a motion on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau to establish an ad-hoc committee with the remit: "To consider the Scotland Bill and report to the Parliament on any relevant Legislative Consent Memorandum". The Scottish Government will work constructively to assist the committee. The bill and accompanying documents leave many unanswered questions. Our aim is to support the Parliament in the thorough scrutiny of the proposals, identify improvements and ensure that the Parliament is able to take an informed decision on consent. At the heart of the bill are the financial provisions. Unfortunately, as drafted, they are at best a missed opportunity and, at worst, potentially damaging to Scotland's economy. The proposals on income tax have the potential to embed a long-term, deflationary bias in Scotland's budget. We  estimate that they would have cost Scotland £8 billion since 1999. Under the proposals, the Scottish budget would also remain at the mercy of UK changes to tax policy and we would not have adequate levers to mitigate volatility in our budgets. There are people who feel that the Treasury has long wanted to cut the Scottish budget and that the measures are effectively a trap amounting to budget cuts by the back door. The Scottish economy needs a Parliament with full financial responsibility and full economic, tax and benefit powers, but the bill fails to provide Scotland with any significant new levers to boost its economy. Responsibility for key taxes—including corporation tax, green taxes, fuel duty, North Sea revenues and excise duties—would remain outwith the Scottish Parliament's control, and around 80 per cent of Scottish revenues would continue to flow to the UK Government. There are big unanswered questions about the costs to the Scottish budget in reductions to the block grant and in implementation and running costs. The command paper that was published yesterday sets out the uncertainties before saying on page 35: "a definitive statement on the correct reduction to the block grant" is "inappropriate at this time." The UK Government's regulatory impact assessment says that accurate estimates of costs will not be available until implementation policies are determined, but gives indicative costs of £45 million for the one-off costs of setting up the systems in Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs, plus £4.2 million per year thereafter. It is clear that the UK Government expects the Scottish Parliament to pick up the costs. The Scottish Parliament is thus being asked to agree to the proposals with, at present, no clear explanation of how the permanent reduction to the block grant would be calculated and with only indicative estimates of the implementation costs. It is not entirely clear how long it will take to put the new financial measures in place. The command paper describes a phased approach. It says on page 25: "there will be a period from 2016 for which transitional arrangements will apply." I suggest that, in considering the bill, the Parliament will want to have a clearer indication of what the transitional arrangements will be, over what period they will apply and whether it will be possible to adjust the provisions in the light of experience and any unintended consequences.  The bill deals with non-financial issues, too. We are happy to support many of them and, in broad terms, we welcome their inclusion in the bill. However, the Scottish Parliament will want to look closely at those provisions, particularly where they do not fully implement the commission's recommendations or leave important matters reserved. For example, the Scottish ministers would be able to set speed limits for cars on motorways, but not for heavy goods vehicles. They would be able to set drink-driving limits, but the Parliament would not be able to legislate to introduce random breath testing. The bill devolves control over some air guns, but the UK Government will be able to exclude "specially dangerous" ones. Responsibility for the regulations that govern Scottish parliamentary elections will be split between Scottish and UK ministers, perpetuating the complexity that was criticised by the Gould report on the 2007 elections. There are other parts of the bill that we do not support. For example, the proposed additional reservations of matters that are currently devolved to the Scottish Parliament, the regulation of all health professionals and court procedures on insolvency. We believe that improved intergovernmental working, not the clawing back of control to Whitehall, is the correct way to ensure that there is proper integration of procedures across the UK. In those areas, and elsewhere, the Scottish Government has suggested improvements that could be made to the proposals to achieve the objectives of the bill more effectively or to provide greater benefit to the people of Scotland. I invite the committee to continue that consideration with us. Some recommendations of the commission have not been included at all—for example, on welfare, the marine environment, the aggregates levy, air passenger duty, the Health and Safety Executive, immigration, food, research councils and animal health. The Scottish Government welcomes some of the omissions, particularly the proposed reservation of food content and labelling and charities law. For others, we are unconvinced by the UK Government's case for not proceeding. For example, the UK Government has cited its planned review of air passenger duty and the current European Union litigation in relation to the aggregates levy. We do not consider those reasons to be substantive barriers to devolving those taxes now. As long ago as 2008, this Parliament passed a motion agreeing that Scotland should have responsibility for marine spatial planning, fisheries and marine nature conservation out to 200 nautical miles. The Scottish Government is therefore extremely disappointed that the bill contains no proposals to devolve legislative  responsibility for the marine environment beyond the 12-mile limit. The bill contains no provision to take forward the devolved role in welfare benefits that was proposed by the commission. The UK Government command paper states that the specific proposals have been "overtaken by events", but it promises a role for the Scottish Government in due course in aspects of the new benefits system. It is clear that this is a complicated area, which the Parliament will want to explore in detail. We regret that these and other recommendations are not addressed in the Scotland Bill, and invite the Parliament to consider whether that is justified. I am confident that the committee will undertake full scrutiny of the proposals. Given the importance of these issues to the people of Scotland, we urge the committee to conduct as full an inquiry as possible and to look to wider Scotland for evidence in that consideration. The Scottish Government will support that process fully for the purpose of strengthening and improving the bill. The Scottish Government invites the committee to begin its consideration of the Scotland Bill and accompanying paper and to report and make its recommendations to the Scottish Parliament. The Scotland Bill is an important matter for both this Parliament and the people of Scotland. Together, we can work to make this a better bill that is truly in Scotland's interests.

Pauline McNeill raises a number of points. I reassure her that by lodging the legislative consent memorandum and making a ministerial statement to Parliament the day after the Scotland Bill's publication, we have demonstrated that, as a Government, we will engage fully in Parliament's scrutiny of the bill. In response to the member's questions on finances, I point out that although the bill proposals would improve accountability with regard to certain aspects of the Scottish block budget, only 15 per cent of Scotland's revenue would be affected. After the bill's implementation, 85 per cent of the revenues raised in Scotland would still proceed directly to the UK Treasury. I most definitely welcome the progress that has been made on borrowing, which is one of a number of issues that we have raised consistently in the 14 meetings that we have had with the Treasury. I am sure that other questions will come back to that. The member asks us to publish the information that we relayed about the deflationary pressures and the impact that would have been felt had the Scotland Bill proposals been in place since 1999, whereby we would have lost out on £8 billion-worth of investment. This morning, I and a number of other ministers have spent a considerable amount of time being questioned by parliamentary committees as part of their scrutiny of the budget. I say most politely to the member that the information in question was published as part of the budget documentation on 17 November and has been available for scrutiny since then.

I think that somewhere in that question was a welcome for the Scottish Government's constructive attitude. David McLetchie raised a number of issues. He questioned the benefits of full financial responsibility, but those benefits have been and will continue to be set out by the Scottish Government. He mentioned bail-outs. It is not as if the UK Government has ever had to be bailed out by anyone—however, I distinctly remember hearing about the International Monetary Fund in 1976 or so, although that was in my childhood. Of course, George Osborne has also put on record his support for the Irish approach to economic growth in the past. The member raises an important point that comes to the nub of the issue, and which I hope that the committee will address. There is a difference between accountability and responsibility for economic growth. As presented, the bill will shift the balance towards providing greater accountability. The real challenge of where we can go with full financial responsibility and powers for the Parliament is in the economic growth test. Where would the benefits be? If the Scotland Bill restricts the Government's opportunities to collect taxes, or restricts it to collecting income tax alone, or if it restricts the higher rate of income tax and the benefit that we would get from it, that would not provide an incentive for economic growth. Over the past 10 years, the greatest element of growth in revenues for the UK Government has come not from income tax, but from the plethora of other taxes. The previous UK Labour Government decided to restrict the amount of revenue that it received from income tax and saw growth in revenues from other areas. That is the pressure that is inherent in the Scotland Bill, and I urge the  committee to give full scrutiny to those aspects of it.

We are delighted to speak for Scotland's interests and to support any measure that improves the lot of the Scottish people. That is why I said quite deliberately in my statement that we welcome a number of the aspects of the proposals in the Scotland Bill. We probably welcomed more of the commission's original recommendations than did the previous UK Government in its white paper. The member raises an important point about borrowing. I agree that it is very important, particularly because we are facing a 36 per cent reduction in our capital over the next few years. I recognise the importance of responsibility in borrowing, which is why I am concerned that the borrowing limits that are proposed by the UK Government's bill would provide for less borrowing for capital spend than the Scottish Government provides annually. The Government has already made £3 billion investment in capital on an annual  basis. The £2.2 billion that is to be provided under the bill's proposals is less than we provide in one year, but it is still welcome. On being able to pay for that investment, the powers and restrictions in the Scotland Bill would mean that the Scottish Government would be more restricted in borrowing than local authorities, which have far more provision for prudential borrowing and what they can pay for. On the question of amounts, in 2006, Birmingham City Council raised £260 million in bonds and other things that are not available to us; under the Scotland Bill, this Government would not be able to do that. I welcome the provisions for borrowing, although they can be improved, and I look forward to working with the member to ensure that we can do that.

The member reflects on a number of points that I raised in reply to Robert Brown's question. I will meet midway: I think that there are possibilities in the borrowing. We welcome the fact that there has been a shift in thinking that has allowed the borrowing provisions to be in the bill. More can be made of the borrowing powers, and we should scrutinise them carefully.

I certainly do not want to pre-empt the scope of the committee in establishing the evidence that it wants to take, and I do not want to usurp the role of the Parliament in deciding what support it gives to the committee or to pre-empt the support that the Scotland Office might give. However, we will consider the member's proposals once the committee has met and set out the terms of its inquiry and the areas that it wants to discuss.

I have not heard the secretary of state's remarks. On corporation tax, I would be disappointed that he is ruling out so quickly any proposal that might come from the deliberations of the committee once it is established. He should reflect on the terms in the Scotland Bill. There are some clauses that could be interpreted as enabling future transfer of powers, but we will need further scrutiny on that. Indeed, I should make it clear that although we have lodged a detailed legislative consent memorandum today, there will be opportunities for supplementary information when some of the terms of the provisions, which were published only yesterday, are looked at and clarified properly.

It is important that we encourage the committee to consider all aspects of fiscal  responsibility—or fiscal autonomy, to use Peter Peacock's phrase. If the committee chooses to examine all the aspects, I think that it will be good for the Parliament to conduct a thorough scrutiny and make a comparison of the opportunities and costs of the different systems that could be set out under the proposals in the Scotland Bill, for full financial responsibility and for other provisions, such as independence. I hope that there is an opportunity for the Parliament and the committee to consider all aspects: pros and cons, costs and opportunities.

That was unusually churlish from Mr Brownlee. He raises an important point about volatility. The prudential borrowing arrangements for local authorities allow some stability of planning for them. On the volatility of income tax, a central element of the Scotland Bill would allow borrowing of up to £500 million a year to address the volatility of forecasts from the Office for Budget Responsibility but would not allow for borrowing to counter volatility in income tax receipts in relation to global market changes. That is a central point. I hope that Mr Brownlee will join me in encouraging the parliamentary committee that will scrutinise the bill to examine the question of volatility thoroughly.

Nicol Stephen asks a number of questions. We have supported many of the non-financial aspects for some time. Indeed, we drafted legal provisions that could have been implemented by order in council and gave them to the previous UK Government some time ago. On the financial aspects, he talks about the tax proposals as being radical; however, the problem  with the tax proposals is that they are not radical enough. They might provide accountability but they do not provide responsibility in relation to achieving economic growth. If the test for the bill, at a time when we are coming out of a recession, is what it does to protect jobs, to improve economic growth and to protect the interests of the public services that we rely on, the bill as it stands will fail. We must improve the bill to ensure that Nicol Stephen and I can join in welcoming a provision that will really make a difference to the people of Scotland. Once the parliamentary committee has thoroughly scrutinised the bill and we can resolve some of the challenges that we have laid out in our memorandum, the Parliament will be in a better place to support the bill.

One of the questions that I frequently get asked—I have been asked it in the past few weeks—is how the Government has managed to provide for services such as the abolition of tuition fees, the cuts in prescription charges and the provision of more police officers within the powers that we already have. We have done that by effectively and competently providing for public services using the resources that we have. The member is correct to look at that analysis, but there are two sides to it. We must be responsible with the taxes and the levers that we have, but we must also deploy them effectively to improve the economy. That brings me back to my central point. There are different ways to produce and provide for sustainable economic growth—I know that the member has a particular perspective on that. If we are to pursue sustainable economic growth, we need all the levers of power; then, across a range of areas, not just in a limited, one-tax solution of income tax, we can truly serve the people of Scotland.

I thank John Wilson for bringing his motion for debate. I also thank Dennis Canavan for his initial campaign; he continues to provide advice to the Scottish Government. This debate gives me an opportunity to restate the Government's support for and recognition of the significance of St Andrew's day to Scotland and the wider world. St Andrew's day gives the people of Scotland a magnificent opportunity to celebrate our patron saint. I have some sympathy with John Wilson's point that few public bodies and local authorities have taken on the spirit of the act, which received royal assent in January 2007. However, I can report that of the 39 public bodies that come within the public sector pay policy, 30 are recognising St Andrew's day. Members might recall that the act was not in any way prescriptive; indeed, it was framed so as to allow a flexible approach on how it could be interpreted by public bodies and private firms alike. If bodies wish to observe St Andrew's day as a public holiday, the facility to substitute another holiday for 30 November is contained in the act.  For its part, the Scottish Government has continued to encourage all parts of Scotland to recognise St Andrew's day. Indeed, £434,000—the same level as in previous years—was made available to local authorities for St Andrew's day celebrations. Through that funding, the Government is supporting a programme of high-quality events throughout Scotland, which start on Friday 26 November and run through to Tuesday 30 November, to mark St Andrew's day. Of course, St Andrew's day launches our Scottish winter festival, which runs all the way through to Burns night. I understand that Renfrewshire, Dumbarton and Stirling have begun their celebrations this evening. For 2010, the Scottish Government is holding a competition, which is open to all publicly funded schools and pre-schools, to design a St Andrew's day poster with the theme of Scotland's food and drink, to tie in with our year of celebration of food and drink. The winning entries in three categories will be displayed here in the Parliament during our family weekend, which is this weekend, and £200 will be awarded to the winning school or pre-school.

I assure the member that that has been done on a number of occasions. Her point about the voluntary nature of all this is well made, because those efforts have been made in the past. Perhaps it is about making sure that people see the opportunities. Celebrations also provide opportunities for people to spend money, which might address the point that Ted Brocklebank made. Festivals mean that people come out and buy from local shops and small businesses. St Andrew's day is an opportunity. The burgeoning Advent fairs and markets that are taking place this weekend show that there is a commercial aspect, which we should perhaps encourage more.

That is where the balance has to be struck. I draw to members' attention the fact that Scotland's most famous heritage attractions will be free—and not just for one day on the Tuesday, which is St Andrew's day; all 48 of  Historic Scotland's winter ticketed heritage sites and monuments will be open free from Saturday 27 November to Tuesday 30 November. In order for those sites to be open, staff will have to work those days, but that gives them the opportunity, with their employers, to think about the day that they will take off in lieu of working on St Andrew's day. A bit of common sense and flexibility would allow us to make progress. The other events that are taking place include Edinburgh's four-day family festival, the undercover at St Andrews festival in Fife, the saltire celebrations in East Lothian and the St Andrew's day Border banquet and taste awards. I will be at the East Lothian saltire celebrations and Edinburgh's event in St Andrew Square gardens. There will also be a St Andrew's day debating championship in the Parliament, in which we will support the cross out child poverty in Scotland campaign. The final motion at that will be on crossing out child poverty. Elaine Smith made an important point about the STUC and its annual anti-racism march. Our national identity is not only about our history; it is also about the values that we hold as a country. The values of fairness and justice have been well reflected by the STUC in its demonstrations and in the cross out child poverty campaign. I assure Linda Fabiani that that campaign will be informed about, and involved in, the development of Scotland's tackling child poverty strategy, which will be Scotland's first child poverty strategy. John Wilson mentioned that there are international celebrations. There are celebrations from Australia to Zambia. Eighteen countries around the world hold lots of ceilidhs, concerts and dinners to celebrate St Andrew's day. John Wilson was correct to draw a comparison with other countries in talking about the number of public holidays that Scotland recognises. According to the figures that I have been given, Scotland has nine public holidays; Belgium, France, Germany and Ireland have 10; Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Italy and Luxembourg have 12; and Austria and Malta have 14. That is not to say that we should aspire to mirror what the Austrians or Maltese do. However, Scotland is a nation of hard-working, passionate and proud individuals who, by and large, care deeply about their identity and being Scottish. Acknowledging and honouring our patron saint is just one way of celebrating our nationality. As I mentioned, there are ways of spending money in celebrating that which help the economy. It is important that we think about that, especially in these times. I am confident that recognition of the holiday will grow in the years ahead, and I encourage all members to join in their local celebrations of our national saint's day. I hope that, on Tuesday, all  members will think about the points that have been made in the debate, and that we will collectively take forward our ambition to celebrate our national day appropriately in the years to come.  Meeting closed at 17:32.

Schools census data published since 2007 indicate that the proportion of Orkney's primary 1 to primary 3 pupils in classes of 18 or fewer in successive years was as follows: in 2007, the proportion was 41.4 per cent, which is good; in 2008 it was 43 per cent, which is better; and, in 2009, it was 44.8, which is very much better. The census data for 2010 are due to be published next week, on 1 December. Orkney is the second highest performing council in this respect, and we believe that, as with other councils that are following a class size reduction policy, its pupils will benefit from enhanced interaction with their teachers.

The planned resources and funding allocated to education and lifelong learning for 2011-12 come to £2,583.6 million. That figure can be found in table 9.01 on page 135 of "Scotland's Spending Plans and Draft Budget 2011-12".

We are  aware of a good number of areas where parents have expressed a demand for Gaelic-medium education and we would like to see it established in those areas. Of course, it is up to each local authority to make provision for such education. We support those local authorities to the limit of our abilities throughout Scotland.

A programme of 15 high-quality events is taking place across Scotland from Friday 26 to Tuesday 30 November to mark St Andrew's day, our national day. In addition, all 48 of Historic Scotland's winter ticketed attractions are open for free for four days around St Andrews day, including the weekend before, the privilege holiday and St Andrew's day itself. St Andrew's day offers us an unrivalled opportunity to celebrate the best of Scotland's rich traditional and contemporary culture at home and abroad. Where possible, Scottish ministers will engage in activity across the country to celebrate our national day. I will be at East Lothian's saltire celebrations and Edinburgh's event in St Andrew's Square gardens.

I am certainly aware of the event, and I extend my best wishes for the launch of the cross out child poverty campaign in East Kilbride on Sunday. I have met the Rev Neil Galbraith from Glasgow the Caring City. He will be among the judges for the public final of the St Andrew's day debating championships on 29 November here in the Parliament, when the motion will be: "This house believes that the private sector should do more to solve child poverty". The cross out poverty campaign has also been part of the engage for education website, and information about the campaign has been given to directors of education. The Rev Neil Galbraith also met officials on 18 November to discuss his involvement in the Scottish Government's discussion paper on Scotland's child poverty strategy.

I would be delighted to attend any of the events for the 600th anniversary. It is a very important event to mark not just for St Andrews and the university but because of the university's contribution to wider thinking and academic achievement. I point out that Louise Richardson, although very impressive, is not the first female principal of a Scottish university, but I am delighted that she is taking the message about the launch of the 600th anniversary campaign to Brussels, ensuring that we can engage with our European friends to help to celebrate this important anniversary.

The Scottish Government has not had any discussions with local authorities regarding the termination of the contracts. It was announced in 2007 that the programme would be phased out. The programme was managed by the Scottish Arts Council, as was, and that body was involved in the contractual discussions between the cultural co-ordinators and the local authorities.

I am happy for the member to write to me outlining his concerns in detail. I point out that, in the area that he represents, Midlothian Council and West Lothian Council continue to pay for cultural co-ordinator posts using local authority funding. The phasing-out announcement back in 2007-08 identified that it was open to local authorities to do that. The City of Edinburgh Council decided not to take the programme forward. However, it has received grants from Creative Scotland's creative learning network fund and has set up an ambassador network. Also, in the past few weeks, the City of Edinburgh Council has appointed a manager for arts and learning, who is located in the education department. The individual in that post is an ex-cultural co-ordinator from Aberdeen.

We have taken a number of important steps to support the Scots language. Those include an audit of Scots language provision, a national conference on the Scots language, the funding of two Scots bodies, a survey of attitudes to Scots, the introduction of a census question on Scots and the establishment of a ministerial Scots language working group. The report from that group will be published soon and we will then consider how we can make further progress in responding to the recommendations of the group.

The member raises an extremely important point. We want accuracy in the census, but that relies on people being aware of what is being asked and what is appropriate in reply. That is why we have established the short-life working group to focus on raising awareness of the Scots language question in the census. The aim is to ensure that we inform people of the choices so that we receive accurate responses to the question and that people have the confidence to respond. We are working with representatives from the General Register Office for Scotland and the Scots language centre on that.

I look forward to the group publishing its report. I will give serious consideration to any recommendations in the report, and I suspect that it will include recommendations on the preparation of materials as well as on teaching and learning. I was extremely impressed by the Falkirk teachers I met who have integrated Scots into their learning. They have found that learning in their own dialect and language has a great impact on children, who can then respond properly in the classroom with confidence and an improved performance. The Scots language is not just a celebration of our culture; as those teachers from Falkirk relayed to me, it has an important role to play in improving the educational experience of many of our young Scots.

Public art is a key part of our streetscapes and gives a sense of place and visual delight to communities across Scotland. The Scottish Government is doing much to promote public art through the work of Creative Scotland, Historic Scotland and other cultural bodies in conjunction with local authorities. For example, the National Galleries of Scotland this year commissioned the celebrated sculptor Antony Gormley to display six life-size figures along the Water of Leith. The project has helped passers-by to appreciate and enjoy the public spaces that they inhabit.

I welcome the member's interest and passion in advocating recognition of the diverse and unique pieces of town art that exist in Glenrothes. I would be delighted to come and see the hippos and so on. I suspect that my six-year-old son might enjoy the visit as well. On a more serious point, recognising and promoting public art is part of Historic Scotland's responsibilities, too. In looking at our civic collections, we should think not just about our buildings but about our art. I am delighted that there has been a constructive dialogue with Historic Scotland. I know that Glenrothes has a special place in Tricia Marwick's heart and I would be delighted to come and visit.

We have supported and are helping to fund the now fully funded phase 1 of the redevelopment of the Edinburgh Sculpture Workshop through our partner, Creative Scotland, with lottery funding and the recent grant in aid. I understand that the work on that is due to start in early 2011. It is an ambitious project, which will create a centre of excellence for visual arts in Scotland, with local, national and international impact. I reassure the member that that certainly takes sculpture, as part of our contribution to Scotland's cultural experience, from being a Cinderella, as he perceives it, to being not just local but national and international in its reach.

I received the report from the museums think tank last week and have now read it and am considering its findings and  recommendations. I will also have a number of meetings with museums organisations this week, which will help to inform my response to the report that is due in the near future. As I advised the member in my answer to his written question on 18 November, the remit of the think tank is broader than just matters of funding.

I thank the member for his support for the collaboration that has already taken place and for recognising the importance of the Titian exhibition in the Kelvingrove in July as part of the Scotland tour. I draw to his attention the fact that the very successful Glasgow boys exhibition, which is now taking London by storm, also featured 30 paintings that were loaned from the National Galleries of Scotland. That indicates the movement by both Glasgow and the national collections in working together for the benefit of the people of Glasgow and Scotland. That is the type of collaboration, exchange and co-ordinated exhibition that I want to encourage in the future.

I thank Chris Harvie for his question and for providing an opportunity for the Parliament to mark the 175th anniversary of the birth of Andrew Carnegie. It will be up to the  museum itself to establish what exhibitions it has, but I cannot believe that there would be an exhibition in Dunfermline that did not celebrate the historic link with Andrew Carnegie. I also put on record my thanks to Fife Council and commend it for committing £6.8 million to this significant project, which will further enhance Dunfermline's tourist attractions.

The First Minister's visit to China in July and the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning's visit to China in October ensured that the Scottish Government continued to make significant progress in deepening our bilateral relationship with China across a range of areas and in support of the objectives that are set out in the Government's China plan. The First Minister led a high-level trade mission to China from 4 to 11 July 2010 to pursue Sino-Scottish business opportunities in key sectors, including the renewable energy, tourism, education and textile sectors. Following the First Minister's meetings with the vice-minister of administration of quality supervision, inspection and quarantine during his 2009 and 2010 visits, the geographical indicator status of Scotch whisky has been agreed. The United Kingdom Government announced that on 8 November.

I congratulate the Scotch Whisky Association, which has campaigned for three years for a GI of origin in China; indeed, it made its first application in 2007. There have been discussions between the SWA and the Chinese Government for three years, and I am pleased that the Scottish Government has played its part. The important issue to consider for the industry is that there were £44 million of Scotch whisky exports to China in 2009. We should bear in mind the global scale of whisky exports, and that Scotch  whisky contributes £3.9 billion in gross value added to the Scottish economy. We should also bear in mind that China is now the second biggest market. There is huge potential there, and the protection to prevent the production of counterfeits and stamp out claims of Scottish provenance where none exists will greatly enhance the opportunities in that market.

Alongside local authorities, Creative Scotland promotes cultural activity across Scotland to ensure a vibrant and thriving cultural scene throughout the country. I was delighted to announce the continuation of funding for the youth music initiative during my visit to the Scottish youth brass band championships in Perth on Sunday. The further investment of £10 million ensures that that successful programme will continue for another year, and it will provide young people throughout the country, including in the Linlithgow constituency, with the opportunity to get involved in music projects and activities. The evening was a fantastic showcase of entertainment, and West Lothian was well represented by the West Lothian schools brass band, which came runner-up in the premier section.

Indeed I will but, at the end of the day, it will be up to the companies to make their programming decisions themselves. Bathgate Regal community theatre now looks spectacular; it is changed days from its recent position. It should be celebrated. It is a great space, and it provides great opportunities to showcase some of the best of Scotland's talents. My answer to the question is similar to my answer to a question that Ted Brocklebank asked about the Byre theatre in St Andrews. We must be conscious of ensuring that all parts of Scotland can enjoy some of the best of our cultural productions. I know that, in celebrating Scotland's  sense of place, Creative Scotland is keen to ensure that there is a regional impact from investment in our cultural bodies. Bathgate certainly deserves to see the best.

I met the UK Minister for Tourism and Heritage on 3 November 2010 in Edinburgh, as did my colleague the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism.

I agree with the member's statements. Richard Lochhead and I have written to the UK Government on the issue. I can share with the Parliament comments that have been received from Caroline Spelman on the UK Government's position. She said: "May I reassure you that while the Government will always continue to listen to arguments for and against change, there are no plans to review the current arrangements for British Summer Time at this time." I say to the member politely, as I have said to other Conservative members, that the reason why we have the difficulty and are having to address the issue is that one of his Conservative colleagues, a certain Rebecca Harris MP, has introduced a private member's bill called the Daylight Saving Bill. It is that Conservative member who is causing the difficulties. I politely ask John Scott to sort out policy on the issue within the Conservative party. However, we support the points that he makes in his argument.

I thank the member for bringing the issue to our attention. I have great admiration for the centre and believe that it houses an important collection. John Buchan had a distinguished career as a writer and I am sure that many people want to visit that part of the world to see the collection. I urge the member to relay to the centre that we appreciate that it has concerns over the lease. The member is right to identify the Heritage Lottery Fund as a possible avenue for application. I understand that the Heritage Lottery Fund would be more than happy to discuss a potential funding application with the centre.

I am more than happy to do so, but I should not be a postbag for comments on the deficiencies of the UK Government on some issues. The member will no doubt be able to make representations to his UK Liberal Democrat colleagues who are now in government. The opportunities for Caithness are huge. I hope that Jamie Stone will join me in celebrating the Royal National Mod's achievements in Caithness, where the town of Thurso almost doubled its population as a result of the number of visitors who were there for the Mod. I urge him to encourage his Liberal Democrat councillors to celebrate the contribution that the Mod made, not only to Gaelic, but to tourism in Caithness.

I am delighted to have this opportunity to thank the teaching profession and all who work in or are part of school communities for what I have to call their unprecedented efforts in successfully continuing the roll-out of curriculum for excellence across our primary, special and secondary schools, in our nurseries and pre-schools and, we should not forget, in our colleges and even our universities. In all those areas of educational endeavour, young people are learning what it is to become successful learners, confident individuals, responsible citizens and effective contributors to society, which is a major step forward in Scottish education. More than thanking the people involved, I want to take the opportunity—and the motion makes this explicit—to confirm the whole Scottish Parliament's on-going support for and commitment to curriculum for excellence, which I hope we all agree provides the core principles for achieving the best possible education for our children and young people. There is no room for complacency. We are all aware of the difficult financial circumstances that we will face over the next few years. In those circumstances, more than any other, Scotland's education system needs stability, determination and focus. It requires unrelenting concentration on fulfilling the purpose of education in Scotland, to enable every single one of our children to achieve the highest possible educational standards and to give them the best possible preparation for successful life and work in the 21st century. In Scotland we have long understood the need for stability. In 2003, the Scottish Parliament's Education, Culture and Sport Committee, of which  I was pleased to be a member, published its report on the purposes of education, in which it highlighted stability in education as an issue in need of attention. The report stated: "There is a need to reconcile the often-expressed desire for a period of stability within the Scottish education system with the even more widespread perception of a need for change. Perhaps a clear and well thought-out sense of direction which is consistently pursued would provide the necessary level of stability?" I pay tribute to the previous Administration for taking up the opportunity to achieve that long-standing agreement on the direction that we wanted our education system to take. That agreement was and is the curriculum for excellence. That was and is the big prize. It is what teachers wanted; it is what headteachers wanted; it is what parents wanted; and it is what the Scottish Parliament wanted on behalf of Scottish society. It has its origins not just in the committee's inquiry but in the national debate on education in 2002, which also achieved a remarkable degree of consensus on the future direction of Scottish education. The aim was to improve Scottish education for each and every young person by undertaking radical reform and sticking with it over a period of time. Given the turbulent times that we are going into, the political consensus needs to be durable and strong. Our teaching professionals and our children and young people—our whole learning communities—expect and demand nothing less. Times are going to be tough. We will argue about the details of how we deal with that, but we need to retain an optimism and a confidence in our education system. That means an optimism and a confidence in the principles of curriculum for excellence and an optimism and a confidence that our education and learning professionals are up to the challenge and are being supported in it. When I became education secretary in December last year, there were difficulties. There was doubt that schools were ready and predictions—mostly from the Opposition benches—of catastrophe. I am glad to say that there has been a marked change since then. Considerable support has been put in place and, since August, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education and its partners have done valuable work to provide direct, hands-on support in schools across the country. [ Interruption .] Does Mr McNulty want to intervene?

I congratulate Bill Wilson on securing the debate and thank every member for contributing to it in an interesting fashion. I found out only one startling thing this evening. I already knew that Jackson Carlaw admired Margaret Thatcher; I did not know that he had a full-scale, working Dalek. Strangely, those two seem to go together rather well. This annual science in the Parliament event is a welcome opportunity for the science community to come together with parliamentarians and policy makers to consider the role of science in our economy. I am grateful to the Royal Society of Chemistry for its work in orchestrating the event so effectively, and I am pleased that many people who were at the event—and, I presume, are going back for a drink later on—are present this evening. I am sorry that no minister could be present this afternoon, but there was pressing parliamentary business. It was nothing quite so pressing as the prospect of setting other MSPs on fire, but I was not told that that was one of the options available to me. Nonetheless, I am glad that people are here.  I will address briefly some of the remarks that other members made before I make one or two points myself. Nigel Don did not demonstrate good scientific method in his research. He looked only at the post-school careers the individual members have followed; he did not delve into the details of their qualifications. In my first year at university, I took a course in sciences and found it absolutely fascinating. It built on the work that I had done at school in physics and biology. Indeed, I found it so fascinating that I was tempted for a while to become a meteorologist, which might have changed my career trajectory completely. I find myself in the position of holding the science portfolio in the Scottish Government. I wanted to reply to this debate because that portfolio is an important part of the work that I do and I am keen to support, encourage and assist science in Scotland, even in times of difficulty. I will illustrate in a minute or two some of the things that we are doing. The points that Elaine Murray, Mike Pringle and Alison McInnes made about the gender difficulties are well taken. The chief scientific adviser, Professor Anne Glover, raises the matter with me regularly. Discussion took place with Elaine Murray during the summer, and I am keen that other members be involved in that, because there is a genuine recruitment and retention issue to address. I think that some of the answers lie in curriculum for excellence and the work that we are doing in schools. Drawing together subjects in a much more interrelated approach to education will assist, as will the much more exciting and interesting courses to which that will lead. I am hopeful that that will make a difference. I say to Patrick Harvie that I can and will distinguish between belief and scientific fact; that is absolutely what I should do. However, I will not be a censor or forbid people from holding opinions or beliefs. I recognise where the lines lie, but I felt that Patrick Harvie moved rather far towards condemning people for their beliefs. I am clear that belief is not to be confused with scientific fact—

I am pleased that we have had the opportunity to debate the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill today and thank the members who have spoken in a thoughtful and constructive debate. There have been some very good, informed and knowledgeable speeches. I highlight Ian McKee's thoughtful speech and reassure him that under the Scottish heritage environment policy the default position for listing is that the building remains in active use. I think that that is an important element in setting out some of the wider context to this issue. Members have shown a lot of passion about the contribution that heritage can make to Scotland and its value as a key driver of tourism. The perspectives that we have heard from Renfrewshire, Orkney, Cramond and the Glasgow west end are important in putting in context our reasons for introducing a bill that will help to shore up and support the existing legislation. A number of interesting issues have been raised in today's debate, not least of which is Bill Wilson's inventive suggestion that those who damage buildings should be punished according to the century in which the building on which the offence is perpetrated was built. Indeed, Historic Scotland might be able raise some revenue by charging people to see those punishments being exacted. [ Laughter .] I am not quite sure who my champion would be, but Ted Brocklebank might well step  forward if required. I will continue to listen to any constructive arguments on this matter, but I stress again that two of the bill's underlying aims are to avoid placing any new burdens or duties on the public sector, private sector or individuals and to ensure that, in the current economic climate, implementation costs are kept low. On our proposal to extend the range of historic environment assets that can be scheduled, the committee expressed an expectation that the Scottish Government will act rigorously and have regard to strict criteria in considering possible sites for designation. I can confirm in response that existing legislation sets out that ministers may schedule only sites of "national importance" and the criteria used to determine that are set out in the Scottish historic environment policy. During its consideration of the bill, the Education Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee received representations against the proposal that any person should be able to apply for a certificate of immunity from listing and I acknowledged those concerns at my appearance before it on 29 September. I thank the committee for considering the arguments for and against limiting the scope of those who may apply for a certificate and note that it is not persuaded that the proposal for applications for a certificate against listing should be restricted to owners and occupiers. Margaret Smith and Claire Baker explained the issues very clearly indeed. The committee recommended that the Scottish Government provide further information on the certificate of immunity application process to give greater assurance to stakeholders. Pauline McNeill also made a specific request in that respect, and I can confirm that I am committed to issuing further information to the committee on the point that she has raised. I will write to the committee about its recommendation that the Scottish Government give further consideration to the availability of expertise to interpret information on the historic environment. I think that that should address the first of the two issues that Ken Macintosh raised. Finally, I confirm that the Scottish ministers agree with the committee that issues related to the inclusion of ecclesiastical buildings in the listed building consent process should not be covered in this bill. Bill Wilson asked about the £50,000 limit for fines. The current limit is £10,000; the £50,000 limit is in line with current environmental fines and is the maximum amount for a summary conviction. Fines for convictions on indictment are unlimited, and the gravity of the offence will be a factor in deciding the procedure. Ted Brocklebank made a number of points about battlefields. He said that the bill offers no test to determine whether a battlefield should be  included in the statutory inventory. The test will be whether a site is of national importance, as defined by the criteria that I have outlined. He also raised concerns about agricultural works. I will explain to him in writing why a class order and exemption will be allowed for lawful disturbance of agricultural land by ploughing for six or 10 years. Ken Macintosh was right to explore the issues that BEFS raised. I appreciate the advice that BEFS has given us. The policy aim of what it proposes is important; at issue is how we get that effect. The member referred to the duty of care that Government departments already have, but that relates only to estates, buildings and assets. The general duty to protect the historic environment that BEFS proposes relates to all public bodies when they are carrying out their functions. Regardless of whether the distinction is semantic, as has been suggested, or legal, the issue is worth exploring, so that we can address some of the concerns that have been raised. Ken Macintosh suggested that the duty might be similar to the duty that the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010 imposes. It is not, as that duty is narrowly focused on clearly defined issues relating to the Scottish marine area and, unlike the duty proposed by BEFS, is limited to the functions for which the act provides. The duty that BEFS proposes is also not similar to the duty to ensure biodiversity under the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004. However, it is important that the member has drawn out those issues, which I am happy to explore. I cannot cover all the points that members have made. Iain Smith referred to the listing of the school buildings on the Kilrymont Road. Ted Brocklebank has raised that point with officials. I reassure them both that Historic Scotland has no recent case history on the issue, but it will contact the site owners and the local authority to explore whether some of the issues of concern can be resolved. Pauline McNeill expressed concern about why conservation is not part of the debate. Conservation is controlled by planning and development law, but the member is right to say that we must be consistent in how we address both issues. In the bill, we are bringing some symmetry to the application of historical environment legislation and planning legislation. The member makes an important point. I hope that I have addressed some of the key issues that members have raised. As many members have said, it is important that we recognise that the Government—Historic Scotland is a Government agency—is not the only body that is responsible for and has interests in the historic environment—[ Interruption .]

Margaret Smith and others referred to the number of volunteers who look after and support local scheduled monuments and other properties. The private owners who are responsible for many of our buildings must be commended for the work that they do. I thank all of those who have contributed to this thoughtful and thorough debate on the general principles of the bill. People may not have thought that the bill would generate one of the most interesting debates in the Parliament, but the contributions of Alasdair Allan, Ian McKee and others have shown otherwise. Liam McArthur referred to the Westray wife and the tourism boom that is taking place in Orkney. It is important to recognise that the historic environment is not dry or dull—it evokes a great deal of passion from members, contributes to the economy and provides skills. Ian McKee referred to the provision of double glazing in Edinburgh and the new skills that are needed to ensure that existing buildings can tackle climate change issues. We should celebrate our rich historic environment. The bill will support many of our other objectives, especially in relation to climate change, and provide regulatory authorities with a much-improved toolkit to help them manage and protect Scotland's historic environment, for the enjoyment and benefit of current and future generations. I ask members to support the motion and to approve the general principles of the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.

That is an important point. I reassure the member that Historic Scotland is in discussions with the National Trust, not least about an exchange of skills. The co-operation that he highlighted is already happening.

The point is crucial. I re-emphasise that what the BEFS proposes would be an additional duty. If Ken Macintosh says that it is not a duty and that it is covered elsewhere, will he explain where it is covered? He has referred to local authorities, but the duty proposed by the BEFS would apply to public bodies. There is a large number of public bodies, including the health service, the Ministry of Defence—you name it. The point is important. I have established a working group to ensure that the result of what we are trying to achieve can be promoted, but I have concerns about what is put in law.

Ken Macintosh is right about a duty of care for Government departments, but widening the scope to public bodies is an issue. The technical proposal is for a duty to enhance the historic environment, which is different.

The member raises an important issue. The defence of ignorance relates to areas that are scheduled monuments. If someone discovers something in an area that is not a scheduled monument, they cannot be accused of detracting from a scheduled monument. Does the member recognise that I addressed some of the issues relating to ploughing, especially on land that has been used in relation to the class consent? I am pleased that the committee examined those important issues thoroughly.

Does the member acknowledge that George Reid made it clear in his report that he did not see an immediate need for comprehensive historic environment legislation but that, as part of its development, the National Trust for Scotland would need to look at its governance, and that might require legislation?

There is nothing in the bill that would stop that happening in the future. The decision to list should be based on the merits of each case, not on the stage at which the application is made. The parents in the situation that Pauline McNeill describes would have been able to apply for a certificate of immunity, but they would have run the risk that the listing might not have been granted. The Law Society has raised the concern that the new provision could somehow thwart development, but that may not be the case, as the decision to list would still be based on the merits and demerits of the case itself, and not necessarily on the certificate of immunity.

I begin by thanking Karen Whitefield and the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee for their careful and informed scrutiny of the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill and for preparing the stage 1 report on the bill. I also thank all the individuals and organisations who commented on the draft bill, which was subject to public consultation in 2009, and those who contributed to the wider stakeholder engagement process that has played a key role in helping to develop and refine the bill's provisions. Before I move on to discuss the bill and the key issues that are raised in the committee's report, I would like to say a few words about the importance of Scotland's historic environment. The role that the historic environment plays in providing the people of Scotland with a sense of place has been brought home to me in rather stark fashion in recent weeks with the damage, through fire, of the Star and Garter hotel in my home town of Linlithgow. The hotel, which is a B-listed Georgian building, has adorned the east end of the town since the middle of the 18th century and has been an iconic building in Linlithgow's townscape. The reaction to the fire has demonstrated the prominent role that that listed building has played in helping to define the physical character of Linlithgow High Street, and the obvious connection that it has with the sense of place that is felt by the people who live there. The importance of the historic environment is not limited to a sense of place. It also makes a significant contribution to the economy, for example through tourism and the support of indigenous craft skills. It is intrinsic to our strong sense of cultural identity, it provides the people of Scotland with a rich environment in which to live and work, and it is inspiring and has a significant role to play in developing a sustainable economic future for Scotland. In introducing the bill, the Scottish Government's aims have been threefold: to improve the management and protection of our unique historic environment by addressing the specific gaps and weaknesses in the current legislative framework that were identified during a year-long stakeholder  engagement process in 2007; to avoid placing significant burdens or duties on central or local government, owners of assets, business or members of the public; and, in a challenging economic climate, to keep the implementation cost low. One of the bill's underlying objectives is to harmonise aspects of historic environment legislation with the planning regime when it is practicable to do so, which has been particularly welcomed by stakeholders. However, the bill should also be seen to complement the work that is already being done by Historic Scotland in partnership with local authorities to streamline and simplify our system of heritage protection. Examples of that are the establishment of joint-working agreements between local government and Historic Scotland, and the managed removal of a duty on local authorities to notify the Scottish ministers of certain casework. The bill will contribute to the Scottish Government's purpose by enhancing the ability of the Scottish ministers and planning authorities to manage in a sustainable way Scotland's unique historic environment. The bill will support the Scottish Government's greener strategic objective, and will contribute directly to the meeting of national outcome 12 by providing a much-improved legislative toolkit to help to protect and enhance our built environment for future generations. The committee considered the evidence that was submitted to it very carefully and produced a thorough and thoughtful report. I will touch on some of the key issues that are discussed in that report. The bill will enhance the ability of the Government to work with developers and owners by enabling the Scottish ministers to set out in a grant award letter the terms of recovery in the event of a disposal or a breach of a condition of grant. I am pleased to note that the committee concluded that that proposal is sensible and will provide a higher level of certainty to grant recipients. The proposal in the bill to modify the current defence of ignorance in relation to unauthorised works affecting scheduled monuments will modernise an archaic piece of law and bring the framing of such offences closer to that of other environmental offences. The committee stressed the importance of the availability of, and access to, information on scheduled monuments for the owners of such sites, and it has asked for an example of the information that we propose to send to all owners, if the bill is enacted. I confirm that a draft  information pack will be with the committee in advance of its stage 2 consideration. The bill will introduce a system of enforcement notices for scheduled monuments that will harmonise the arrangements for scheduled monuments with those for listed buildings. The bill also includes provisions that will provide for a system of stop notices and temporary stop notices for listed buildings and scheduled monuments that will strengthen protection for designated historic assets and bring it into line with the planning system. I am pleased to note the broad support for those provisions. The bill will create a duty for the Scottish ministers to compile and maintain two new statutory inventories: an inventory of gardens and designed landscapes, and an inventory of battlefields. The inventories will enable nationally important sites to be identified and recorded on a statutory basis, and they will allow planning authorities to pick up on changes to the inventories immediately. It is important that those provisions will impose no new additional duties or burdens on owners. The bill will extend the range of historic environment assets that can be scheduled under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979. That provision will allow the Scottish ministers to designate and protect a small number of nationally important sites that are currently afforded no protection, such as, for example, scatters of flint tools that mark sites of early human occupation. Such sites are important but rare; the total number of sites that are likely to be scheduled is around 10. The bill will also introduce a new power that will enable the Scottish ministers to offer any person a certificate that will guarantee that a building will not be listed during the five years from the date of the certificate. The main policy aim of that is to provide certainty for owners and developers who are considering works. It will allow projects to be started with confidence, because crucial decisions about listing have been made at an early stage in the process. The policy is not, as a matter of principle, to exempt buildings from listing, because the listing of a building would be a perfectly proper outcome of the process of considering a building for a certificate of immunity. That should address some of the concerns that have been raised by the Law Society for Scotland. I am pleased to note that the committee supports that proposal. I am also pleased to note that the committee recognises that our proposals to extend to successor owners the liability for any expenses for urgent works that are carried out by the regulatory authorities will address the situation in which an owner transfers ownership in order to avoid payment.  I want to address some of the points that were made in written evidence from the Built Environment Forum Scotland, which called for the bill to do two things. First, it wants to bill to give all public bodies a responsibility to protect, enhance and have special regard to Scotland's historic environment in exercising their duties. Secondly, it wants the bill to ensure that local authorities have access, and give special regard, to appropriate information and expert advice on the local historic environment. The Scottish Government's view is that the bill, which is cost neutral, is not the vehicle for such provisions, because both proposals could have significant cost implications. The first duty that is sought by the BEFS would apply to all public bodies, no matter how remote their connection to the historic environment. It would impose a proactive duty to protect and enhance the historic environment, which goes much further than simply having to have regard to, or—to use BEFS's words—"to take cognisance of" it. Such a duty would require additional resources to ensure compliance. Indeed, the duty would be so open-ended that it is difficult to see a point at which a public body could safely stop spending money without fear of non-compliance. The second proposal is simply not developed enough to be costed accurately. Any legislative duty would give local authorities no alternative but to spend the money that is necessary to bring the current information and expertise up to the standard that would be required by such a duty. However, I acknowledge that information and expertise are important and, to that end, a working group has been set up to examine the issues that are involved and to identify a range of options for improving on the current situation that will take realistic account of the current economic climate.

That is not how we interpret the proposal, and it is certainly not how local authorities and others have interpreted it. The proposal seems to be for a proactive duty that does not currently exist, although I look forward to hearing Ken Macintosh's contribution on that point. Our view is that there should be no new statutory controls and duties when better and more proportionate means to bring about improvements to the heritage framework are  available. The Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill is a tightly focused technical amending bill that has been drafted with the intention of avoiding placing significant new burdens or duties on public bodies or individuals, and implementation costs are expected to be low. The bill addresses the specific gaps and weaknesses in the current heritage legislation framework that were identified during extensive discussions with stakeholders, and its provisions will make a good system better and improve the ability of the regulatory authorities to work with partners to manage Scotland's unique historic legacy. I look forward to hearing members' contributions on this important issue. No doubt we will also get a sense of the importance of Scotland's historic environment from members' reflections from their constituencies of how such issues have had an effect and may have an effect in the future. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.

Argyll and Bute Council is responsible for decisions on school closures in its area, in accordance with legal requirements, and the democratically elected local councillors will be accountable for the decisions that they take. As members will be aware, the council has postponed its decision and has asked officers to complete further work on the proposals. As the member knows, the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010, which was proposed by this Government, establishes a presumption against the closure of rural schools by ensuring that a decision by a council to consult on a closure proposal is only a last resort. Argyll and Bute Council must, like all councils, follow the robust consultation process set out in that act, and if there is strong evidence that that has not been properly done, Scottish ministers will call in and could refuse consent to any closure decisions.

As the member is aware, adult Gaelic learning is central to Bòrd na Gàidhlig's action plan to increase the number of Gaelic speakers, which was prepared for the bòrd at the request of the Scottish Government. We are working with the bòrd to ensure that there is a wide range of effective support in place for adult learners of Gaelic. The bòrd announced on 13 October additional support for the ulpan method of learning. The bòrd is now providing an additional £112,000 for Deiseal in 2010-11, taking the level of support to £202,000 in total, so that the rate of provision can be accelerated. In addition, the bòrd has also approved in principle support of £250,000 for each of the two years after that.

It is important to stress that Taic's funding is in place until the end of this financial year and support from that organisation to local Gaelic pre-school groups should remain in place until then under the terms of Taic's agreement with Bòrd na Gàidhlig. We also agree with the bòrd about the need, which it identifies in the action plan, to ensure that there is a comprehensive service for Gaelic early-years provision, including funding and support for volunteers, disclosure checking, insurance, payroll services and compliance with the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator and the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care. Training for leaders and improved teaching resources are also a feature. The bòrd is currently in dialogue with local groups to assess their needs. Improvement in provision should increase parental confidence, leading to increasing numbers entering Gaelic education. We expect the bòrd to have its support  mechanisms fully in place in December, so that Gaelic early-years groups will continue to be supported beyond the end of March 2011, when the Taic funding agreement with the bòrd is due to cease.

The Scottish Government has put in place a range of measures to support the Scots language. That includes an audit of Scots language provision, a survey of attitudes to Scots, funding of two Scots language bodies, the introduction of a census question and the establishment of a Scots language working group. Those actions are based on the pre-election commitments that we made in respect of the Scots language. I acknowledge the member's personal contribution to many of those actions.

I am indeed aware of the launch of the book, and although I was unable to attend the official launch on 21 October, I have heard that the event went well. I look forward to reading the book in the near future, having translated parts of "The Aeneid" from the original when I studied Latin at school. John Law's untimely passing earlier this year is a great loss to those who are involved in promotion of the Scots language. I am sure that we all agree that he made a great contribution with enormous passion to a cause that was close to his heart.

I note the member's interest and support for the promotion of our Roman heritage in general, and in Perthshire in particular.  The Scottish Government has demonstrated its commitment to our Roman heritage through its support for the inscription of the Antonine wall as part of the frontiers of the Roman empire world heritage site in 2008. That has been the springboard for partnership working with local authorities, heritage bodies, museums and local community groups to promote the heritage of the area. The positive work coming from this transnational world heritage site will help to raise awareness of our Roman heritage across Scotland and Europe, which will help to boost the heritage tourism industry and, therefore, the economy across Scotland.

Some might ask, "What have the Romans ever done for us?" but I am not one such person. Bringing together Scotland's Roman heritage is an interesting idea. It is clear that much work is being done around the Antonine wall, but I am sure that several people—not least Roseanna Cunningham—would want such a centre to be located in Perthshire. I understand that the Ardoch fort site is privately owned, so that raises issues of bringing together sectors. I cautiously remind Murdo Fraser that the degree of capital cuts in the Scottish budget means that creating a new centre would be extremely problematic, unless he could persuade his colleagues at the Westminster Treasury of the merits of improving our capital situation. I fully support the concept of capitalising on our Roman heritage, but we must be realistic about what we can do. At this time, we should have our initial focus on the Antonine wall.

Instead of Scots—or perhaps Picts and Celts—fighting Romans, as happened in ancient times, we have Scots fighting over the Romans. The concept is there. Great resources are available, such as the Scotland's history initiative from Learning and Teaching Scotland, which makes a fantastic array of Roman heritage items from all our collections and museums available to our young people. We need to show what we can do with the Antonine wall. That means that all five local authorities that are involved must capitalise on that. However, interesting aspects of the Roman impact and Roman history go across Scotland. In Perthshire, Doune primary school was involved in the recent excavation of a fort near it, so Roman history is not exclusive to the central belt. We must marshal our limited resources effectively by being productive and successful around the Antonine wall. However, that should not limit our horizons on what can be done elsewhere in the country.

Plans to relocate Creative Scotland will be carried forward as announced by Creative Scotland on 19 October 2010.

As I said in an answer to a parliamentary question from Pauline McNeill, relocation will take place around mid-January 2011. The relocation costs are less than those in the business plan that was produced earlier this year. We understand that they will not exceed £70,000 from the funds that are earmarked for the purpose in 2010-11.

The Scottish Government supports and promotes theatre through our partner  Creative Scotland, through our direct funding relationship with the National Theatre of Scotland and through our Edinburgh festivals expo fund. On Iain Smith's interest, I put it on record that I have attended a positive and successful performance by Dundee Rep of "Sunshine on Leith" in Edinburgh in recent weeks.

The short answer is yes. We need to value the importance of the Byre. I know that there will be disappointment at the two-year flexible funding, which is neither core funding nor five-year funding. However, it is important that we look across Scotland to see how we all within culture and the arts can support different institutions. I am very pleased that both Scottish Opera and Scottish Ballet have visited the Byre over the past month and that the Scottish Chamber Orchestra is due to collaborate with the Byre. Creative Scotland had been due to meet representatives of the Byre. Clearly, the meeting did not take place, pending the appeal, but I am under the impression that it will happen very soon. I encourage Creative Scotland, Fife Council and all those who are interested to come together to look at a collective and sustainable solution that will help the Byre theatre.

I will relay the suggestion to Creative Scotland. However, we also have to recognise that in making funding decisions vulnerability itself has to be addressed. The organisation has to address vulnerability issues, whether of the business model, artistic interpretation, relationships or other matters. It has to address the issue and make improvements.  The member is absolutely correct in saying that the problem is one not only for the Byre theatre but for other theatres across Scotland—theatres that are very important to local communities. Scotland's sense of place in how we celebrate our culture has to be recognised. I am not convinced that flexible funding is the route to that; it is not a consistent funding model. The points that the member makes are properly made. Indeed, the Scotland's creative industry partnership that has been established is looking at the economic models of performing theatre. The member's points can be fed into that working group.

Indeed, I will. I am not sure that I have the opportunity this evening to attend the event, but I will do so if I can. I am travelling to Glasgow tonight for the Fairbridge film gala evening 2010. Fairbridge is using film and theatre to help to support young people. Indeed, the work that is happening across Scotland in relation to prisoners should be brought to the attention of the Parliament. I saw a very powerful women's production at Greenock prison in which empowerment and re-evaluation of lives was clearly visible. Seeing prisoners revisiting their previous lives in theatre form and asserting their desire not to repeat the problems of the past was one of the most dramatic performances that I have seen.

Since the establishment of Creative Scotland on 1 July, there have been nine formal meetings with staff representatives from Unite and PCS. Topics covered at these meetings included job matching of existing staff, redeployment and recruitment, voluntary early severance arrangements and pay and grading issues.

I am aware that concerns have been raised by some people and I think that discussions have been taking place with Robin Harper. James Kelly may wish to ask Robin Harper about that. As Minister for Culture and External Affairs, I have issued a letter of guidance to Creative Scotland, as part of which I said that I expect to see a clear strategic plan. The organisation was established only on 1 July. The board met in August, and clear direction is quite evident in some of the activities that have already taken place. There were far more concerns in recent years, when some members of the Parliament were trying to thwart the development of Creative Scotland, than there has been since its establishment on 1 July. However, I reassure the member that there will be clear direction and it will be shared with not only the staff but the rest of the cultural organisations in Scotland.

First, I offer my congratulations to the Edinburgh Sculpture Workshop for winning the arts funding prize for Edinburgh. Its ambitious project will create a centre of excellence for visual arts for Scotland with a local, national and international impact. We have supported the now fully funded phase 1 of the redevelopment through our partners Creative Scotland with lottery funding and recent grant in aid, and I understand that work is due to begin on this exciting development in early 2011.

Indeed. I think that it will do that, which is why I mentioned in my first answer that it will have an international perspective. I recognise Malcolm Chisholm's support for the project. I am looking forward to visiting it to see the work as it progresses. When times are difficult for many other areas, it is important that we celebrate and note our successes. The establishment of the Edinburgh Sculpture Workshop's new premises and its winning of the arts funding prize are things that we should celebrate. We should give recognition to all those who have had a perhaps long and difficult journey in trying to establish the new project and we should support those who are supporting it.

The Scottish Government recognises the significant contribution of Scotland's museums to education, health and wellbeing, and cultural tourism. We will continue to work with the museums sector in the difficult economic climate ahead.

I am aware of the member's passionate support for the football museum. I will write to him about the figures that he quoted, but I think that he is quoting United Kingdom figures and not Scotland's figures, because Scotland's  museums have seen very good progress. Indeed, Edinburgh castle had almost its best performance for seven years—it was only a couple of hundred thousand off that—and one of the most successful Augusts for some time. I think that Scotland has been bucking the trend of the rest of the UK in terms of museum attendance. However, that is not to belie the very successful work of the football museum. The member must respect the fact that about 120 of the 340 museums that are members of Museums Galleries Scotland do charge. As an independent organisation, it is up to the Scottish football museum to consider whether it wants to charge or not. It has been well supported by the Government, with £70,000 allocated to it for its lighting area and £20,000 for its very good Alzheimer project, which helps people in the community through football. However, if the member wishes to make representations, I suggest that he do so to the museum itself.

I am a supporter of free admission. However, the member will be aware of the funding problems that we are experiencing, some of which are the responsibility of the previous Labour Government. Once we see the opportunities in the budget, we will have to make assessments. One of the successes of Scotland's museums is the free access to the museums that currently have that.

The Scottish Government recognises the importance of supporting the nation's built heritage. Our commitment this year is an investment of £12 million. We have also introduced the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill to the Parliament.

I understand and appreciate the trust's concerns. I also appreciate and am encouraged by the trust's attempts to protect part of the community's built heritage. However, I hope that the member appreciates that the Scottish ministers cannot get involved in specific cases at that stage and that his concerns should, for the moment, be addressed through the planning system. I am appreciative of the trust's commitment.

There will be savings, but savings are not the main driver. The prime reason for establishing the new agency is to ensure that we have the best possible national structure in place to support and challenge our education system. Nonetheless, the creation of the new organisation provides an excellent opportunity to ensure that it will deliver its services as efficiently as possible, making savings whenever it can.

As a result of the commitment of teachers and other professionals to raising the standard of education and learning in Scotland, the curriculum for excellence is now a reality in our nurseries, schools and colleges across Scotland. The curriculum for excellence management board, which met today, is using a range of evidence from partners to monitor and advise on implementation matters. I believe, as I think most people do, that it is going well.

As I said in committee yesterday, the General Teaching Council for Scotland's surveys of post-probation teachers show that a significant number of teachers gain employment in the course of the school year. However, the employment of teachers is a matter for local authorities, and the extent to which new teachers find posts is greatly dependent on local authority recruitment decisions.

We expect institutions to work closely with one other and with the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to ensure that further and higher education provision across Scotland is coherent, relevant and of high quality. Moreover, we announced in August that there would be a review of post-16 education and vocational training. That review will explore options for more effective approaches to workforce development, support for young people seeking work for the first time and support for the unemployed. College provision is included in the scope of the review, which will report to ministers by March 2011. We shall consider then what further steps to take.

The development of literacy skills is vital to people of all ages in Scotland. We recognise without question that a strong, successful country requires strong and secure literacy skills. Literacy is key to life chances for learning, employability and full participation in our society. Without literacy skills, health and wellbeing are impaired or negated. Without literacy skills, the chances of offending and repeat offending behaviour are greater. Without literacy skills, it is also more likely that an individual will live in poverty. Most profoundly of all, the likelihood is that the children of the person without literacy skills will also lack those skills. Without literacy skills, people in our society become locked into a cycle of difficulty that leads to impairment in learning. In January, during our debate on the literacy commission's report and its recommendations on ways to advance literacy across society, I made a commitment to work with the commission to bring forward an action plan for literacy in Scotland. Today, I am fulfilling that commitment and I am launching the Scottish Government's literacy action plan. This is the first time since devolution that a Scottish Administration has laid out a concerted plan of action aimed at improving literacy levels. The plan sets out our vision to raise standards of literacy for all, from the early years through to adulthood. It is designed to improve the literacy of all who would benefit from support across the continuum of learning. That will require sustained commitment and continuing action at all levels of Government, and support at all points of the education system and through wider public services. There needs to be a particular focus on those with the lowest levels of literacy. The action plan will build on existing good practice and ensure that literacy will have a central and continuing focus in education and related Government policies. I am confident that it will raise standards. We have worked closely with members of the literacy commission as we have developed the literacy action plan, drawing on their expertise. I  thank them for their support and look forward to working with them as we implement its actions. The plan draws on the recommendations of the literacy commission, which were set out in its report, "A Vision for Scotland". Those recommendations reflect in great part the aims of the Government, and many of the commission's priorities feature in the literacy action plan. I am sorry that Rhona Brankin is not in the chamber, but I would like to commend her—

When proposing school mergers, local authorities must undertake a consultation, using the updated and robust processes that are set out in the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010.

Feasgar math. I welcome the opportunity to respond to the motion and to  conclude the debate today. I pay tribute to Ted Brocklebank for bringing the motion to Parliament and for his consistent and persistent support for BBC Alba. I am intrigued by the new schedule, including the programme on redheads. Alasdair Allan, as interviewed by Russell Brand, now has a ready-made audience. I welcome the themes that are addressed in the motion, which testify to the contribution of BBC Alba to Scottish economic and cultural life. Without doubt, BBC Alba is a significant addition to broadcasting in Scotland. I will offer some clear reasons why I believe that BBC Alba is to be commended for its achievements and deserves to have access to Freeview. First, we should all welcome the boost that BBC Alba has given to the independent production sector in Scotland. As has been mentioned, last year BBC Alba commissioned more than 50 per cent of all the hours that were commissioned in that sector in Scotland. We should also welcome the jobs that have been created, the skills that have been retained and the artistic excellence that has been encouraged throughout Scotland. In addition, we should be mindful of the fact that much of that has been achieved in areas of low population density where a small number of jobs has an important impact. BBC Alba should be congratulated on, along with its television services, its enhanced radio provision and its excellent online services for all ages, both of which have played a key role in sustaining the Gaelic language. Earlier this year, the Scottish Government provided MG Alba with £50,000 for a Gaelic learners website. I look forward to its being launched and to hearing more about it later this month. BBC Alba should also be commended for extending the range of programmes that are available in Scotland. Indeed, I was delighted to see Linlithgow Rose, my home-town football team, win the junior cup when that match was broadcast on BBC Alba. Without doubt, public service broadcasting has been enhanced in Scotland as a result of the additional choice that is provided by BBC Alba in news, current affairs, sport, the arts, heritage and children's programmes. We should all welcome the way in which BBC Alba has engaged young people in Scotland. It has developed children's programmes and educational materials. The innovative and successful film G competition is now in its third year, and MG Alba is supporting training in the media industry, Gaelic writing courses in further education and media courses in schools. BBC Alba should also be congratulated on the high approval rating that it has received from its viewers, the strong appeal that it has among the  Gaelic audience and its ability to attract new viewers and listeners to its programmes. In addition, we should all welcome the contribution that BBC Alba makes to education generally. BBC Alba supports Gaelic learning at all levels, and the channel can function, in effect, as a new Gaelic presence in the home to support the efforts of parents to pass on the language. There are many initiatives to support and promote Gaelic in Scotland, and I am confident that BBC Alba brings added value to our many other efforts—which Peter Peacock recognised and which have received support from all parties across the chamber—to create a secure future for Gaelic in Scotland. I believe that BBC Alba has made a positive contribution to public service broadcasting in Scotland by boosting jobs and the economy, by promoting artistic excellence and the creative industries, by supporting education and learning, and by promoting Gaelic. Along with many other people throughout the country, the Scottish Government has been very impressed with the progress and achievements of BBC Alba, and we remain in favour of the proposal—which is supported by the BBC executive and MG Alba—to extend the channel's reach by securing access to Freeview. Members will be aware that the Scottish Parliament unanimously endorsed that proposal in its debate on BBC Alba in February 2010. I followed that with a letter to the chair of the BBC trust on the matter. We are aware that the present proposal will have some impact on radio services, but we are persuaded that the gain for BBC Alba would be significant in comparison to the slight counterimpact on radio services. We hope that the trust agrees that the argument for BBC Alba's access to Freeview is compelling. The vast majority of people who listen to radio on Freeview in Scotland listen to stations that are already available on FM or AM. Recent research suggests that the number of Freeview radio listeners who are at risk of losing access to their digital radio stations is around 4,000—as could be inferred from the original proposal for BBC Alba's transmission on Freeview of October 2009. That number compares to the expected 150,000 new viewers that carriage of BBC Alba on Freeview would bring. We also take the view that Freeview access would be fitting recognition of the success and accomplishments of BBC Alba since its launch in 2008, and of the expectations of actual and potential viewers in Scotland. A compelling case has been made by many people, including Jamie McGrigor, that people are being denied the opportunity to receive BBC Alba. That is already happening; the question is whether the BBC trust  will compound the situation or whether it will provide that opportunity. We have heard impassioned pleas and expressions of support from Pauline McNeill, Alasdair Allan and Dave Thompson, and we remain firmly supportive of the current proposal and hope that any slight reduction in radio service can be addressed by other means. Our hope is that the BBC will be able to find a long-term solution to the question. I welcome the opportunity to agree with colleagues today on a number of issues, such as the strength of BBC Alba and the contribution that it makes to Scotland and Gaelic. Our consistent message has been that BBC Alba should have access to Freeview, and I assure members that I will write again to the BBC trust to draw its attention to the strength of cross-party support for that position, as expressed here today.  Meanwhile, we have a two-year anniversary to celebrate. I remember the Elvis programme that was mentioned earlier. I did not tune in to it deliberately; I found it by accident, but was drawn into it by its production values and the quality of its content. Meal ur naidheachd do BBC Alba. Congratulations to BBC Alba.  Meeting closed at 18:41.

The Scottish Government participates in the programme for international student assessment—or PISA—survey run by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. The survey provides comparative information on the performance of Scotland's 15-year-olds in reading, mathematics and science.

The Scottish Government is committed to improving literacy for everyone in Scotland. In particular, curriculum for excellence has literacy at its heart and all teachers have responsibility for its development. Our ambition to improve literacy skills extends beyond schools: our focus starts in the early years and continues right through to lifelong learning. I will shortly be launching a literacy action plan, which will set out our vision to improve literacy for all, from the early years to adulthood, and the actions that we will take to deliver it.

I am very pleased that the Conservatives should choose to use their allocated time to bring the subject of the future of higher education in Scotland to the chamber. In the piece in the Scotland on Sunday to which Elizabeth Smith referred, I paid that tribute, too. For the record, it should be noted that I am glad that that has happened and I think that we can have a consensual debate. We had such a debate in the chamber on 3 June, when we reached the consensus that tuition fees—both up-front and back-door—are not the right solution for Scotland. I hope that today we can build on that by working towards a broader consensus on what a sustainable funding and organisational solution should look like to preserve the excellent reputation of our universities for years to come. I also want to set the record straight in response to Elizabeth Smith's closing words. She talked about a desperation for leadership in our university sector. Last week, at the very conference that she organised, Professor Anton Muscatelli, the principal of the University of Glasgow, said: "I think Scotland's universities are doing extremely well at the moment. We have three in the top 100, five in the top 200. So, at the moment there is no problem." He went on to say that he wanted to see a resolution to this issue over the next year. I am surprised that there should be laughter from the Labour Party at Anton Muscatelli's opinion. The Opposition usually quotes him with approval, but when he disagrees with it, Opposition members  laugh at him. That says something about the future of higher education in Scotland.

I, too, thank the committee for its valuable work, which was set out clearly by the convener, Gil Paterson. The committee performs an important and valuable role for the Parliament, which must be recognised. When Angela Constance voiced her concern at the possibility of becoming a member of the committee, all that I could hear from the front bench was, "It could have been the Subordinate Legislation Committee." As Bruce Crawford has said, the Government endorses the committee's conclusions. In particular, we welcome and support the committee's conclusion that the issues raised by the commission's report are best dealt with through the Scottish Parliament's standing orders rather than through Westminster legislation. It is interesting that the committee supported only three proposals that would require amendments to the Scotland Act 1998: the relaxation of the limitation on the number of Deputy Presiding Officers; the move away from overly prescriptive requirements for a members' interests regime; and the introduction of a requirement for a statement on legislative competence for members' bills. As Bruce Crawford said, the Government has reservations about the last of those—I will return to that point. As a general rule, we do not believe that the procedures of the Scottish Parliament should be laid down in the Scotland Act 1998, which we cannot change. We believe that the Scottish Parliament should take responsibility for its own procedures and practices and not be dependent on the UK Parliament or the UK Government to lay out how we should operate. We also agree that further work is required on many of the recommendations. Inevitably, there is greater expertise—or at least a greater range of views—in the Scottish Parliament on its procedures than the commission could draw on in its deliberations. Those who have been members since 1999 might reflect on the fact that, in the Parliament's first session, there were regular reports and recommendations on improving the standing orders, and a separate committee did just that. The commission has set out proposals, but the Parliament is perfectly capable of forming and owning the solutions. That has come through loud and clear in this debate. I turn to issues that members have raised. Pauline McNeill talked about the European and External Relations Committee's recommendations and, latterly, its reflections on the Lisbon treaty and other issues. I reassure her that, without having to make any changes to the standing orders or legislation, we are already making  changes in our Government-Parliament relationships and in how we work with Westminster and Europe on some of the subsidiarity issues that she touched on. None of those changes requires changes to the standing orders; they are taking place already. Indeed, I will meet David Lidington at the end of the debate. Those things are happening and the relationships are being built as we go on. It has been suggested that we have joint UK committees. However, there would be a danger that that would reinvent the problems that the Parliament's European and External Relations Committee faced for a considerable time until some improvements were made. There would be a danger of creating a bottleneck and reinventing previous problems. It is not impossible for relations to be built between the Scottish Parliament's committees and the UK Parliament's committees. Robert Brown might recall that the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee regularly corresponded with the relevant UK committees in relation to common issues.

The emphasis is on common interest. Formalising procedures because that seems the right thing to do rather than basing the relationship on issues would be problematic. It is probably more important that we think about our relationships in terms of issues. Angela Constance made the point in an excellent speech that this is about relationships between people, and if people want them to work they will work. Robert Brown made an interesting comment about whether, in policy terms, the Scottish Parliament should act as an agent of the UK Government. I was interested in his reflection, which might have been an allusion to, for example, Northern Ireland in relation to social security. I was not quite sure of that, but it was an important contribution and, no doubt, we will hear more about it. I return to a central point that David McLetchie, Wendy Alexander and Pauline McNeill made about legislative competence. It is important to remember that, currently, under the Scotland Act 1998, ministers and the Presiding Officer have a statutory duty to make a statement on legislative competence. Sections 31(1) and 31(2) of the Scotland Act 1998 clearly set that out.

I am sure that David McLetchie recognises—and, as a former minister, Ross Finnie will know—that when law officers' views are sought, there is a standing convention that their legal advice is not shared. The recommendations in the report from the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee are about members' bills. The issue is David McLetchie's lack of faith in the Presiding Officer. I worry, too, about Wendy Alexander, who, as a minister, introduced bills, and who will know that in doing so she had to make statements on legislative competence. The committee's proposals, as far as I read them, are about members' bills.

The issue has been raised by various members. Under the Scotland Act 1998, a statement of legislative competence has to be made by the Presiding Officer and by ministers, but not by back benchers when they introduce members' bills. I move on to other areas that have been raised in the debate, such as interparliamentary and intergovernmental issues. There are challenges in Parliament-to-Parliament relationships and in Government-to-Government relationships, and we are working hard with the current UK Government, as we did with the previous one, to improve the Government-to-Government relationship. The improvements that have taken place will rely on political will. However, it is still early days. We have made it clear that we support all the recommendations in the committee's report. Nicol Stephen referred to history. Perhaps, in considering the Government's preference for full financial responsibility rather than the flawed proposals in the commission's report, he will reflect on why the Liberals want to abandon their long-standing commitment to federalism, and why the Steel commission is not part of their thinking. We have reasons for preferring full financial responsibility—

Circumstances have changed and, as the committee's report suggests, time has moved on and there have been changes to procedures, not least with the joint ministerial committee. Those developments mean that we need to be fluid in our thinking. We can take some of the commission's proposals, own them and shape them for ourselves. The European and External Relations Committee is already making changes. The joint ministerial committee is doing likewise. I will meet the Secretary of State for Scotland shortly to continue our intergovernmental dialogue on policy issues. It is important that we recognise the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's hard work in preparing the report. I sense approval of the committee's recommendations, and the motion, throughout the chamber.

Will the member give way?

Just over two years ago, the Scottish Broadcasting Commission produced its final report. That still stands as a blueprint for how to improve broadcasting in Scotland, due to the diligence of the commission's research, the quality of its analysis and the logic of its conclusions. In the chamber, a regular focus on broadcasting has been an important feature of the Parliament. It emphasises the significant role for Scottish institutions in examining broadcasting matters. One form of progress in the past year has been the United Kingdom Government's acceptance that the Scottish ministers should in the future appoint the BBC Trust member for Scotland. In the short term, the appointment of Jeremy Peat's successor is being undertaken as a joint process by the Scottish and United Kingdom Governments. I will reflect on what we might achieve under existing powers. I will focus on three key themes of the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's final report: its expectation that the BBC and Channel 4 should increase their commissioning from Scotland; its belief that public sector agencies should provide coherent support and leadership for the sector; and its aspiration for a Scottish digital network to provide sustainable competition for the BBC in Scottish public service broadcasting. It is worth remembering that the core reason for the commission's establishment was the release of figures that showed that Scotland's share of UK network production fell from 6 per cent in 2004 to less than 3 per cent in 2006. Genuine progress has been made in the past year, although far more still needs to be done. Scotland's share of network production increased from 2.5 per cent in 2008 to 3.6 per cent in 2009. That includes a significant increase from the BBC, where Scotland now accounts for 6.1 per cent of network commissions, which is up from 3.7 per cent in 2008. Incidentally, that increase alone represents an injection of an additional £19.5 million into the Scottish economy. I believe that the BBC should aim for Scotland to account for 8.6 per cent of network programming by 2012, rather than by its original target date of 2016. The rapid progress that it has made  certainly suggests that the target could sustainably be met considerably earlier than 2016. Progress by Channel 4 has been significantly slower. Scotland's share of Channel 4 network production in 2009 increased from 1.4 per cent to 2.5 per cent and Channel 4 expects a further increase in 2010. Channel 4 contributes a considerable amount of work to the digital media and film industries in Scotland and I believe that the Office of Communications should account more for that. I saw evidence of the value of Channel 4's work at first hand earlier this month when I visited Tag Games and Dynamo Games in Dundee, both of which have benefited from investment by Channel 4 and Creative Scotland. We will continue to work constructively with Channel 4 to maximise the positive and welcome contribution that I fully acknowledge it makes to Scotland's creative industries. However, for as long as Channel 4's broadcasting expenditure—by far the largest part of its overall budget—is so low in Scotland, I will continue to press it to do more. The increase in network production in Scotland provides an important opportunity for the independent production sector. On taking over as the Minister for Culture and External Affairs, one of my first steps was to hold a broadcasting conference in Glasgow and to chair a meeting between broadcasters, independent producers and public sector agencies at which we explored the issues that face the television production sector. I was left in no doubt about everyone's commitment to working in partnership, or about the creativity and drive that exist in many parts of the independent sector. As many members know, Scottish Enterprise and Creative Scotland recently published the report of the television broadcast and production working group that was established last year. Many of the recommendations in that report are being implemented. To follow up one recommendation, Scottish Enterprise is today publishing a report on production space in Scotland. The key theme that runs through the working group's report is partnership—how much stronger the production sector is when public agencies, broadcasters and independent producers work together for the sector's benefit. I strongly encourage Creative Scotland to play a lead role in maintaining that partnership approach and I am pleased that it has already agreed partnerships with the BBC and STV. There have been genuinely encouraging developments in relation to both network commissions and the development of the television production industry, but there has been less success thus far in trying to implement the  Broadcasting Commission's proposal for a Scottish digital network. The case for a network has strengthened, not weakened, over the past two years. Reports in 2009 by both Ofcom and the previous UK Government highlighted the dangers to public service broadcasting plurality in Scotland if major steps were not taken. STV's efforts to increase its domestic production are welcome. We support the contribution that STV can make to Scottish broadcasting and the creative economy, but opt-out programmes on channel 3 clearly have limits in providing secure and sustainable competition to the BBC over the full range of Scottish public service programming. Furthermore, the success of BBC Alba, as noted by the Parliament in February this year, gives some indication of the appetite in Scotland for more Scottish content. If the BBC Trust were to place BBC Alba on Freeview, as the Scottish Government has repeatedly emphasised that it should, the appetite for doing that would be even clearer. There is just now a window of opportunity. Jeremy Hunt, the Secretary of State for Culture, Olympics, Media and Sport, has spoken of the "chronic over-centralisation" of UK broadcasting. I think that every member of this Parliament would endorse that opinion. The UK Government wants to address that chronic overcentralisation. That is why it has established a panel that is chaired by Nicholas Shott to explore what needs to be done to make local television commercially viable. Nicholas Shott expects to conclude his report in late November, after which the UK Government will launch a consultation on local television in early January. I have had very constructive meetings with Jeremy Hunt and Nicholas Shott over the past five weeks. Nicholas Shott's initial views, which were published yesterday, state that he recognises that there are particular requirements in the nations of the UK and that his final report will include further analysis of these. The Scottish Parliament is unanimously behind a digital network that, in the words of the Broadcasting Commission's final report, "could certainly accommodate opportunities for more locaIised broadcasting." It is clear that Nicholas Shott is investigating how local television can be supported by a host channel, although his initial thinking is that that could be provided by existing public service broadcasters. The views of this Parliament and the UK Government are very close in their common desire for more localised broadcasting. However, it is clear that much work is still needed to marry the  UK Government's ambitions and those of this Parliament. The issue of funding will be particularly important. For that reason, two weeks ago, I established the Scottish digital network panel, chaired by Blair Jenkins, to assess how a Scottish digital network could be established and funded. I have already made it clear to the UK Government that I want the work of the Scottish panel to complement and not compete with the work that Nicholas Shott is undertaking. I very much hope that the Scottish digital network panel will form a constructive working relationship with Nicholas Shott's team. By doing so, it can inform the consultation on local television that the UK Government plans to launch in January next year. I want to work with other parties at Holyrood as far as is possible. The case for a digital network and for increased commissioning from Scotland has been significantly strengthened by the consensus that has surrounded broadcasting in Scotland since the Broadcasting Commission first reported. The quality of debate on broadcasting has been heightened by the constructive approach that Opposition spokespeople have shown in our debates and discussions on broadcasting thus far. I hope that we can continue to take forward the debate on broadcasting in Scotland as constructively as possible and that, where we differ, we respect one another's different perspectives. The events of the past year have demonstrated that a partnership approach can yield results. There is, of course, much more to do. However, I hope that the Scottish Government and this Parliament can make a real difference. By doing so, we will enhance broadcasting's role in the democratic, economic and cultural life of the nation.

There were a number of very important questions there, and I will try to answer them all. If I do not, I hope that other members will come in on the same topics. There will be further opportunities to address some of those fundamental questions that Pauline McNeill has asked. I thank Pauline McNeill for her support. She is correct to identify funding issues as being the main concern. The work of both the digital network panel and the Nicholas Shott review will be helpful in informing us on that subject. I recognise Pauline McNeill's concern about the impact of a digital network on existing channels. I would go further: it is important also to consider the potential impact on other media and other interests. The remit of the digital network panel therefore covers the potential market impact of any proposed funding on other Scottish media organisations. The issue has been addressed, and it will be addressed by the panel. Pauline McNeill identified some more recent developments, including those involving STV. In the series of meetings that I have held with broadcasters, they were all open to participating and involving themselves in the digital network panel's work. They are involved in the Nicholas Shott review, too. Pauline McNeill also identified the issue of auditing skills and the extent to which the production that is taking place in Scotland is adding value to the local economy, to skills and to  the development of local production and independent producers. We have been assured by the BBC that that is the case. However, Pauline McNeill correctly identified the need to continue to audit that in order to ensure that value is kept in and added to the Scottish perspective. We should be realistic about the question of a commercial channel being involved. Our initial thinking was that the network would be public service broadcasting and would not necessarily be commercial in nature but, taking into account the reality of where the UK Government is going, we should be prepared to consider a combination of different models. That could mean certain elements—opt-out or otherwise—involving some commercial aspects. We have to wait and see what the UK Government comes up with. We need to be open minded in this regard, and people are conscious of that. Funding from the licence fee, top-sliced or otherwise, was always an option or opportunity. The various different funding options will be considered by the digital network panel. I hope that I have managed to cover that wide range of questions, but I am sure that we will return to the same points in subsequent questions.

The member has raised a number of issues. I think that the BBC can reach the target before 2016 and I am urging it to do so. Progress has been made and, welcome though that is, I think that 2016 is too long a way off and that the momentum is such that the BBC can reach the target before 2016. On community-based television, there can be a variety of models. At one point, the Conservatives were talking about having 80 local television stations. Ofcom's submission to the Shott review is interesting in that regard, and Nicholas Shott indicated only yesterday in a letter that such local community-based television stations might not be sustainable through advertising revenue in the way that was first envisaged. Economies of scale might therefore be necessary. We want the panel to report quickly and promptly, taking on board Nicholas Shott's review, which we hope will be published before the end of the year. We want the panel to deliver in time to influence the consultation that the UK Government will put out next year. The membership of the panel is small and does not include a member with community-based television experience, but I expect the panel to consult such people as part of its deliberations. Blair Jenkins has indicated that he is open to engaging with all interests in taking the matter forward. On whether a digital channel should be paid for through the licence fee, I suspect that that will depend on what happens with the licence fee. There are different models of funding, which is why I have asked the panel specifically to consider different models of funding. A variety of models exists across the regions and nations of the UK, and it is important that we are open minded, so I will not pass judgment until I have seen the results of the panel's deliberations.

On the licence freeze, the member's colleagues at Westminster and in the UK Government will want to consider issues in that regard. On digital roll-out, I assure the member that my colleague Jim Mather has written to Jeremy Hunt to urge him to ensure that one of the pilot areas for superhighway activity is a rural area in Scotland, because unless we serve the periphery of Scotland first we will repeat the mistakes of the past, when the central belt had a fast service long before remoter parts of Scotland did. I agree with the member's emphasis in that regard. We should collectively support that drive, to ensure that we are at the forefront of development. There will eventually be developments in internet television: proposals must not only meet the needs of today and tomorrow but anticipate how Scotland can be ahead of the game in broadcasting in several years. That is why I have emphasised to Jeremy Hunt and Nicholas Shott that there is an appetite in Scotland to grasp the issue and that Scotland should be at the forefront of decisions, in particular if resources are available. Scotland has an appetite and offers an opportunity, and these are the right circumstances in which to ensure that we can drive forward the digital network, which could operate as a spine from which local opt-outs could come. On the figures, the second annual progress report, which was published today and issued to all MSPs, contains more detail about the progress over the past year, which has been considerable.

I very much agree with that sentiment. Indeed, the risk to plurality from monopolies of any form—whether public service broadcasting monopolies or monopolies of commercial interests—is obviously of concern  because of the importance of broadcasting within a democracy. When I met Colette Bowe from Ofcom recently, I made the point that Jamie Hepburn has raised because it refers to an important feature of Scottish broadcasting and must be addressed.

I am disappointed that David Whitton is so grudging. I talked about Creative Scotland's partnership with the BBC and STV, which is specifically about skills. I also talked about the industry advisory group's recommendations. The actions from those are already being taken and the recommendations that I referred to that are being implemented include training provision, particularly in drama. There is some very exciting work on that. Skills Development Scotland is investing in drama training. The big weakness in commissioning that was recognised is not necessarily in factual or news programming but in drama. We can make a big difference and achieve a huge amount in that. That is why Scottish Enterprise has today produced a report that gives different options on production capacity that would help to support that. I reassure David Whitton that there has been progress in the past year but, even before that, with my previous responsibilities, we ensured that there was skills development for networks and drama in particular because they were identified as being weak in that respect. I am pleased to assure him that Skills Development Scotland is on the case. More important is that the Scottish Broadcasting Commission recommended that there be a partnership between the public sector and the individual broadcasting companies. Skills is clearly an area for that partnership and I am pleased that Creative Scotland has moved swiftly to reinforce that agenda.

I am sure that the panel will look throughout Scotland to find out what possibilities exist. I have already said that Scotland has particular relevance, reference and importance as part of the UK consideration. Within Scotland, the Borders have a particular issue that must be addressed—the region is badly served by existing broadcasting arrangements. We have repeatedly said that it is absurd that 250,000 people in Scotland receive their channel 3 regional news bulletin from studios in Gateshead and we will continue to press the UK Government on that. The south of Scotland alliance and other groups are considering how community television stations could work. I encourage them to engage with the digital network panel and the Nicholas Shott review. However, at the end of the day, the decision remains a matter for the UK Government until such time as broadcasting responsibilities are transferred to the Scottish Parliament.

One of the members of the digital network panel is Charles McGhee, and the panel's remit includes examining impacts on other media. I have met the consortium that put together the bid for independently funded news consortia, which was not signed by the incoming United Kingdom Government. Some of the potential opportunities might be reflected in the proposals that Margo MacDonald makes. Everyone is open to consideration of all of the options. Indeed, Nicholas Shott has already met people from the organisations that might be able to provide the solution that she is talking about. I do not think that  it is fair to prejudge that work, which will be informed by the additional network panel and Nicholas Shott. At this point in time, we have to keep our options open. The solution might end up being a combination of a variety of suggestions that have been put forward by this Parliament. I simply ask members to be open minded and to consider the practical realities, particularly given the economic constraints that we face.

In the draft budget statement on 17 November 2010, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth announced plans to protect the education maintenance allowance scheme for the remainder of this academic year and the next academic year. That is consistent with the Government's commitment to support the least well-off students in Scotland and to open up opportunities for poorer families.

I thank Jamie Hepburn for bringing the debate to the Scottish Parliament. I also thank those members who have made contributions, which have been thoughtful, informed and at times passionate. The current conflict in Afghanistan has lasted for almost a decade and has had a major impact on families and communities throughout Scotland. As we have heard, 345 troops from the UK have lost their lives since the war started in October 2001. The war has also had a life-changing impact on hundreds of others, including the families and communities of our troops. I join other members in the chamber in paying tribute to all those soldiers, including those who have lost their lives. Each and every death is incredibly painful and underlines the remarkable dedication and sacrifice of our forces. All parts of Scotland, including Jamie Hepburn's constituency of Central Scotland, as his motion notes, are touched. There is enormous public support for the troops on the ground and I put on record once again the Scottish Government's admiration for the remarkable and courageous work that they are doing. They have our full support. However, as members have said in the debate, it is time for the UK Government to give greater clarity on the future of our forces in Afghanistan. President Obama has already stated that he intends to withdraw US troops from Afghanistan by July next year. The UK Government has indicated that troops will be removed by 2015, but the Scottish Government's view is that we should work towards withdrawal by the end of 2011. It is clear that a great deal of effort will need to go into reconstruction—Pauline McNeill mentioned nation building. Too many Afghans are seeing little in the way of reconstruction, and military spending—as Jamie Hepburn outlined—still far outstrips spending on development. There must be a focus on the long-term and sustainable development of Afghanistan. Scottish aid agencies are making a remarkable contribution to that effort and I put on record the Government's support for the aid agencies in Afghanistan. Many of the key players from the non-governmental organisation sector in Scotland are active in Afghanistan. The Halo Trust, for example, has been operating there for more than 20 years and is the largest implementing agency for the United Nations mine action programme for Afghanistan. The trust is dedicated to building local capacity and nowhere is that better exemplified than in Afghanistan, where its 3,500 Afghan staff are  managed by Afghans, with support from 10 expatriate staff. Mercy Corps has been in Afghanistan since 1986 and is currently assisting more than 2.5 million Afghans to rebuild their lives by running programmes throughout the country that focus on agricultural and economic development to help build stronger communities. Since 1998, Concern Worldwide has focused on strengthening governance at grass-roots level and helping communities to manage their own development. Several members touched on the issue of governance and how to empower people to help themselves. Islamic Relief, which began working in 2001, has successfully combined long-term development with food assistance, helping villages to have a practical incentive to remain at home and easing the problems of internally displaced persons. Oxfam has established education and government programmes, making better use of agricultural training, developing Afghan capacity and improving the rights of women. Tearfund has provided humanitarian support across the country. Christian Aid is also there, empowering poor and marginalised people to improve the conditions of their own lives, be it through employment or asserting their human rights, again with an interest in promoting Afghan women's rights. It is right that we discuss and debate international issues, but we should also recognise the number of organisations that have bases in Scotland that are supporting the national development of Afghanistan by supporting people and helping them to build their own futures. As we mark the work of international agencies, let us not forget those who have given their lives. Just a few weeks ago, we received the shocking and sad news of Linda Norgrove's tragic death during a rescue operation. Our thoughts are with the parents, family and friends of Linda Norgrove, who made such an incredible contribution during her life. Her contribution to improve the lives of the people of Afghanistan and elsewhere in the world has a legacy that we, as a nation, can be proud of. We should also not forget that we have a duty to look after our veterans from conflicts such as Afghanistan, and the Scottish Government continues to develop a policy to meet the needs of veterans and improve and deliver services to them. We have taken forward a range of work in the health, housing, education, employment and transport sectors, and that will continue. Much work is going on, details of which will be provided in our next report, to improve support to armed forces and veterans communities, and that is expected before Christmas.  A serious point in the debate is how we build democracy, how we intervene to build capacity and how we face up to the responsibilities of the UK's involvement in Afghanistan. A lot of wise words have been said. We are not the only people in the world who are discussing and debating the issues, but we have a right and an opportunity to voice our concerns and it is right that the Parliament is used to voice the concerns of many people about what is happening in Afghanistan, why we were there in the first place and, indeed, activities since. We must support our troops and our Government has put that position on the record, but that does not prevent us as parliamentarians from expressing our view on what should happen. The Scottish Government supports withdrawal by the end of 2011 but, importantly, we are also committed to doing what we can to support the efforts of those who are building long-term peace, stability and economic success.  Meeting closed at 18:32.

The United Kingdom Government published its Scotland Bill yesterday. The Scottish Government welcomes many aspects of the bill and the further devolution that it provides. However, it is no secret that the proposals in the bill do not meet the ambitions that the Scottish Government and many people in Scotland have for Scotland. The proposals for additional devolution are limited. For example, the bill would give the Scottish Parliament limited additional legislative competence in matters such as landfill tax, stamp duty and air guns. It would take away legislative competence in three other areas, including insolvency and the health professions. It does not even implement fully the recommendations of the Commission on Scottish Devolution. The key test for the Scotland Bill is whether it will help the Scottish economy to grow, protect jobs and ensure that our public services have the investment that they need. With that in mind, the legislative consent memorandum that we lodge today provides a first detailed analysis of the proposals in the bill. As all parties have recognised, proper scrutiny of the bill is essential. The Minister for Parliamentary Business has lodged a motion on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau to establish an ad-hoc committee with the remit: "To consider the Scotland Bill and report to the Parliament on any relevant Legislative Consent Memorandum". The Scottish Government will work constructively to assist the committee. The bill and accompanying documents leave many unanswered questions. Our aim is to support the Parliament in the thorough scrutiny of the proposals, identify improvements and ensure that the Parliament is able to take an informed decision on consent. At the heart of the bill are the financial provisions. Unfortunately, as drafted, they are at best a missed opportunity and, at worst, potentially damaging to Scotland's economy. The proposals on income tax have the potential to embed a long-term, deflationary bias in Scotland's budget. We  estimate that they would have cost Scotland £8 billion since 1999. Under the proposals, the Scottish budget would also remain at the mercy of UK changes to tax policy and we would not have adequate levers to mitigate volatility in our budgets. There are people who feel that the Treasury has long wanted to cut the Scottish budget and that the measures are effectively a trap amounting to budget cuts by the back door. The Scottish economy needs a Parliament with full financial responsibility and full economic, tax and benefit powers, but the bill fails to provide Scotland with any significant new levers to boost its economy. Responsibility for key taxes—including corporation tax, green taxes, fuel duty, North Sea revenues and excise duties—would remain outwith the Scottish Parliament's control, and around 80 per cent of Scottish revenues would continue to flow to the UK Government. There are big unanswered questions about the costs to the Scottish budget in reductions to the block grant and in implementation and running costs. The command paper that was published yesterday sets out the uncertainties before saying on page 35: "a definitive statement on the correct reduction to the block grant" is "inappropriate at this time." The UK Government's regulatory impact assessment says that accurate estimates of costs will not be available until implementation policies are determined, but gives indicative costs of £45 million for the one-off costs of setting up the systems in Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs, plus £4.2 million per year thereafter. It is clear that the UK Government expects the Scottish Parliament to pick up the costs. The Scottish Parliament is thus being asked to agree to the proposals with, at present, no clear explanation of how the permanent reduction to the block grant would be calculated and with only indicative estimates of the implementation costs. It is not entirely clear how long it will take to put the new financial measures in place. The command paper describes a phased approach. It says on page 25: "there will be a period from 2016 for which transitional arrangements will apply." I suggest that, in considering the bill, the Parliament will want to have a clearer indication of what the transitional arrangements will be, over what period they will apply and whether it will be possible to adjust the provisions in the light of experience and any unintended consequences.  The bill deals with non-financial issues, too. We are happy to support many of them and, in broad terms, we welcome their inclusion in the bill. However, the Scottish Parliament will want to look closely at those provisions, particularly where they do not fully implement the commission's recommendations or leave important matters reserved. For example, the Scottish ministers would be able to set speed limits for cars on motorways, but not for heavy goods vehicles. They would be able to set drink-driving limits, but the Parliament would not be able to legislate to introduce random breath testing. The bill devolves control over some air guns, but the UK Government will be able to exclude "specially dangerous" ones. Responsibility for the regulations that govern Scottish parliamentary elections will be split between Scottish and UK ministers, perpetuating the complexity that was criticised by the Gould report on the 2007 elections. There are other parts of the bill that we do not support. For example, the proposed additional reservations of matters that are currently devolved to the Scottish Parliament, the regulation of all health professionals and court procedures on insolvency. We believe that improved intergovernmental working, not the clawing back of control to Whitehall, is the correct way to ensure that there is proper integration of procedures across the UK. In those areas, and elsewhere, the Scottish Government has suggested improvements that could be made to the proposals to achieve the objectives of the bill more effectively or to provide greater benefit to the people of Scotland. I invite the committee to continue that consideration with us. Some recommendations of the commission have not been included at all—for example, on welfare, the marine environment, the aggregates levy, air passenger duty, the Health and Safety Executive, immigration, food, research councils and animal health. The Scottish Government welcomes some of the omissions, particularly the proposed reservation of food content and labelling and charities law. For others, we are unconvinced by the UK Government's case for not proceeding. For example, the UK Government has cited its planned review of air passenger duty and the current European Union litigation in relation to the aggregates levy. We do not consider those reasons to be substantive barriers to devolving those taxes now. As long ago as 2008, this Parliament passed a motion agreeing that Scotland should have responsibility for marine spatial planning, fisheries and marine nature conservation out to 200 nautical miles. The Scottish Government is therefore extremely disappointed that the bill contains no proposals to devolve legislative  responsibility for the marine environment beyond the 12-mile limit. The bill contains no provision to take forward the devolved role in welfare benefits that was proposed by the commission. The UK Government command paper states that the specific proposals have been "overtaken by events", but it promises a role for the Scottish Government in due course in aspects of the new benefits system. It is clear that this is a complicated area, which the Parliament will want to explore in detail. We regret that these and other recommendations are not addressed in the Scotland Bill, and invite the Parliament to consider whether that is justified. I am confident that the committee will undertake full scrutiny of the proposals. Given the importance of these issues to the people of Scotland, we urge the committee to conduct as full an inquiry as possible and to look to wider Scotland for evidence in that consideration. The Scottish Government will support that process fully for the purpose of strengthening and improving the bill. The Scottish Government invites the committee to begin its consideration of the Scotland Bill and accompanying paper and to report and make its recommendations to the Scottish Parliament. The Scotland Bill is an important matter for both this Parliament and the people of Scotland. Together, we can work to make this a better bill that is truly in Scotland's interests.

Pauline McNeill raises a number of points. I reassure her that by lodging the legislative consent memorandum and making a ministerial statement to Parliament the day after the Scotland Bill's publication, we have demonstrated that, as a Government, we will engage fully in Parliament's scrutiny of the bill. In response to the member's questions on finances, I point out that although the bill proposals would improve accountability with regard to certain aspects of the Scottish block budget, only 15 per cent of Scotland's revenue would be affected. After the bill's implementation, 85 per cent of the revenues raised in Scotland would still proceed directly to the UK Treasury. I most definitely welcome the progress that has been made on borrowing, which is one of a number of issues that we have raised consistently in the 14 meetings that we have had with the Treasury. I am sure that other questions will come back to that. The member asks us to publish the information that we relayed about the deflationary pressures and the impact that would have been felt had the Scotland Bill proposals been in place since 1999, whereby we would have lost out on £8 billion-worth of investment. This morning, I and a number of other ministers have spent a considerable amount of time being questioned by parliamentary committees as part of their scrutiny of the budget. I say most politely to the member that the information in question was published as part of the budget documentation on 17 November and has been available for scrutiny since then.

I think that somewhere in that question was a welcome for the Scottish Government's constructive attitude. David McLetchie raised a number of issues. He questioned the benefits of full financial responsibility, but those benefits have been and will continue to be set out by the Scottish Government. He mentioned bail-outs. It is not as if the UK Government has ever had to be bailed out by anyone—however, I distinctly remember hearing about the International Monetary Fund in 1976 or so, although that was in my childhood. Of course, George Osborne has also put on record his support for the Irish approach to economic growth in the past. The member raises an important point that comes to the nub of the issue, and which I hope that the committee will address. There is a difference between accountability and responsibility for economic growth. As presented, the bill will shift the balance towards providing greater accountability. The real challenge of where we can go with full financial responsibility and powers for the Parliament is in the economic growth test. Where would the benefits be? If the Scotland Bill restricts the Government's opportunities to collect taxes, or restricts it to collecting income tax alone, or if it restricts the higher rate of income tax and the benefit that we would get from it, that would not provide an incentive for economic growth. Over the past 10 years, the greatest element of growth in revenues for the UK Government has come not from income tax, but from the plethora of other taxes. The previous UK Labour Government decided to restrict the amount of revenue that it received from income tax and saw growth in revenues from other areas. That is the pressure that is inherent in the Scotland Bill, and I urge the  committee to give full scrutiny to those aspects of it.

We are delighted to speak for Scotland's interests and to support any measure that improves the lot of the Scottish people. That is why I said quite deliberately in my statement that we welcome a number of the aspects of the proposals in the Scotland Bill. We probably welcomed more of the commission's original recommendations than did the previous UK Government in its white paper. The member raises an important point about borrowing. I agree that it is very important, particularly because we are facing a 36 per cent reduction in our capital over the next few years. I recognise the importance of responsibility in borrowing, which is why I am concerned that the borrowing limits that are proposed by the UK Government's bill would provide for less borrowing for capital spend than the Scottish Government provides annually. The Government has already made £3 billion investment in capital on an annual  basis. The £2.2 billion that is to be provided under the bill's proposals is less than we provide in one year, but it is still welcome. On being able to pay for that investment, the powers and restrictions in the Scotland Bill would mean that the Scottish Government would be more restricted in borrowing than local authorities, which have far more provision for prudential borrowing and what they can pay for. On the question of amounts, in 2006, Birmingham City Council raised £260 million in bonds and other things that are not available to us; under the Scotland Bill, this Government would not be able to do that. I welcome the provisions for borrowing, although they can be improved, and I look forward to working with the member to ensure that we can do that.

The member reflects on a number of points that I raised in reply to Robert Brown's question. I will meet midway: I think that there are possibilities in the borrowing. We welcome the fact that there has been a shift in thinking that has allowed the borrowing provisions to be in the bill. More can be made of the borrowing powers, and we should scrutinise them carefully.

I certainly do not want to pre-empt the scope of the committee in establishing the evidence that it wants to take, and I do not want to usurp the role of the Parliament in deciding what support it gives to the committee or to pre-empt the support that the Scotland Office might give. However, we will consider the member's proposals once the committee has met and set out the terms of its inquiry and the areas that it wants to discuss.

I have not heard the secretary of state's remarks. On corporation tax, I would be disappointed that he is ruling out so quickly any proposal that might come from the deliberations of the committee once it is established. He should reflect on the terms in the Scotland Bill. There are some clauses that could be interpreted as enabling future transfer of powers, but we will need further scrutiny on that. Indeed, I should make it clear that although we have lodged a detailed legislative consent memorandum today, there will be opportunities for supplementary information when some of the terms of the provisions, which were published only yesterday, are looked at and clarified properly.

It is important that we encourage the committee to consider all aspects of fiscal  responsibility—or fiscal autonomy, to use Peter Peacock's phrase. If the committee chooses to examine all the aspects, I think that it will be good for the Parliament to conduct a thorough scrutiny and make a comparison of the opportunities and costs of the different systems that could be set out under the proposals in the Scotland Bill, for full financial responsibility and for other provisions, such as independence. I hope that there is an opportunity for the Parliament and the committee to consider all aspects: pros and cons, costs and opportunities.

That was unusually churlish from Mr Brownlee. He raises an important point about volatility. The prudential borrowing arrangements for local authorities allow some stability of planning for them. On the volatility of income tax, a central element of the Scotland Bill would allow borrowing of up to £500 million a year to address the volatility of forecasts from the Office for Budget Responsibility but would not allow for borrowing to counter volatility in income tax receipts in relation to global market changes. That is a central point. I hope that Mr Brownlee will join me in encouraging the parliamentary committee that will scrutinise the bill to examine the question of volatility thoroughly.

Nicol Stephen asks a number of questions. We have supported many of the non-financial aspects for some time. Indeed, we drafted legal provisions that could have been implemented by order in council and gave them to the previous UK Government some time ago. On the financial aspects, he talks about the tax proposals as being radical; however, the problem  with the tax proposals is that they are not radical enough. They might provide accountability but they do not provide responsibility in relation to achieving economic growth. If the test for the bill, at a time when we are coming out of a recession, is what it does to protect jobs, to improve economic growth and to protect the interests of the public services that we rely on, the bill as it stands will fail. We must improve the bill to ensure that Nicol Stephen and I can join in welcoming a provision that will really make a difference to the people of Scotland. Once the parliamentary committee has thoroughly scrutinised the bill and we can resolve some of the challenges that we have laid out in our memorandum, the Parliament will be in a better place to support the bill.

One of the questions that I frequently get asked—I have been asked it in the past few weeks—is how the Government has managed to provide for services such as the abolition of tuition fees, the cuts in prescription charges and the provision of more police officers within the powers that we already have. We have done that by effectively and competently providing for public services using the resources that we have. The member is correct to look at that analysis, but there are two sides to it. We must be responsible with the taxes and the levers that we have, but we must also deploy them effectively to improve the economy. That brings me back to my central point. There are different ways to produce and provide for sustainable economic growth—I know that the member has a particular perspective on that. If we are to pursue sustainable economic growth, we need all the levers of power; then, across a range of areas, not just in a limited, one-tax solution of income tax, we can truly serve the people of Scotland.

I thank John Wilson for bringing his motion for debate. I also thank Dennis Canavan for his initial campaign; he continues to provide advice to the Scottish Government. This debate gives me an opportunity to restate the Government's support for and recognition of the significance of St Andrew's day to Scotland and the wider world. St Andrew's day gives the people of Scotland a magnificent opportunity to celebrate our patron saint. I have some sympathy with John Wilson's point that few public bodies and local authorities have taken on the spirit of the act, which received royal assent in January 2007. However, I can report that of the 39 public bodies that come within the public sector pay policy, 30 are recognising St Andrew's day. Members might recall that the act was not in any way prescriptive; indeed, it was framed so as to allow a flexible approach on how it could be interpreted by public bodies and private firms alike. If bodies wish to observe St Andrew's day as a public holiday, the facility to substitute another holiday for 30 November is contained in the act.  For its part, the Scottish Government has continued to encourage all parts of Scotland to recognise St Andrew's day. Indeed, £434,000—the same level as in previous years—was made available to local authorities for St Andrew's day celebrations. Through that funding, the Government is supporting a programme of high-quality events throughout Scotland, which start on Friday 26 November and run through to Tuesday 30 November, to mark St Andrew's day. Of course, St Andrew's day launches our Scottish winter festival, which runs all the way through to Burns night. I understand that Renfrewshire, Dumbarton and Stirling have begun their celebrations this evening. For 2010, the Scottish Government is holding a competition, which is open to all publicly funded schools and pre-schools, to design a St Andrew's day poster with the theme of Scotland's food and drink, to tie in with our year of celebration of food and drink. The winning entries in three categories will be displayed here in the Parliament during our family weekend, which is this weekend, and £200 will be awarded to the winning school or pre-school.

I assure the member that that has been done on a number of occasions. Her point about the voluntary nature of all this is well made, because those efforts have been made in the past. Perhaps it is about making sure that people see the opportunities. Celebrations also provide opportunities for people to spend money, which might address the point that Ted Brocklebank made. Festivals mean that people come out and buy from local shops and small businesses. St Andrew's day is an opportunity. The burgeoning Advent fairs and markets that are taking place this weekend show that there is a commercial aspect, which we should perhaps encourage more.

That is where the balance has to be struck. I draw to members' attention the fact that Scotland's most famous heritage attractions will be free—and not just for one day on the Tuesday, which is St Andrew's day; all 48 of  Historic Scotland's winter ticketed heritage sites and monuments will be open free from Saturday 27 November to Tuesday 30 November. In order for those sites to be open, staff will have to work those days, but that gives them the opportunity, with their employers, to think about the day that they will take off in lieu of working on St Andrew's day. A bit of common sense and flexibility would allow us to make progress. The other events that are taking place include Edinburgh's four-day family festival, the undercover at St Andrews festival in Fife, the saltire celebrations in East Lothian and the St Andrew's day Border banquet and taste awards. I will be at the East Lothian saltire celebrations and Edinburgh's event in St Andrew Square gardens. There will also be a St Andrew's day debating championship in the Parliament, in which we will support the cross out child poverty in Scotland campaign. The final motion at that will be on crossing out child poverty. Elaine Smith made an important point about the STUC and its annual anti-racism march. Our national identity is not only about our history; it is also about the values that we hold as a country. The values of fairness and justice have been well reflected by the STUC in its demonstrations and in the cross out child poverty campaign. I assure Linda Fabiani that that campaign will be informed about, and involved in, the development of Scotland's tackling child poverty strategy, which will be Scotland's first child poverty strategy. John Wilson mentioned that there are international celebrations. There are celebrations from Australia to Zambia. Eighteen countries around the world hold lots of ceilidhs, concerts and dinners to celebrate St Andrew's day. John Wilson was correct to draw a comparison with other countries in talking about the number of public holidays that Scotland recognises. According to the figures that I have been given, Scotland has nine public holidays; Belgium, France, Germany and Ireland have 10; Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Italy and Luxembourg have 12; and Austria and Malta have 14. That is not to say that we should aspire to mirror what the Austrians or Maltese do. However, Scotland is a nation of hard-working, passionate and proud individuals who, by and large, care deeply about their identity and being Scottish. Acknowledging and honouring our patron saint is just one way of celebrating our nationality. As I mentioned, there are ways of spending money in celebrating that which help the economy. It is important that we think about that, especially in these times. I am confident that recognition of the holiday will grow in the years ahead, and I encourage all members to join in their local celebrations of our national saint's day. I hope that, on Tuesday, all  members will think about the points that have been made in the debate, and that we will collectively take forward our ambition to celebrate our national day appropriately in the years to come.  Meeting closed at 17:32.

Schools census data published since 2007 indicate that the proportion of Orkney's primary 1 to primary 3 pupils in classes of 18 or fewer in successive years was as follows: in 2007, the proportion was 41.4 per cent, which is good; in 2008 it was 43 per cent, which is better; and, in 2009, it was 44.8, which is very much better. The census data for 2010 are due to be published next week, on 1 December. Orkney is the second highest performing council in this respect, and we believe that, as with other councils that are following a class size reduction policy, its pupils will benefit from enhanced interaction with their teachers.

The planned resources and funding allocated to education and lifelong learning for 2011-12 come to £2,583.6 million. That figure can be found in table 9.01 on page 135 of "Scotland's Spending Plans and Draft Budget 2011-12".

We are  aware of a good number of areas where parents have expressed a demand for Gaelic-medium education and we would like to see it established in those areas. Of course, it is up to each local authority to make provision for such education. We support those local authorities to the limit of our abilities throughout Scotland.

A programme of 15 high-quality events is taking place across Scotland from Friday 26 to Tuesday 30 November to mark St Andrew's day, our national day. In addition, all 48 of Historic Scotland's winter ticketed attractions are open for free for four days around St Andrews day, including the weekend before, the privilege holiday and St Andrew's day itself. St Andrew's day offers us an unrivalled opportunity to celebrate the best of Scotland's rich traditional and contemporary culture at home and abroad. Where possible, Scottish ministers will engage in activity across the country to celebrate our national day. I will be at East Lothian's saltire celebrations and Edinburgh's event in St Andrew's Square gardens.

I am certainly aware of the event, and I extend my best wishes for the launch of the cross out child poverty campaign in East Kilbride on Sunday. I have met the Rev Neil Galbraith from Glasgow the Caring City. He will be among the judges for the public final of the St Andrew's day debating championships on 29 November here in the Parliament, when the motion will be: "This house believes that the private sector should do more to solve child poverty". The cross out poverty campaign has also been part of the engage for education website, and information about the campaign has been given to directors of education. The Rev Neil Galbraith also met officials on 18 November to discuss his involvement in the Scottish Government's discussion paper on Scotland's child poverty strategy.

I would be delighted to attend any of the events for the 600th anniversary. It is a very important event to mark not just for St Andrews and the university but because of the university's contribution to wider thinking and academic achievement. I point out that Louise Richardson, although very impressive, is not the first female principal of a Scottish university, but I am delighted that she is taking the message about the launch of the 600th anniversary campaign to Brussels, ensuring that we can engage with our European friends to help to celebrate this important anniversary.

The Scottish Government has not had any discussions with local authorities regarding the termination of the contracts. It was announced in 2007 that the programme would be phased out. The programme was managed by the Scottish Arts Council, as was, and that body was involved in the contractual discussions between the cultural co-ordinators and the local authorities.

I am happy for the member to write to me outlining his concerns in detail. I point out that, in the area that he represents, Midlothian Council and West Lothian Council continue to pay for cultural co-ordinator posts using local authority funding. The phasing-out announcement back in 2007-08 identified that it was open to local authorities to do that. The City of Edinburgh Council decided not to take the programme forward. However, it has received grants from Creative Scotland's creative learning network fund and has set up an ambassador network. Also, in the past few weeks, the City of Edinburgh Council has appointed a manager for arts and learning, who is located in the education department. The individual in that post is an ex-cultural co-ordinator from Aberdeen.

We have taken a number of important steps to support the Scots language. Those include an audit of Scots language provision, a national conference on the Scots language, the funding of two Scots bodies, a survey of attitudes to Scots, the introduction of a census question on Scots and the establishment of a ministerial Scots language working group. The report from that group will be published soon and we will then consider how we can make further progress in responding to the recommendations of the group.

The member raises an extremely important point. We want accuracy in the census, but that relies on people being aware of what is being asked and what is appropriate in reply. That is why we have established the short-life working group to focus on raising awareness of the Scots language question in the census. The aim is to ensure that we inform people of the choices so that we receive accurate responses to the question and that people have the confidence to respond. We are working with representatives from the General Register Office for Scotland and the Scots language centre on that.

I look forward to the group publishing its report. I will give serious consideration to any recommendations in the report, and I suspect that it will include recommendations on the preparation of materials as well as on teaching and learning. I was extremely impressed by the Falkirk teachers I met who have integrated Scots into their learning. They have found that learning in their own dialect and language has a great impact on children, who can then respond properly in the classroom with confidence and an improved performance. The Scots language is not just a celebration of our culture; as those teachers from Falkirk relayed to me, it has an important role to play in improving the educational experience of many of our young Scots.

Public art is a key part of our streetscapes and gives a sense of place and visual delight to communities across Scotland. The Scottish Government is doing much to promote public art through the work of Creative Scotland, Historic Scotland and other cultural bodies in conjunction with local authorities. For example, the National Galleries of Scotland this year commissioned the celebrated sculptor Antony Gormley to display six life-size figures along the Water of Leith. The project has helped passers-by to appreciate and enjoy the public spaces that they inhabit.

I welcome the member's interest and passion in advocating recognition of the diverse and unique pieces of town art that exist in Glenrothes. I would be delighted to come and see the hippos and so on. I suspect that my six-year-old son might enjoy the visit as well. On a more serious point, recognising and promoting public art is part of Historic Scotland's responsibilities, too. In looking at our civic collections, we should think not just about our buildings but about our art. I am delighted that there has been a constructive dialogue with Historic Scotland. I know that Glenrothes has a special place in Tricia Marwick's heart and I would be delighted to come and visit.

We have supported and are helping to fund the now fully funded phase 1 of the redevelopment of the Edinburgh Sculpture Workshop through our partner, Creative Scotland, with lottery funding and the recent grant in aid. I understand that the work on that is due to start in early 2011. It is an ambitious project, which will create a centre of excellence for visual arts in Scotland, with local, national and international impact. I reassure the member that that certainly takes sculpture, as part of our contribution to Scotland's cultural experience, from being a Cinderella, as he perceives it, to being not just local but national and international in its reach.

I received the report from the museums think tank last week and have now read it and am considering its findings and  recommendations. I will also have a number of meetings with museums organisations this week, which will help to inform my response to the report that is due in the near future. As I advised the member in my answer to his written question on 18 November, the remit of the think tank is broader than just matters of funding.

I thank the member for his support for the collaboration that has already taken place and for recognising the importance of the Titian exhibition in the Kelvingrove in July as part of the Scotland tour. I draw to his attention the fact that the very successful Glasgow boys exhibition, which is now taking London by storm, also featured 30 paintings that were loaned from the National Galleries of Scotland. That indicates the movement by both Glasgow and the national collections in working together for the benefit of the people of Glasgow and Scotland. That is the type of collaboration, exchange and co-ordinated exhibition that I want to encourage in the future.

I thank Chris Harvie for his question and for providing an opportunity for the Parliament to mark the 175th anniversary of the birth of Andrew Carnegie. It will be up to the  museum itself to establish what exhibitions it has, but I cannot believe that there would be an exhibition in Dunfermline that did not celebrate the historic link with Andrew Carnegie. I also put on record my thanks to Fife Council and commend it for committing £6.8 million to this significant project, which will further enhance Dunfermline's tourist attractions.

The First Minister's visit to China in July and the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning's visit to China in October ensured that the Scottish Government continued to make significant progress in deepening our bilateral relationship with China across a range of areas and in support of the objectives that are set out in the Government's China plan. The First Minister led a high-level trade mission to China from 4 to 11 July 2010 to pursue Sino-Scottish business opportunities in key sectors, including the renewable energy, tourism, education and textile sectors. Following the First Minister's meetings with the vice-minister of administration of quality supervision, inspection and quarantine during his 2009 and 2010 visits, the geographical indicator status of Scotch whisky has been agreed. The United Kingdom Government announced that on 8 November.

I congratulate the Scotch Whisky Association, which has campaigned for three years for a GI of origin in China; indeed, it made its first application in 2007. There have been discussions between the SWA and the Chinese Government for three years, and I am pleased that the Scottish Government has played its part. The important issue to consider for the industry is that there were £44 million of Scotch whisky exports to China in 2009. We should bear in mind the global scale of whisky exports, and that Scotch  whisky contributes £3.9 billion in gross value added to the Scottish economy. We should also bear in mind that China is now the second biggest market. There is huge potential there, and the protection to prevent the production of counterfeits and stamp out claims of Scottish provenance where none exists will greatly enhance the opportunities in that market.

Alongside local authorities, Creative Scotland promotes cultural activity across Scotland to ensure a vibrant and thriving cultural scene throughout the country. I was delighted to announce the continuation of funding for the youth music initiative during my visit to the Scottish youth brass band championships in Perth on Sunday. The further investment of £10 million ensures that that successful programme will continue for another year, and it will provide young people throughout the country, including in the Linlithgow constituency, with the opportunity to get involved in music projects and activities. The evening was a fantastic showcase of entertainment, and West Lothian was well represented by the West Lothian schools brass band, which came runner-up in the premier section.

Indeed I will but, at the end of the day, it will be up to the companies to make their programming decisions themselves. Bathgate Regal community theatre now looks spectacular; it is changed days from its recent position. It should be celebrated. It is a great space, and it provides great opportunities to showcase some of the best of Scotland's talents. My answer to the question is similar to my answer to a question that Ted Brocklebank asked about the Byre theatre in St Andrews. We must be conscious of ensuring that all parts of Scotland can enjoy some of the best of our cultural productions. I know that, in celebrating Scotland's  sense of place, Creative Scotland is keen to ensure that there is a regional impact from investment in our cultural bodies. Bathgate certainly deserves to see the best.

I met the UK Minister for Tourism and Heritage on 3 November 2010 in Edinburgh, as did my colleague the Minister for Enterprise, Energy and Tourism.

I agree with the member's statements. Richard Lochhead and I have written to the UK Government on the issue. I can share with the Parliament comments that have been received from Caroline Spelman on the UK Government's position. She said: "May I reassure you that while the Government will always continue to listen to arguments for and against change, there are no plans to review the current arrangements for British Summer Time at this time." I say to the member politely, as I have said to other Conservative members, that the reason why we have the difficulty and are having to address the issue is that one of his Conservative colleagues, a certain Rebecca Harris MP, has introduced a private member's bill called the Daylight Saving Bill. It is that Conservative member who is causing the difficulties. I politely ask John Scott to sort out policy on the issue within the Conservative party. However, we support the points that he makes in his argument.

I thank the member for bringing the issue to our attention. I have great admiration for the centre and believe that it houses an important collection. John Buchan had a distinguished career as a writer and I am sure that many people want to visit that part of the world to see the collection. I urge the member to relay to the centre that we appreciate that it has concerns over the lease. The member is right to identify the Heritage Lottery Fund as a possible avenue for application. I understand that the Heritage Lottery Fund would be more than happy to discuss a potential funding application with the centre.

I am more than happy to do so, but I should not be a postbag for comments on the deficiencies of the UK Government on some issues. The member will no doubt be able to make representations to his UK Liberal Democrat colleagues who are now in government. The opportunities for Caithness are huge. I hope that Jamie Stone will join me in celebrating the Royal National Mod's achievements in Caithness, where the town of Thurso almost doubled its population as a result of the number of visitors who were there for the Mod. I urge him to encourage his Liberal Democrat councillors to celebrate the contribution that the Mod made, not only to Gaelic, but to tourism in Caithness.

I am delighted to have this opportunity to thank the teaching profession and all who work in or are part of school communities for what I have to call their unprecedented efforts in successfully continuing the roll-out of curriculum for excellence across our primary, special and secondary schools, in our nurseries and pre-schools and, we should not forget, in our colleges and even our universities. In all those areas of educational endeavour, young people are learning what it is to become successful learners, confident individuals, responsible citizens and effective contributors to society, which is a major step forward in Scottish education. More than thanking the people involved, I want to take the opportunity—and the motion makes this explicit—to confirm the whole Scottish Parliament's on-going support for and commitment to curriculum for excellence, which I hope we all agree provides the core principles for achieving the best possible education for our children and young people. There is no room for complacency. We are all aware of the difficult financial circumstances that we will face over the next few years. In those circumstances, more than any other, Scotland's education system needs stability, determination and focus. It requires unrelenting concentration on fulfilling the purpose of education in Scotland, to enable every single one of our children to achieve the highest possible educational standards and to give them the best possible preparation for successful life and work in the 21st century. In Scotland we have long understood the need for stability. In 2003, the Scottish Parliament's Education, Culture and Sport Committee, of which  I was pleased to be a member, published its report on the purposes of education, in which it highlighted stability in education as an issue in need of attention. The report stated: "There is a need to reconcile the often-expressed desire for a period of stability within the Scottish education system with the even more widespread perception of a need for change. Perhaps a clear and well thought-out sense of direction which is consistently pursued would provide the necessary level of stability?" I pay tribute to the previous Administration for taking up the opportunity to achieve that long-standing agreement on the direction that we wanted our education system to take. That agreement was and is the curriculum for excellence. That was and is the big prize. It is what teachers wanted; it is what headteachers wanted; it is what parents wanted; and it is what the Scottish Parliament wanted on behalf of Scottish society. It has its origins not just in the committee's inquiry but in the national debate on education in 2002, which also achieved a remarkable degree of consensus on the future direction of Scottish education. The aim was to improve Scottish education for each and every young person by undertaking radical reform and sticking with it over a period of time. Given the turbulent times that we are going into, the political consensus needs to be durable and strong. Our teaching professionals and our children and young people—our whole learning communities—expect and demand nothing less. Times are going to be tough. We will argue about the details of how we deal with that, but we need to retain an optimism and a confidence in our education system. That means an optimism and a confidence in the principles of curriculum for excellence and an optimism and a confidence that our education and learning professionals are up to the challenge and are being supported in it. When I became education secretary in December last year, there were difficulties. There was doubt that schools were ready and predictions—mostly from the Opposition benches—of catastrophe. I am glad to say that there has been a marked change since then. Considerable support has been put in place and, since August, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education and its partners have done valuable work to provide direct, hands-on support in schools across the country. [ Interruption .] Does Mr McNulty want to intervene?

I congratulate Bill Wilson on securing the debate and thank every member for contributing to it in an interesting fashion. I found out only one startling thing this evening. I already knew that Jackson Carlaw admired Margaret Thatcher; I did not know that he had a full-scale, working Dalek. Strangely, those two seem to go together rather well. This annual science in the Parliament event is a welcome opportunity for the science community to come together with parliamentarians and policy makers to consider the role of science in our economy. I am grateful to the Royal Society of Chemistry for its work in orchestrating the event so effectively, and I am pleased that many people who were at the event—and, I presume, are going back for a drink later on—are present this evening. I am sorry that no minister could be present this afternoon, but there was pressing parliamentary business. It was nothing quite so pressing as the prospect of setting other MSPs on fire, but I was not told that that was one of the options available to me. Nonetheless, I am glad that people are here.  I will address briefly some of the remarks that other members made before I make one or two points myself. Nigel Don did not demonstrate good scientific method in his research. He looked only at the post-school careers the individual members have followed; he did not delve into the details of their qualifications. In my first year at university, I took a course in sciences and found it absolutely fascinating. It built on the work that I had done at school in physics and biology. Indeed, I found it so fascinating that I was tempted for a while to become a meteorologist, which might have changed my career trajectory completely. I find myself in the position of holding the science portfolio in the Scottish Government. I wanted to reply to this debate because that portfolio is an important part of the work that I do and I am keen to support, encourage and assist science in Scotland, even in times of difficulty. I will illustrate in a minute or two some of the things that we are doing. The points that Elaine Murray, Mike Pringle and Alison McInnes made about the gender difficulties are well taken. The chief scientific adviser, Professor Anne Glover, raises the matter with me regularly. Discussion took place with Elaine Murray during the summer, and I am keen that other members be involved in that, because there is a genuine recruitment and retention issue to address. I think that some of the answers lie in curriculum for excellence and the work that we are doing in schools. Drawing together subjects in a much more interrelated approach to education will assist, as will the much more exciting and interesting courses to which that will lead. I am hopeful that that will make a difference. I say to Patrick Harvie that I can and will distinguish between belief and scientific fact; that is absolutely what I should do. However, I will not be a censor or forbid people from holding opinions or beliefs. I recognise where the lines lie, but I felt that Patrick Harvie moved rather far towards condemning people for their beliefs. I am clear that belief is not to be confused with scientific fact—

I am pleased that we have had the opportunity to debate the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill today and thank the members who have spoken in a thoughtful and constructive debate. There have been some very good, informed and knowledgeable speeches. I highlight Ian McKee's thoughtful speech and reassure him that under the Scottish heritage environment policy the default position for listing is that the building remains in active use. I think that that is an important element in setting out some of the wider context to this issue. Members have shown a lot of passion about the contribution that heritage can make to Scotland and its value as a key driver of tourism. The perspectives that we have heard from Renfrewshire, Orkney, Cramond and the Glasgow west end are important in putting in context our reasons for introducing a bill that will help to shore up and support the existing legislation. A number of interesting issues have been raised in today's debate, not least of which is Bill Wilson's inventive suggestion that those who damage buildings should be punished according to the century in which the building on which the offence is perpetrated was built. Indeed, Historic Scotland might be able raise some revenue by charging people to see those punishments being exacted. [ Laughter .] I am not quite sure who my champion would be, but Ted Brocklebank might well step  forward if required. I will continue to listen to any constructive arguments on this matter, but I stress again that two of the bill's underlying aims are to avoid placing any new burdens or duties on the public sector, private sector or individuals and to ensure that, in the current economic climate, implementation costs are kept low. On our proposal to extend the range of historic environment assets that can be scheduled, the committee expressed an expectation that the Scottish Government will act rigorously and have regard to strict criteria in considering possible sites for designation. I can confirm in response that existing legislation sets out that ministers may schedule only sites of "national importance" and the criteria used to determine that are set out in the Scottish historic environment policy. During its consideration of the bill, the Education Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee received representations against the proposal that any person should be able to apply for a certificate of immunity from listing and I acknowledged those concerns at my appearance before it on 29 September. I thank the committee for considering the arguments for and against limiting the scope of those who may apply for a certificate and note that it is not persuaded that the proposal for applications for a certificate against listing should be restricted to owners and occupiers. Margaret Smith and Claire Baker explained the issues very clearly indeed. The committee recommended that the Scottish Government provide further information on the certificate of immunity application process to give greater assurance to stakeholders. Pauline McNeill also made a specific request in that respect, and I can confirm that I am committed to issuing further information to the committee on the point that she has raised. I will write to the committee about its recommendation that the Scottish Government give further consideration to the availability of expertise to interpret information on the historic environment. I think that that should address the first of the two issues that Ken Macintosh raised. Finally, I confirm that the Scottish ministers agree with the committee that issues related to the inclusion of ecclesiastical buildings in the listed building consent process should not be covered in this bill. Bill Wilson asked about the £50,000 limit for fines. The current limit is £10,000; the £50,000 limit is in line with current environmental fines and is the maximum amount for a summary conviction. Fines for convictions on indictment are unlimited, and the gravity of the offence will be a factor in deciding the procedure. Ted Brocklebank made a number of points about battlefields. He said that the bill offers no test to determine whether a battlefield should be  included in the statutory inventory. The test will be whether a site is of national importance, as defined by the criteria that I have outlined. He also raised concerns about agricultural works. I will explain to him in writing why a class order and exemption will be allowed for lawful disturbance of agricultural land by ploughing for six or 10 years. Ken Macintosh was right to explore the issues that BEFS raised. I appreciate the advice that BEFS has given us. The policy aim of what it proposes is important; at issue is how we get that effect. The member referred to the duty of care that Government departments already have, but that relates only to estates, buildings and assets. The general duty to protect the historic environment that BEFS proposes relates to all public bodies when they are carrying out their functions. Regardless of whether the distinction is semantic, as has been suggested, or legal, the issue is worth exploring, so that we can address some of the concerns that have been raised. Ken Macintosh suggested that the duty might be similar to the duty that the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010 imposes. It is not, as that duty is narrowly focused on clearly defined issues relating to the Scottish marine area and, unlike the duty proposed by BEFS, is limited to the functions for which the act provides. The duty that BEFS proposes is also not similar to the duty to ensure biodiversity under the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004. However, it is important that the member has drawn out those issues, which I am happy to explore. I cannot cover all the points that members have made. Iain Smith referred to the listing of the school buildings on the Kilrymont Road. Ted Brocklebank has raised that point with officials. I reassure them both that Historic Scotland has no recent case history on the issue, but it will contact the site owners and the local authority to explore whether some of the issues of concern can be resolved. Pauline McNeill expressed concern about why conservation is not part of the debate. Conservation is controlled by planning and development law, but the member is right to say that we must be consistent in how we address both issues. In the bill, we are bringing some symmetry to the application of historical environment legislation and planning legislation. The member makes an important point. I hope that I have addressed some of the key issues that members have raised. As many members have said, it is important that we recognise that the Government—Historic Scotland is a Government agency—is not the only body that is responsible for and has interests in the historic environment—[ Interruption .]

Margaret Smith and others referred to the number of volunteers who look after and support local scheduled monuments and other properties. The private owners who are responsible for many of our buildings must be commended for the work that they do. I thank all of those who have contributed to this thoughtful and thorough debate on the general principles of the bill. People may not have thought that the bill would generate one of the most interesting debates in the Parliament, but the contributions of Alasdair Allan, Ian McKee and others have shown otherwise. Liam McArthur referred to the Westray wife and the tourism boom that is taking place in Orkney. It is important to recognise that the historic environment is not dry or dull—it evokes a great deal of passion from members, contributes to the economy and provides skills. Ian McKee referred to the provision of double glazing in Edinburgh and the new skills that are needed to ensure that existing buildings can tackle climate change issues. We should celebrate our rich historic environment. The bill will support many of our other objectives, especially in relation to climate change, and provide regulatory authorities with a much-improved toolkit to help them manage and protect Scotland's historic environment, for the enjoyment and benefit of current and future generations. I ask members to support the motion and to approve the general principles of the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.

That is an important point. I reassure the member that Historic Scotland is in discussions with the National Trust, not least about an exchange of skills. The co-operation that he highlighted is already happening.

The point is crucial. I re-emphasise that what the BEFS proposes would be an additional duty. If Ken Macintosh says that it is not a duty and that it is covered elsewhere, will he explain where it is covered? He has referred to local authorities, but the duty proposed by the BEFS would apply to public bodies. There is a large number of public bodies, including the health service, the Ministry of Defence—you name it. The point is important. I have established a working group to ensure that the result of what we are trying to achieve can be promoted, but I have concerns about what is put in law.

Ken Macintosh is right about a duty of care for Government departments, but widening the scope to public bodies is an issue. The technical proposal is for a duty to enhance the historic environment, which is different.

The member raises an important issue. The defence of ignorance relates to areas that are scheduled monuments. If someone discovers something in an area that is not a scheduled monument, they cannot be accused of detracting from a scheduled monument. Does the member recognise that I addressed some of the issues relating to ploughing, especially on land that has been used in relation to the class consent? I am pleased that the committee examined those important issues thoroughly.

Does the member acknowledge that George Reid made it clear in his report that he did not see an immediate need for comprehensive historic environment legislation but that, as part of its development, the National Trust for Scotland would need to look at its governance, and that might require legislation?

There is nothing in the bill that would stop that happening in the future. The decision to list should be based on the merits of each case, not on the stage at which the application is made. The parents in the situation that Pauline McNeill describes would have been able to apply for a certificate of immunity, but they would have run the risk that the listing might not have been granted. The Law Society has raised the concern that the new provision could somehow thwart development, but that may not be the case, as the decision to list would still be based on the merits and demerits of the case itself, and not necessarily on the certificate of immunity.

I begin by thanking Karen Whitefield and the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee for their careful and informed scrutiny of the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill and for preparing the stage 1 report on the bill. I also thank all the individuals and organisations who commented on the draft bill, which was subject to public consultation in 2009, and those who contributed to the wider stakeholder engagement process that has played a key role in helping to develop and refine the bill's provisions. Before I move on to discuss the bill and the key issues that are raised in the committee's report, I would like to say a few words about the importance of Scotland's historic environment. The role that the historic environment plays in providing the people of Scotland with a sense of place has been brought home to me in rather stark fashion in recent weeks with the damage, through fire, of the Star and Garter hotel in my home town of Linlithgow. The hotel, which is a B-listed Georgian building, has adorned the east end of the town since the middle of the 18th century and has been an iconic building in Linlithgow's townscape. The reaction to the fire has demonstrated the prominent role that that listed building has played in helping to define the physical character of Linlithgow High Street, and the obvious connection that it has with the sense of place that is felt by the people who live there. The importance of the historic environment is not limited to a sense of place. It also makes a significant contribution to the economy, for example through tourism and the support of indigenous craft skills. It is intrinsic to our strong sense of cultural identity, it provides the people of Scotland with a rich environment in which to live and work, and it is inspiring and has a significant role to play in developing a sustainable economic future for Scotland. In introducing the bill, the Scottish Government's aims have been threefold: to improve the management and protection of our unique historic environment by addressing the specific gaps and weaknesses in the current legislative framework that were identified during a year-long stakeholder  engagement process in 2007; to avoid placing significant burdens or duties on central or local government, owners of assets, business or members of the public; and, in a challenging economic climate, to keep the implementation cost low. One of the bill's underlying objectives is to harmonise aspects of historic environment legislation with the planning regime when it is practicable to do so, which has been particularly welcomed by stakeholders. However, the bill should also be seen to complement the work that is already being done by Historic Scotland in partnership with local authorities to streamline and simplify our system of heritage protection. Examples of that are the establishment of joint-working agreements between local government and Historic Scotland, and the managed removal of a duty on local authorities to notify the Scottish ministers of certain casework. The bill will contribute to the Scottish Government's purpose by enhancing the ability of the Scottish ministers and planning authorities to manage in a sustainable way Scotland's unique historic environment. The bill will support the Scottish Government's greener strategic objective, and will contribute directly to the meeting of national outcome 12 by providing a much-improved legislative toolkit to help to protect and enhance our built environment for future generations. The committee considered the evidence that was submitted to it very carefully and produced a thorough and thoughtful report. I will touch on some of the key issues that are discussed in that report. The bill will enhance the ability of the Government to work with developers and owners by enabling the Scottish ministers to set out in a grant award letter the terms of recovery in the event of a disposal or a breach of a condition of grant. I am pleased to note that the committee concluded that that proposal is sensible and will provide a higher level of certainty to grant recipients. The proposal in the bill to modify the current defence of ignorance in relation to unauthorised works affecting scheduled monuments will modernise an archaic piece of law and bring the framing of such offences closer to that of other environmental offences. The committee stressed the importance of the availability of, and access to, information on scheduled monuments for the owners of such sites, and it has asked for an example of the information that we propose to send to all owners, if the bill is enacted. I confirm that a draft  information pack will be with the committee in advance of its stage 2 consideration. The bill will introduce a system of enforcement notices for scheduled monuments that will harmonise the arrangements for scheduled monuments with those for listed buildings. The bill also includes provisions that will provide for a system of stop notices and temporary stop notices for listed buildings and scheduled monuments that will strengthen protection for designated historic assets and bring it into line with the planning system. I am pleased to note the broad support for those provisions. The bill will create a duty for the Scottish ministers to compile and maintain two new statutory inventories: an inventory of gardens and designed landscapes, and an inventory of battlefields. The inventories will enable nationally important sites to be identified and recorded on a statutory basis, and they will allow planning authorities to pick up on changes to the inventories immediately. It is important that those provisions will impose no new additional duties or burdens on owners. The bill will extend the range of historic environment assets that can be scheduled under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979. That provision will allow the Scottish ministers to designate and protect a small number of nationally important sites that are currently afforded no protection, such as, for example, scatters of flint tools that mark sites of early human occupation. Such sites are important but rare; the total number of sites that are likely to be scheduled is around 10. The bill will also introduce a new power that will enable the Scottish ministers to offer any person a certificate that will guarantee that a building will not be listed during the five years from the date of the certificate. The main policy aim of that is to provide certainty for owners and developers who are considering works. It will allow projects to be started with confidence, because crucial decisions about listing have been made at an early stage in the process. The policy is not, as a matter of principle, to exempt buildings from listing, because the listing of a building would be a perfectly proper outcome of the process of considering a building for a certificate of immunity. That should address some of the concerns that have been raised by the Law Society for Scotland. I am pleased to note that the committee supports that proposal. I am also pleased to note that the committee recognises that our proposals to extend to successor owners the liability for any expenses for urgent works that are carried out by the regulatory authorities will address the situation in which an owner transfers ownership in order to avoid payment.  I want to address some of the points that were made in written evidence from the Built Environment Forum Scotland, which called for the bill to do two things. First, it wants to bill to give all public bodies a responsibility to protect, enhance and have special regard to Scotland's historic environment in exercising their duties. Secondly, it wants the bill to ensure that local authorities have access, and give special regard, to appropriate information and expert advice on the local historic environment. The Scottish Government's view is that the bill, which is cost neutral, is not the vehicle for such provisions, because both proposals could have significant cost implications. The first duty that is sought by the BEFS would apply to all public bodies, no matter how remote their connection to the historic environment. It would impose a proactive duty to protect and enhance the historic environment, which goes much further than simply having to have regard to, or—to use BEFS's words—"to take cognisance of" it. Such a duty would require additional resources to ensure compliance. Indeed, the duty would be so open-ended that it is difficult to see a point at which a public body could safely stop spending money without fear of non-compliance. The second proposal is simply not developed enough to be costed accurately. Any legislative duty would give local authorities no alternative but to spend the money that is necessary to bring the current information and expertise up to the standard that would be required by such a duty. However, I acknowledge that information and expertise are important and, to that end, a working group has been set up to examine the issues that are involved and to identify a range of options for improving on the current situation that will take realistic account of the current economic climate.

That is not how we interpret the proposal, and it is certainly not how local authorities and others have interpreted it. The proposal seems to be for a proactive duty that does not currently exist, although I look forward to hearing Ken Macintosh's contribution on that point. Our view is that there should be no new statutory controls and duties when better and more proportionate means to bring about improvements to the heritage framework are  available. The Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill is a tightly focused technical amending bill that has been drafted with the intention of avoiding placing significant new burdens or duties on public bodies or individuals, and implementation costs are expected to be low. The bill addresses the specific gaps and weaknesses in the current heritage legislation framework that were identified during extensive discussions with stakeholders, and its provisions will make a good system better and improve the ability of the regulatory authorities to work with partners to manage Scotland's unique historic legacy. I look forward to hearing members' contributions on this important issue. No doubt we will also get a sense of the importance of Scotland's historic environment from members' reflections from their constituencies of how such issues have had an effect and may have an effect in the future. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.

Argyll and Bute Council is responsible for decisions on school closures in its area, in accordance with legal requirements, and the democratically elected local councillors will be accountable for the decisions that they take. As members will be aware, the council has postponed its decision and has asked officers to complete further work on the proposals. As the member knows, the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010, which was proposed by this Government, establishes a presumption against the closure of rural schools by ensuring that a decision by a council to consult on a closure proposal is only a last resort. Argyll and Bute Council must, like all councils, follow the robust consultation process set out in that act, and if there is strong evidence that that has not been properly done, Scottish ministers will call in and could refuse consent to any closure decisions.

As the member is aware, adult Gaelic learning is central to Bòrd na Gàidhlig's action plan to increase the number of Gaelic speakers, which was prepared for the bòrd at the request of the Scottish Government. We are working with the bòrd to ensure that there is a wide range of effective support in place for adult learners of Gaelic. The bòrd announced on 13 October additional support for the ulpan method of learning. The bòrd is now providing an additional £112,000 for Deiseal in 2010-11, taking the level of support to £202,000 in total, so that the rate of provision can be accelerated. In addition, the bòrd has also approved in principle support of £250,000 for each of the two years after that.

It is important to stress that Taic's funding is in place until the end of this financial year and support from that organisation to local Gaelic pre-school groups should remain in place until then under the terms of Taic's agreement with Bòrd na Gàidhlig. We also agree with the bòrd about the need, which it identifies in the action plan, to ensure that there is a comprehensive service for Gaelic early-years provision, including funding and support for volunteers, disclosure checking, insurance, payroll services and compliance with the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator and the Scottish Commission for the Regulation of Care. Training for leaders and improved teaching resources are also a feature. The bòrd is currently in dialogue with local groups to assess their needs. Improvement in provision should increase parental confidence, leading to increasing numbers entering Gaelic education. We expect the bòrd to have its support  mechanisms fully in place in December, so that Gaelic early-years groups will continue to be supported beyond the end of March 2011, when the Taic funding agreement with the bòrd is due to cease.

The Scottish Government has put in place a range of measures to support the Scots language. That includes an audit of Scots language provision, a survey of attitudes to Scots, funding of two Scots language bodies, the introduction of a census question and the establishment of a Scots language working group. Those actions are based on the pre-election commitments that we made in respect of the Scots language. I acknowledge the member's personal contribution to many of those actions.

I am indeed aware of the launch of the book, and although I was unable to attend the official launch on 21 October, I have heard that the event went well. I look forward to reading the book in the near future, having translated parts of "The Aeneid" from the original when I studied Latin at school. John Law's untimely passing earlier this year is a great loss to those who are involved in promotion of the Scots language. I am sure that we all agree that he made a great contribution with enormous passion to a cause that was close to his heart.

I note the member's interest and support for the promotion of our Roman heritage in general, and in Perthshire in particular.  The Scottish Government has demonstrated its commitment to our Roman heritage through its support for the inscription of the Antonine wall as part of the frontiers of the Roman empire world heritage site in 2008. That has been the springboard for partnership working with local authorities, heritage bodies, museums and local community groups to promote the heritage of the area. The positive work coming from this transnational world heritage site will help to raise awareness of our Roman heritage across Scotland and Europe, which will help to boost the heritage tourism industry and, therefore, the economy across Scotland.

Some might ask, "What have the Romans ever done for us?" but I am not one such person. Bringing together Scotland's Roman heritage is an interesting idea. It is clear that much work is being done around the Antonine wall, but I am sure that several people—not least Roseanna Cunningham—would want such a centre to be located in Perthshire. I understand that the Ardoch fort site is privately owned, so that raises issues of bringing together sectors. I cautiously remind Murdo Fraser that the degree of capital cuts in the Scottish budget means that creating a new centre would be extremely problematic, unless he could persuade his colleagues at the Westminster Treasury of the merits of improving our capital situation. I fully support the concept of capitalising on our Roman heritage, but we must be realistic about what we can do. At this time, we should have our initial focus on the Antonine wall.

Instead of Scots—or perhaps Picts and Celts—fighting Romans, as happened in ancient times, we have Scots fighting over the Romans. The concept is there. Great resources are available, such as the Scotland's history initiative from Learning and Teaching Scotland, which makes a fantastic array of Roman heritage items from all our collections and museums available to our young people. We need to show what we can do with the Antonine wall. That means that all five local authorities that are involved must capitalise on that. However, interesting aspects of the Roman impact and Roman history go across Scotland. In Perthshire, Doune primary school was involved in the recent excavation of a fort near it, so Roman history is not exclusive to the central belt. We must marshal our limited resources effectively by being productive and successful around the Antonine wall. However, that should not limit our horizons on what can be done elsewhere in the country.

Plans to relocate Creative Scotland will be carried forward as announced by Creative Scotland on 19 October 2010.

As I said in an answer to a parliamentary question from Pauline McNeill, relocation will take place around mid-January 2011. The relocation costs are less than those in the business plan that was produced earlier this year. We understand that they will not exceed £70,000 from the funds that are earmarked for the purpose in 2010-11.

The Scottish Government supports and promotes theatre through our partner  Creative Scotland, through our direct funding relationship with the National Theatre of Scotland and through our Edinburgh festivals expo fund. On Iain Smith's interest, I put it on record that I have attended a positive and successful performance by Dundee Rep of "Sunshine on Leith" in Edinburgh in recent weeks.

The short answer is yes. We need to value the importance of the Byre. I know that there will be disappointment at the two-year flexible funding, which is neither core funding nor five-year funding. However, it is important that we look across Scotland to see how we all within culture and the arts can support different institutions. I am very pleased that both Scottish Opera and Scottish Ballet have visited the Byre over the past month and that the Scottish Chamber Orchestra is due to collaborate with the Byre. Creative Scotland had been due to meet representatives of the Byre. Clearly, the meeting did not take place, pending the appeal, but I am under the impression that it will happen very soon. I encourage Creative Scotland, Fife Council and all those who are interested to come together to look at a collective and sustainable solution that will help the Byre theatre.

I will relay the suggestion to Creative Scotland. However, we also have to recognise that in making funding decisions vulnerability itself has to be addressed. The organisation has to address vulnerability issues, whether of the business model, artistic interpretation, relationships or other matters. It has to address the issue and make improvements.  The member is absolutely correct in saying that the problem is one not only for the Byre theatre but for other theatres across Scotland—theatres that are very important to local communities. Scotland's sense of place in how we celebrate our culture has to be recognised. I am not convinced that flexible funding is the route to that; it is not a consistent funding model. The points that the member makes are properly made. Indeed, the Scotland's creative industry partnership that has been established is looking at the economic models of performing theatre. The member's points can be fed into that working group.

Indeed, I will. I am not sure that I have the opportunity this evening to attend the event, but I will do so if I can. I am travelling to Glasgow tonight for the Fairbridge film gala evening 2010. Fairbridge is using film and theatre to help to support young people. Indeed, the work that is happening across Scotland in relation to prisoners should be brought to the attention of the Parliament. I saw a very powerful women's production at Greenock prison in which empowerment and re-evaluation of lives was clearly visible. Seeing prisoners revisiting their previous lives in theatre form and asserting their desire not to repeat the problems of the past was one of the most dramatic performances that I have seen.

Since the establishment of Creative Scotland on 1 July, there have been nine formal meetings with staff representatives from Unite and PCS. Topics covered at these meetings included job matching of existing staff, redeployment and recruitment, voluntary early severance arrangements and pay and grading issues.

I am aware that concerns have been raised by some people and I think that discussions have been taking place with Robin Harper. James Kelly may wish to ask Robin Harper about that. As Minister for Culture and External Affairs, I have issued a letter of guidance to Creative Scotland, as part of which I said that I expect to see a clear strategic plan. The organisation was established only on 1 July. The board met in August, and clear direction is quite evident in some of the activities that have already taken place. There were far more concerns in recent years, when some members of the Parliament were trying to thwart the development of Creative Scotland, than there has been since its establishment on 1 July. However, I reassure the member that there will be clear direction and it will be shared with not only the staff but the rest of the cultural organisations in Scotland.

First, I offer my congratulations to the Edinburgh Sculpture Workshop for winning the arts funding prize for Edinburgh. Its ambitious project will create a centre of excellence for visual arts for Scotland with a local, national and international impact. We have supported the now fully funded phase 1 of the redevelopment through our partners Creative Scotland with lottery funding and recent grant in aid, and I understand that work is due to begin on this exciting development in early 2011.

Indeed. I think that it will do that, which is why I mentioned in my first answer that it will have an international perspective. I recognise Malcolm Chisholm's support for the project. I am looking forward to visiting it to see the work as it progresses. When times are difficult for many other areas, it is important that we celebrate and note our successes. The establishment of the Edinburgh Sculpture Workshop's new premises and its winning of the arts funding prize are things that we should celebrate. We should give recognition to all those who have had a perhaps long and difficult journey in trying to establish the new project and we should support those who are supporting it.

The Scottish Government recognises the significant contribution of Scotland's museums to education, health and wellbeing, and cultural tourism. We will continue to work with the museums sector in the difficult economic climate ahead.

I am aware of the member's passionate support for the football museum. I will write to him about the figures that he quoted, but I think that he is quoting United Kingdom figures and not Scotland's figures, because Scotland's  museums have seen very good progress. Indeed, Edinburgh castle had almost its best performance for seven years—it was only a couple of hundred thousand off that—and one of the most successful Augusts for some time. I think that Scotland has been bucking the trend of the rest of the UK in terms of museum attendance. However, that is not to belie the very successful work of the football museum. The member must respect the fact that about 120 of the 340 museums that are members of Museums Galleries Scotland do charge. As an independent organisation, it is up to the Scottish football museum to consider whether it wants to charge or not. It has been well supported by the Government, with £70,000 allocated to it for its lighting area and £20,000 for its very good Alzheimer project, which helps people in the community through football. However, if the member wishes to make representations, I suggest that he do so to the museum itself.

I am a supporter of free admission. However, the member will be aware of the funding problems that we are experiencing, some of which are the responsibility of the previous Labour Government. Once we see the opportunities in the budget, we will have to make assessments. One of the successes of Scotland's museums is the free access to the museums that currently have that.

The Scottish Government recognises the importance of supporting the nation's built heritage. Our commitment this year is an investment of £12 million. We have also introduced the Historic Environment (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill to the Parliament.

I understand and appreciate the trust's concerns. I also appreciate and am encouraged by the trust's attempts to protect part of the community's built heritage. However, I hope that the member appreciates that the Scottish ministers cannot get involved in specific cases at that stage and that his concerns should, for the moment, be addressed through the planning system. I am appreciative of the trust's commitment.

There will be savings, but savings are not the main driver. The prime reason for establishing the new agency is to ensure that we have the best possible national structure in place to support and challenge our education system. Nonetheless, the creation of the new organisation provides an excellent opportunity to ensure that it will deliver its services as efficiently as possible, making savings whenever it can.

As a result of the commitment of teachers and other professionals to raising the standard of education and learning in Scotland, the curriculum for excellence is now a reality in our nurseries, schools and colleges across Scotland. The curriculum for excellence management board, which met today, is using a range of evidence from partners to monitor and advise on implementation matters. I believe, as I think most people do, that it is going well.

As I said in committee yesterday, the General Teaching Council for Scotland's surveys of post-probation teachers show that a significant number of teachers gain employment in the course of the school year. However, the employment of teachers is a matter for local authorities, and the extent to which new teachers find posts is greatly dependent on local authority recruitment decisions.

We expect institutions to work closely with one other and with the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to ensure that further and higher education provision across Scotland is coherent, relevant and of high quality. Moreover, we announced in August that there would be a review of post-16 education and vocational training. That review will explore options for more effective approaches to workforce development, support for young people seeking work for the first time and support for the unemployed. College provision is included in the scope of the review, which will report to ministers by March 2011. We shall consider then what further steps to take.

The development of literacy skills is vital to people of all ages in Scotland. We recognise without question that a strong, successful country requires strong and secure literacy skills. Literacy is key to life chances for learning, employability and full participation in our society. Without literacy skills, health and wellbeing are impaired or negated. Without literacy skills, the chances of offending and repeat offending behaviour are greater. Without literacy skills, it is also more likely that an individual will live in poverty. Most profoundly of all, the likelihood is that the children of the person without literacy skills will also lack those skills. Without literacy skills, people in our society become locked into a cycle of difficulty that leads to impairment in learning. In January, during our debate on the literacy commission's report and its recommendations on ways to advance literacy across society, I made a commitment to work with the commission to bring forward an action plan for literacy in Scotland. Today, I am fulfilling that commitment and I am launching the Scottish Government's literacy action plan. This is the first time since devolution that a Scottish Administration has laid out a concerted plan of action aimed at improving literacy levels. The plan sets out our vision to raise standards of literacy for all, from the early years through to adulthood. It is designed to improve the literacy of all who would benefit from support across the continuum of learning. That will require sustained commitment and continuing action at all levels of Government, and support at all points of the education system and through wider public services. There needs to be a particular focus on those with the lowest levels of literacy. The action plan will build on existing good practice and ensure that literacy will have a central and continuing focus in education and related Government policies. I am confident that it will raise standards. We have worked closely with members of the literacy commission as we have developed the literacy action plan, drawing on their expertise. I  thank them for their support and look forward to working with them as we implement its actions. The plan draws on the recommendations of the literacy commission, which were set out in its report, "A Vision for Scotland". Those recommendations reflect in great part the aims of the Government, and many of the commission's priorities feature in the literacy action plan. I am sorry that Rhona Brankin is not in the chamber, but I would like to commend her—

When proposing school mergers, local authorities must undertake a consultation, using the updated and robust processes that are set out in the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Act 2010.

Feasgar math. I welcome the opportunity to respond to the motion and to  conclude the debate today. I pay tribute to Ted Brocklebank for bringing the motion to Parliament and for his consistent and persistent support for BBC Alba. I am intrigued by the new schedule, including the programme on redheads. Alasdair Allan, as interviewed by Russell Brand, now has a ready-made audience. I welcome the themes that are addressed in the motion, which testify to the contribution of BBC Alba to Scottish economic and cultural life. Without doubt, BBC Alba is a significant addition to broadcasting in Scotland. I will offer some clear reasons why I believe that BBC Alba is to be commended for its achievements and deserves to have access to Freeview. First, we should all welcome the boost that BBC Alba has given to the independent production sector in Scotland. As has been mentioned, last year BBC Alba commissioned more than 50 per cent of all the hours that were commissioned in that sector in Scotland. We should also welcome the jobs that have been created, the skills that have been retained and the artistic excellence that has been encouraged throughout Scotland. In addition, we should be mindful of the fact that much of that has been achieved in areas of low population density where a small number of jobs has an important impact. BBC Alba should be congratulated on, along with its television services, its enhanced radio provision and its excellent online services for all ages, both of which have played a key role in sustaining the Gaelic language. Earlier this year, the Scottish Government provided MG Alba with £50,000 for a Gaelic learners website. I look forward to its being launched and to hearing more about it later this month. BBC Alba should also be commended for extending the range of programmes that are available in Scotland. Indeed, I was delighted to see Linlithgow Rose, my home-town football team, win the junior cup when that match was broadcast on BBC Alba. Without doubt, public service broadcasting has been enhanced in Scotland as a result of the additional choice that is provided by BBC Alba in news, current affairs, sport, the arts, heritage and children's programmes. We should all welcome the way in which BBC Alba has engaged young people in Scotland. It has developed children's programmes and educational materials. The innovative and successful film G competition is now in its third year, and MG Alba is supporting training in the media industry, Gaelic writing courses in further education and media courses in schools. BBC Alba should also be congratulated on the high approval rating that it has received from its viewers, the strong appeal that it has among the  Gaelic audience and its ability to attract new viewers and listeners to its programmes. In addition, we should all welcome the contribution that BBC Alba makes to education generally. BBC Alba supports Gaelic learning at all levels, and the channel can function, in effect, as a new Gaelic presence in the home to support the efforts of parents to pass on the language. There are many initiatives to support and promote Gaelic in Scotland, and I am confident that BBC Alba brings added value to our many other efforts—which Peter Peacock recognised and which have received support from all parties across the chamber—to create a secure future for Gaelic in Scotland. I believe that BBC Alba has made a positive contribution to public service broadcasting in Scotland by boosting jobs and the economy, by promoting artistic excellence and the creative industries, by supporting education and learning, and by promoting Gaelic. Along with many other people throughout the country, the Scottish Government has been very impressed with the progress and achievements of BBC Alba, and we remain in favour of the proposal—which is supported by the BBC executive and MG Alba—to extend the channel's reach by securing access to Freeview. Members will be aware that the Scottish Parliament unanimously endorsed that proposal in its debate on BBC Alba in February 2010. I followed that with a letter to the chair of the BBC trust on the matter. We are aware that the present proposal will have some impact on radio services, but we are persuaded that the gain for BBC Alba would be significant in comparison to the slight counterimpact on radio services. We hope that the trust agrees that the argument for BBC Alba's access to Freeview is compelling. The vast majority of people who listen to radio on Freeview in Scotland listen to stations that are already available on FM or AM. Recent research suggests that the number of Freeview radio listeners who are at risk of losing access to their digital radio stations is around 4,000—as could be inferred from the original proposal for BBC Alba's transmission on Freeview of October 2009. That number compares to the expected 150,000 new viewers that carriage of BBC Alba on Freeview would bring. We also take the view that Freeview access would be fitting recognition of the success and accomplishments of BBC Alba since its launch in 2008, and of the expectations of actual and potential viewers in Scotland. A compelling case has been made by many people, including Jamie McGrigor, that people are being denied the opportunity to receive BBC Alba. That is already happening; the question is whether the BBC trust  will compound the situation or whether it will provide that opportunity. We have heard impassioned pleas and expressions of support from Pauline McNeill, Alasdair Allan and Dave Thompson, and we remain firmly supportive of the current proposal and hope that any slight reduction in radio service can be addressed by other means. Our hope is that the BBC will be able to find a long-term solution to the question. I welcome the opportunity to agree with colleagues today on a number of issues, such as the strength of BBC Alba and the contribution that it makes to Scotland and Gaelic. Our consistent message has been that BBC Alba should have access to Freeview, and I assure members that I will write again to the BBC trust to draw its attention to the strength of cross-party support for that position, as expressed here today.  Meanwhile, we have a two-year anniversary to celebrate. I remember the Elvis programme that was mentioned earlier. I did not tune in to it deliberately; I found it by accident, but was drawn into it by its production values and the quality of its content. Meal ur naidheachd do BBC Alba. Congratulations to BBC Alba.  Meeting closed at 18:41.

The Scottish Government participates in the programme for international student assessment—or PISA—survey run by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. The survey provides comparative information on the performance of Scotland's 15-year-olds in reading, mathematics and science.

The Scottish Government is committed to improving literacy for everyone in Scotland. In particular, curriculum for excellence has literacy at its heart and all teachers have responsibility for its development. Our ambition to improve literacy skills extends beyond schools: our focus starts in the early years and continues right through to lifelong learning. I will shortly be launching a literacy action plan, which will set out our vision to improve literacy for all, from the early years to adulthood, and the actions that we will take to deliver it.

I am very pleased that the Conservatives should choose to use their allocated time to bring the subject of the future of higher education in Scotland to the chamber. In the piece in the Scotland on Sunday to which Elizabeth Smith referred, I paid that tribute, too. For the record, it should be noted that I am glad that that has happened and I think that we can have a consensual debate. We had such a debate in the chamber on 3 June, when we reached the consensus that tuition fees—both up-front and back-door—are not the right solution for Scotland. I hope that today we can build on that by working towards a broader consensus on what a sustainable funding and organisational solution should look like to preserve the excellent reputation of our universities for years to come. I also want to set the record straight in response to Elizabeth Smith's closing words. She talked about a desperation for leadership in our university sector. Last week, at the very conference that she organised, Professor Anton Muscatelli, the principal of the University of Glasgow, said: "I think Scotland's universities are doing extremely well at the moment. We have three in the top 100, five in the top 200. So, at the moment there is no problem." He went on to say that he wanted to see a resolution to this issue over the next year. I am surprised that there should be laughter from the Labour Party at Anton Muscatelli's opinion. The Opposition usually quotes him with approval, but when he disagrees with it, Opposition members  laugh at him. That says something about the future of higher education in Scotland.

I, too, thank the committee for its valuable work, which was set out clearly by the convener, Gil Paterson. The committee performs an important and valuable role for the Parliament, which must be recognised. When Angela Constance voiced her concern at the possibility of becoming a member of the committee, all that I could hear from the front bench was, "It could have been the Subordinate Legislation Committee." As Bruce Crawford has said, the Government endorses the committee's conclusions. In particular, we welcome and support the committee's conclusion that the issues raised by the commission's report are best dealt with through the Scottish Parliament's standing orders rather than through Westminster legislation. It is interesting that the committee supported only three proposals that would require amendments to the Scotland Act 1998: the relaxation of the limitation on the number of Deputy Presiding Officers; the move away from overly prescriptive requirements for a members' interests regime; and the introduction of a requirement for a statement on legislative competence for members' bills. As Bruce Crawford said, the Government has reservations about the last of those—I will return to that point. As a general rule, we do not believe that the procedures of the Scottish Parliament should be laid down in the Scotland Act 1998, which we cannot change. We believe that the Scottish Parliament should take responsibility for its own procedures and practices and not be dependent on the UK Parliament or the UK Government to lay out how we should operate. We also agree that further work is required on many of the recommendations. Inevitably, there is greater expertise—or at least a greater range of views—in the Scottish Parliament on its procedures than the commission could draw on in its deliberations. Those who have been members since 1999 might reflect on the fact that, in the Parliament's first session, there were regular reports and recommendations on improving the standing orders, and a separate committee did just that. The commission has set out proposals, but the Parliament is perfectly capable of forming and owning the solutions. That has come through loud and clear in this debate. I turn to issues that members have raised. Pauline McNeill talked about the European and External Relations Committee's recommendations and, latterly, its reflections on the Lisbon treaty and other issues. I reassure her that, without having to make any changes to the standing orders or legislation, we are already making  changes in our Government-Parliament relationships and in how we work with Westminster and Europe on some of the subsidiarity issues that she touched on. None of those changes requires changes to the standing orders; they are taking place already. Indeed, I will meet David Lidington at the end of the debate. Those things are happening and the relationships are being built as we go on. It has been suggested that we have joint UK committees. However, there would be a danger that that would reinvent the problems that the Parliament's European and External Relations Committee faced for a considerable time until some improvements were made. There would be a danger of creating a bottleneck and reinventing previous problems. It is not impossible for relations to be built between the Scottish Parliament's committees and the UK Parliament's committees. Robert Brown might recall that the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee regularly corresponded with the relevant UK committees in relation to common issues.

The emphasis is on common interest. Formalising procedures because that seems the right thing to do rather than basing the relationship on issues would be problematic. It is probably more important that we think about our relationships in terms of issues. Angela Constance made the point in an excellent speech that this is about relationships between people, and if people want them to work they will work. Robert Brown made an interesting comment about whether, in policy terms, the Scottish Parliament should act as an agent of the UK Government. I was interested in his reflection, which might have been an allusion to, for example, Northern Ireland in relation to social security. I was not quite sure of that, but it was an important contribution and, no doubt, we will hear more about it. I return to a central point that David McLetchie, Wendy Alexander and Pauline McNeill made about legislative competence. It is important to remember that, currently, under the Scotland Act 1998, ministers and the Presiding Officer have a statutory duty to make a statement on legislative competence. Sections 31(1) and 31(2) of the Scotland Act 1998 clearly set that out.

I am sure that David McLetchie recognises—and, as a former minister, Ross Finnie will know—that when law officers' views are sought, there is a standing convention that their legal advice is not shared. The recommendations in the report from the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee are about members' bills. The issue is David McLetchie's lack of faith in the Presiding Officer. I worry, too, about Wendy Alexander, who, as a minister, introduced bills, and who will know that in doing so she had to make statements on legislative competence. The committee's proposals, as far as I read them, are about members' bills.

The issue has been raised by various members. Under the Scotland Act 1998, a statement of legislative competence has to be made by the Presiding Officer and by ministers, but not by back benchers when they introduce members' bills. I move on to other areas that have been raised in the debate, such as interparliamentary and intergovernmental issues. There are challenges in Parliament-to-Parliament relationships and in Government-to-Government relationships, and we are working hard with the current UK Government, as we did with the previous one, to improve the Government-to-Government relationship. The improvements that have taken place will rely on political will. However, it is still early days. We have made it clear that we support all the recommendations in the committee's report. Nicol Stephen referred to history. Perhaps, in considering the Government's preference for full financial responsibility rather than the flawed proposals in the commission's report, he will reflect on why the Liberals want to abandon their long-standing commitment to federalism, and why the Steel commission is not part of their thinking. We have reasons for preferring full financial responsibility—

Circumstances have changed and, as the committee's report suggests, time has moved on and there have been changes to procedures, not least with the joint ministerial committee. Those developments mean that we need to be fluid in our thinking. We can take some of the commission's proposals, own them and shape them for ourselves. The European and External Relations Committee is already making changes. The joint ministerial committee is doing likewise. I will meet the Secretary of State for Scotland shortly to continue our intergovernmental dialogue on policy issues. It is important that we recognise the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee's hard work in preparing the report. I sense approval of the committee's recommendations, and the motion, throughout the chamber.

Will the member give way?

Just over two years ago, the Scottish Broadcasting Commission produced its final report. That still stands as a blueprint for how to improve broadcasting in Scotland, due to the diligence of the commission's research, the quality of its analysis and the logic of its conclusions. In the chamber, a regular focus on broadcasting has been an important feature of the Parliament. It emphasises the significant role for Scottish institutions in examining broadcasting matters. One form of progress in the past year has been the United Kingdom Government's acceptance that the Scottish ministers should in the future appoint the BBC Trust member for Scotland. In the short term, the appointment of Jeremy Peat's successor is being undertaken as a joint process by the Scottish and United Kingdom Governments. I will reflect on what we might achieve under existing powers. I will focus on three key themes of the Scottish Broadcasting Commission's final report: its expectation that the BBC and Channel 4 should increase their commissioning from Scotland; its belief that public sector agencies should provide coherent support and leadership for the sector; and its aspiration for a Scottish digital network to provide sustainable competition for the BBC in Scottish public service broadcasting. It is worth remembering that the core reason for the commission's establishment was the release of figures that showed that Scotland's share of UK network production fell from 6 per cent in 2004 to less than 3 per cent in 2006. Genuine progress has been made in the past year, although far more still needs to be done. Scotland's share of network production increased from 2.5 per cent in 2008 to 3.6 per cent in 2009. That includes a significant increase from the BBC, where Scotland now accounts for 6.1 per cent of network commissions, which is up from 3.7 per cent in 2008. Incidentally, that increase alone represents an injection of an additional £19.5 million into the Scottish economy. I believe that the BBC should aim for Scotland to account for 8.6 per cent of network programming by 2012, rather than by its original target date of 2016. The rapid progress that it has made  certainly suggests that the target could sustainably be met considerably earlier than 2016. Progress by Channel 4 has been significantly slower. Scotland's share of Channel 4 network production in 2009 increased from 1.4 per cent to 2.5 per cent and Channel 4 expects a further increase in 2010. Channel 4 contributes a considerable amount of work to the digital media and film industries in Scotland and I believe that the Office of Communications should account more for that. I saw evidence of the value of Channel 4's work at first hand earlier this month when I visited Tag Games and Dynamo Games in Dundee, both of which have benefited from investment by Channel 4 and Creative Scotland. We will continue to work constructively with Channel 4 to maximise the positive and welcome contribution that I fully acknowledge it makes to Scotland's creative industries. However, for as long as Channel 4's broadcasting expenditure—by far the largest part of its overall budget—is so low in Scotland, I will continue to press it to do more. The increase in network production in Scotland provides an important opportunity for the independent production sector. On taking over as the Minister for Culture and External Affairs, one of my first steps was to hold a broadcasting conference in Glasgow and to chair a meeting between broadcasters, independent producers and public sector agencies at which we explored the issues that face the television production sector. I was left in no doubt about everyone's commitment to working in partnership, or about the creativity and drive that exist in many parts of the independent sector. As many members know, Scottish Enterprise and Creative Scotland recently published the report of the television broadcast and production working group that was established last year. Many of the recommendations in that report are being implemented. To follow up one recommendation, Scottish Enterprise is today publishing a report on production space in Scotland. The key theme that runs through the working group's report is partnership—how much stronger the production sector is when public agencies, broadcasters and independent producers work together for the sector's benefit. I strongly encourage Creative Scotland to play a lead role in maintaining that partnership approach and I am pleased that it has already agreed partnerships with the BBC and STV. There have been genuinely encouraging developments in relation to both network commissions and the development of the television production industry, but there has been less success thus far in trying to implement the  Broadcasting Commission's proposal for a Scottish digital network. The case for a network has strengthened, not weakened, over the past two years. Reports in 2009 by both Ofcom and the previous UK Government highlighted the dangers to public service broadcasting plurality in Scotland if major steps were not taken. STV's efforts to increase its domestic production are welcome. We support the contribution that STV can make to Scottish broadcasting and the creative economy, but opt-out programmes on channel 3 clearly have limits in providing secure and sustainable competition to the BBC over the full range of Scottish public service programming. Furthermore, the success of BBC Alba, as noted by the Parliament in February this year, gives some indication of the appetite in Scotland for more Scottish content. If the BBC Trust were to place BBC Alba on Freeview, as the Scottish Government has repeatedly emphasised that it should, the appetite for doing that would be even clearer. There is just now a window of opportunity. Jeremy Hunt, the Secretary of State for Culture, Olympics, Media and Sport, has spoken of the "chronic over-centralisation" of UK broadcasting. I think that every member of this Parliament would endorse that opinion. The UK Government wants to address that chronic overcentralisation. That is why it has established a panel that is chaired by Nicholas Shott to explore what needs to be done to make local television commercially viable. Nicholas Shott expects to conclude his report in late November, after which the UK Government will launch a consultation on local television in early January. I have had very constructive meetings with Jeremy Hunt and Nicholas Shott over the past five weeks. Nicholas Shott's initial views, which were published yesterday, state that he recognises that there are particular requirements in the nations of the UK and that his final report will include further analysis of these. The Scottish Parliament is unanimously behind a digital network that, in the words of the Broadcasting Commission's final report, "could certainly accommodate opportunities for more locaIised broadcasting." It is clear that Nicholas Shott is investigating how local television can be supported by a host channel, although his initial thinking is that that could be provided by existing public service broadcasters. The views of this Parliament and the UK Government are very close in their common desire for more localised broadcasting. However, it is clear that much work is still needed to marry the  UK Government's ambitions and those of this Parliament. The issue of funding will be particularly important. For that reason, two weeks ago, I established the Scottish digital network panel, chaired by Blair Jenkins, to assess how a Scottish digital network could be established and funded. I have already made it clear to the UK Government that I want the work of the Scottish panel to complement and not compete with the work that Nicholas Shott is undertaking. I very much hope that the Scottish digital network panel will form a constructive working relationship with Nicholas Shott's team. By doing so, it can inform the consultation on local television that the UK Government plans to launch in January next year. I want to work with other parties at Holyrood as far as is possible. The case for a digital network and for increased commissioning from Scotland has been significantly strengthened by the consensus that has surrounded broadcasting in Scotland since the Broadcasting Commission first reported. The quality of debate on broadcasting has been heightened by the constructive approach that Opposition spokespeople have shown in our debates and discussions on broadcasting thus far. I hope that we can continue to take forward the debate on broadcasting in Scotland as constructively as possible and that, where we differ, we respect one another's different perspectives. The events of the past year have demonstrated that a partnership approach can yield results. There is, of course, much more to do. However, I hope that the Scottish Government and this Parliament can make a real difference. By doing so, we will enhance broadcasting's role in the democratic, economic and cultural life of the nation.

There were a number of very important questions there, and I will try to answer them all. If I do not, I hope that other members will come in on the same topics. There will be further opportunities to address some of those fundamental questions that Pauline McNeill has asked. I thank Pauline McNeill for her support. She is correct to identify funding issues as being the main concern. The work of both the digital network panel and the Nicholas Shott review will be helpful in informing us on that subject. I recognise Pauline McNeill's concern about the impact of a digital network on existing channels. I would go further: it is important also to consider the potential impact on other media and other interests. The remit of the digital network panel therefore covers the potential market impact of any proposed funding on other Scottish media organisations. The issue has been addressed, and it will be addressed by the panel. Pauline McNeill identified some more recent developments, including those involving STV. In the series of meetings that I have held with broadcasters, they were all open to participating and involving themselves in the digital network panel's work. They are involved in the Nicholas Shott review, too. Pauline McNeill also identified the issue of auditing skills and the extent to which the production that is taking place in Scotland is adding value to the local economy, to skills and to  the development of local production and independent producers. We have been assured by the BBC that that is the case. However, Pauline McNeill correctly identified the need to continue to audit that in order to ensure that value is kept in and added to the Scottish perspective. We should be realistic about the question of a commercial channel being involved. Our initial thinking was that the network would be public service broadcasting and would not necessarily be commercial in nature but, taking into account the reality of where the UK Government is going, we should be prepared to consider a combination of different models. That could mean certain elements—opt-out or otherwise—involving some commercial aspects. We have to wait and see what the UK Government comes up with. We need to be open minded in this regard, and people are conscious of that. Funding from the licence fee, top-sliced or otherwise, was always an option or opportunity. The various different funding options will be considered by the digital network panel. I hope that I have managed to cover that wide range of questions, but I am sure that we will return to the same points in subsequent questions.

The member has raised a number of issues. I think that the BBC can reach the target before 2016 and I am urging it to do so. Progress has been made and, welcome though that is, I think that 2016 is too long a way off and that the momentum is such that the BBC can reach the target before 2016. On community-based television, there can be a variety of models. At one point, the Conservatives were talking about having 80 local television stations. Ofcom's submission to the Shott review is interesting in that regard, and Nicholas Shott indicated only yesterday in a letter that such local community-based television stations might not be sustainable through advertising revenue in the way that was first envisaged. Economies of scale might therefore be necessary. We want the panel to report quickly and promptly, taking on board Nicholas Shott's review, which we hope will be published before the end of the year. We want the panel to deliver in time to influence the consultation that the UK Government will put out next year. The membership of the panel is small and does not include a member with community-based television experience, but I expect the panel to consult such people as part of its deliberations. Blair Jenkins has indicated that he is open to engaging with all interests in taking the matter forward. On whether a digital channel should be paid for through the licence fee, I suspect that that will depend on what happens with the licence fee. There are different models of funding, which is why I have asked the panel specifically to consider different models of funding. A variety of models exists across the regions and nations of the UK, and it is important that we are open minded, so I will not pass judgment until I have seen the results of the panel's deliberations.

On the licence freeze, the member's colleagues at Westminster and in the UK Government will want to consider issues in that regard. On digital roll-out, I assure the member that my colleague Jim Mather has written to Jeremy Hunt to urge him to ensure that one of the pilot areas for superhighway activity is a rural area in Scotland, because unless we serve the periphery of Scotland first we will repeat the mistakes of the past, when the central belt had a fast service long before remoter parts of Scotland did. I agree with the member's emphasis in that regard. We should collectively support that drive, to ensure that we are at the forefront of development. There will eventually be developments in internet television: proposals must not only meet the needs of today and tomorrow but anticipate how Scotland can be ahead of the game in broadcasting in several years. That is why I have emphasised to Jeremy Hunt and Nicholas Shott that there is an appetite in Scotland to grasp the issue and that Scotland should be at the forefront of decisions, in particular if resources are available. Scotland has an appetite and offers an opportunity, and these are the right circumstances in which to ensure that we can drive forward the digital network, which could operate as a spine from which local opt-outs could come. On the figures, the second annual progress report, which was published today and issued to all MSPs, contains more detail about the progress over the past year, which has been considerable.

I very much agree with that sentiment. Indeed, the risk to plurality from monopolies of any form—whether public service broadcasting monopolies or monopolies of commercial interests—is obviously of concern  because of the importance of broadcasting within a democracy. When I met Colette Bowe from Ofcom recently, I made the point that Jamie Hepburn has raised because it refers to an important feature of Scottish broadcasting and must be addressed.

I am disappointed that David Whitton is so grudging. I talked about Creative Scotland's partnership with the BBC and STV, which is specifically about skills. I also talked about the industry advisory group's recommendations. The actions from those are already being taken and the recommendations that I referred to that are being implemented include training provision, particularly in drama. There is some very exciting work on that. Skills Development Scotland is investing in drama training. The big weakness in commissioning that was recognised is not necessarily in factual or news programming but in drama. We can make a big difference and achieve a huge amount in that. That is why Scottish Enterprise has today produced a report that gives different options on production capacity that would help to support that. I reassure David Whitton that there has been progress in the past year but, even before that, with my previous responsibilities, we ensured that there was skills development for networks and drama in particular because they were identified as being weak in that respect. I am pleased to assure him that Skills Development Scotland is on the case. More important is that the Scottish Broadcasting Commission recommended that there be a partnership between the public sector and the individual broadcasting companies. Skills is clearly an area for that partnership and I am pleased that Creative Scotland has moved swiftly to reinforce that agenda.

I am sure that the panel will look throughout Scotland to find out what possibilities exist. I have already said that Scotland has particular relevance, reference and importance as part of the UK consideration. Within Scotland, the Borders have a particular issue that must be addressed—the region is badly served by existing broadcasting arrangements. We have repeatedly said that it is absurd that 250,000 people in Scotland receive their channel 3 regional news bulletin from studios in Gateshead and we will continue to press the UK Government on that. The south of Scotland alliance and other groups are considering how community television stations could work. I encourage them to engage with the digital network panel and the Nicholas Shott review. However, at the end of the day, the decision remains a matter for the UK Government until such time as broadcasting responsibilities are transferred to the Scottish Parliament.

One of the members of the digital network panel is Charles McGhee, and the panel's remit includes examining impacts on other media. I have met the consortium that put together the bid for independently funded news consortia, which was not signed by the incoming United Kingdom Government. Some of the potential opportunities might be reflected in the proposals that Margo MacDonald makes. Everyone is open to consideration of all of the options. Indeed, Nicholas Shott has already met people from the organisations that might be able to provide the solution that she is talking about. I do not think that  it is fair to prejudge that work, which will be informed by the additional network panel and Nicholas Shott. At this point in time, we have to keep our options open. The solution might end up being a combination of a variety of suggestions that have been put forward by this Parliament. I simply ask members to be open minded and to consider the practical realities, particularly given the economic constraints that we face.

I am more than happy to take forward the matter. Recently, I had a constructive evidence session with the European and External Relations Committee. It is important that we have such dialogue and that we report back, as appropriate. The Government is proactive in its European engagement. We regularly take the opportunity to respond to Commission consultations. The Commission's consultation on developing an energy action plan for 2011-20, which was published last week, presents us with major opportunities. I encourage Lewis Macdonald and the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee to ensure that the committee has input to the process. We are engaging with the Commission and the UK Government to ensure that the plan allows Scotland and Europe to fulfil their potential on renewable energy, carbon capture and storage, and on the development of new grid infrastructures, to which Sandra White referred. Another good example of how we are working to influence EU developments is the Scottish Government's response to the Commission's consultations on Europe 2020. We are also looking at the newly published proposals for Europe's culture and creative industries.  The Government adapts to the new opportunities that the EU affords. Only this week, my officials attended a meeting of the newly formed sports council. I have shared with the European and External Relations Committee my ideas for ensuring that Parliament plays an effective role in the new subsidiarity arrangements under the Lisbon treaty. However, I echo Iain Smith's point that the arrangements involve Parliament-to-Parliament relationships. A leadership role for the Presiding Officer and the Parliament will be important in that regard. The Government has set itself challenging targets for combating poverty. A number of members, including Jamie Hepburn, referred to that. With our huge renewables resource, we have the most ambitious emissions-reduction targets in Europe. We are now seeking the highest levels of ambition from other countries. In particular, we want the EU to increase the level of reductions to which it is committed from 20 per cent to 30 per cent by 2020. We must play an active role in the Commission's work programme because it has an impact on such issues. The programme focuses on activities in which we have major interest and that are fundamental to the nation's wellbeing. We must continue to ensure that the UK Government takes Scottish interests into account and that our ministers are at the negotiating table when devolved interests are under discussion. The Scottish Government is determined to enhance Scotland's profile in Europe and to benefit from the opportunities that are available. All members who have spoken have identified key areas, and there is consensus on the areas on which we need to work. I look forward to a productive and constructive relationship with the Parliament, the UK Government, the European Commission and the European Parliament to take forward that agenda.

I am sorry to have to correct Helen Eadie. I have chaired an EMILE meeting in the Parliament in my capacity as Minister for Culture and External Affairs, and I was disappointed that she could not attend. Another meeting is planned, although there is a difficulty, because it might clash with the domestic and European joint ministerial committee meetings.

The Scottish Government also welcomes the Commission's work programme and supports the priorities that are contained in it. I would like to pick out a few key initiatives from the programme and talk about some areas in which Scotland is already forging ahead, in particular in leading the EU in areas such as renewable  energy, climate change and creating a sustainable fisheries industry. The Scottish Government recognises that, although we have returned to growth in Scotland following a recession that has been shorter than that in the rest of the UK, maintaining that recovery is a priority. Our economic strategy is very much aligned with the EU 2020 strategy proposals, and we see Europe as a partner in building on our recovery. In partnership with Europe, Scotland is also well placed to perform against the targets on climate change, energy, labour market participation and education. This year is the European year for combating poverty and social exclusion. The Scottish Government recognises that we need to break the cycles of poverty and deprivation that have become deeply embedded in society. We will set challenging targets in line with "Achieving our Potential: A Framework to tackle poverty and income inequality in Scotland", which sets out priorities for action. That is one of three interlinked policy frameworks that we have developed with our partners in local government, the national health service and the third sector to take priorities forward in a co-ordinated and unified way. In the longer term, that joined-up approach will deliver measures to tackle poverty and low income through providing children and young people with a better start in life; supporting the broader effort to deal with health inequalities in our society; promoting equality and tackling discrimination; delivering good-quality affordable housing; and regenerating disadvantaged communities. I welcome in particular the commitment in the work programme to take forward work to develop renewable energy and the electricity grid. Scotland has won plaudits across Europe and the rest of the world for our work on climate change. We will continue to push for ambitious action at an international and European level. The Scottish Government wants Scotland to be at the heart of Europe's low-carbon energy revolution. We are working to forge European partnerships to do that through the work of the Scottish European Green Energy Centre to harness our massive potential in renewables and carbon capture and storage. Scotland's fishing industry is a key priority for the Government. With 69 per cent of the share of UK quotas, Scotland should have a place at the top table in Brussels. Unfortunately, we have continually been refused. During the busy Westminster election campaign, we had the frankly incredible scenario in which my colleague Richard Lochhead was denied a seat at an important informal council on the future of EU fisheries policy. That meeting was critical to Scotland and Richard Lochhead could have made points on behalf of the whole of the UK fishing  industry far more convincingly than the unelected Lord Davies of Oldham, who had no specific responsibilities for fisheries issues, but apparently has responsibility for bees and plant health. That situation need not have arisen. At the end of March, I led the UK delegation at an informal culture council meeting in Barcelona and, yesterday, Michael Russell spoke for the UK at the education council, using Gaelic for the first time at council. Such instances demonstrate the legitimacy and added value of Scotland playing a greater role than simply attending in silence. We intend to discuss an improved role for the Scottish Government in Europe with the new UK Government. We continue to press for fundamental reform of Europe's fisheries regime. We intend to host a major ministerial workshop later this year marking the beginning of a new way to manage our fisheries that will consign the centralised bureaucratic CFP to the dustbin of history.

Despite the fact that we are a minority Government and are under increased pressure to vote in the chamber, the attendance of this Administration's ministers is better than that of the previous Administration. However, it is what we do when we are there that is important, rather than attending and just sitting in silence. I sincerely hope that we can pursue the agenda of having more participation as I did in Barcelona and as Mike Russell did only yesterday. The single farm payment is the biggest element of the common agricultural policy and it is clear that the current historical basis of payments, which relates to average production in a reference period almost a decade ago, cannot be justified today. Scotland currently has the lowest single farm payment per hectare in the UK and one of the lowest in Europe. We also have the lowest rural development funding per hectare in Europe. If, however, a flatter rate system, paying the same rate per hectare of utilised agricultural land across all member states regardless of farming activity and intensity were introduced, Scotland would benefit. The outcome of the forthcoming CAP and CFP discussions is therefore crucial for Scotland, and we are well placed to identify a negotiating position that meets the needs of our diverse agricultural sector. The Scottish Government continues to identify in our economic recovery plan key areas in which  we need to move forward. Irene Oldfather was correct to identify that our focus has to be on policy priorities, which we will support, but we need fundamental reform of the European budget. We are already liaising with the UK Government, with which I have had discussions, and the EU institutions on how Scotland can apply influence. We need more resources to make the low-carbon economy a reality as well as fair support for farming in our most fragile areas. I do not deny that that tension will be one of the issues that the Parliament, the Government and our members of the European Parliament will need to discuss further. Freedom, security and justice are a key area for us because of our distinct legal system. Our position is unique because we are also part of a larger member state. Family law and cross-border co-operation on crime fall within devolved competence, so securing recognition of Scottish interests is critical. However, I know of good work being done to ensure that our Scottish legal system is protected. The Commission's work programme refers to the action plan for taking forward the Stockholm programme on FSJ to the end of 2014. We have a major interest in areas such as cross-border crime. We are engaging with the action plan. I thank the committee for bringing forward the debate today. The EU has a huge impact on policy making in Scotland, as reflected in the debate. We have strengths. We want to work positively and constructively with the European Commission and partners to maximise the benefits of the European Union. I look forward to hearing the contributions from colleagues throughout the chamber.

The Scottish Government is not aware of any film or television productions that have been lost to Scotland specifically as a result of the smoking ban. Producers base their decisions to film in Scotland on a wide range of factors, including fiscal incentives and the availability of skilled crew and good locations.

I have had no representations on the issue. In Wales, legislation on smoking came into force on 2 April 2007. Following public consultation on draft regulations in 2006, the Welsh Assembly Government decided not to provide an exemption for performers, and it has advised that there is no hard evidence to indicate that the legislation prevents any productions from being made in Wales, which contradicts the member's comments. However, if the member has any evidence or representations, I am happy to engage with him on that.

Unfortunately, I missed the latest episode of "Doctor Who", even though I am an avid fan. There are, of course, different technological ways of using film inventively and creatively. Despite the smoking ban in Scotland, there are a variety of ways in which smoking can be shown where that is required by artistic integrity in reflecting, for example, 1950s Scotland, when more people smoked. Electric cigarettes can be used, for example, as is being done in Scottish Opera's current production of "La Bohème". Some ingenuity and respect are needed. The important point is the success of the smoking ban: I acknowledge Stewart Maxwell's personal involvement in ensuring that the ban happened. With cross-party support, we have managed to achieve a great improvement in health promotion. The point about not glamorising smoking was one of Stewart Maxwell's more serious points.

My recent visit to the United  States for Scotland week provided me with a valuable first-hand perspective on the opportunities for promoting Scotland in the US. I shall be reflecting on this with officials with a view to publishing a refreshed United States plan shortly. We are also working on a new plan for our engagement in Canada.

The US is an important market for us in terms of business. Our Scotland week events included 20 business meetings that were conducted by all three ministers. Each year, we examine the feedback and research into the coverage that we receive in terms of publicising and promoting Scotland's interests. It is essential to ensure that we get value for money from the expenditure on Scotland week, and I assure the member that we have taken every step to ensure that that is the case.

It is essential, as I said in my previous answer, that we ensure that we get value for money from all the operations that are funded by the Scottish Government, whether through Scottish Development International, the Scottish Government office in Washington or VisitScotland. During my time in the United States, I paid specific attention to those issues to see what progress is being made. There are particular opportunities in Canada, due to personnel issues, and we are pursuing them. On the member's first point, about the timing of the publication of the refresh, I hope that she understands that I want to reflect on my visit. However, we published the south Asia development programme on 1 March and the India plan on 26 March. The Pakistan plan is due to be published before the summer recess, and the wider south Asia engagement plan and the US plan are due as well. By the summer recess, the  European and External Relations Committee will have a range of plans to support our international strategy, on which the Government can be held to account.

Bòrd na Gàidhlig's action plan and our response were published last week. We expect that the effective implementation of the action plan will have important implications for Gaelic education in Kilmarnock and Loudon and throughout Scotland. We will be working closely with Bòrd na Gàidhlig to ensure that we bring improvements to the key areas of Gaelic early years education, Gaelic school education and Gaelic adult education.

The member is correct to identify the need to support the supply of teachers and people who can help to promote the Gaelic language. and the need to stimulate demand for use of Gaelic. I am in full agreement with the proposal that Gaelic education be promoted to parents. I am encouraged by the work that is being done in East Ayrshire. I understand that there is a Gaelic parent and toddler group at Mount Carmel primary in Kilmarnock and Gaelic-medium provision at Onthank primary, with secondary provision at Grange academy. I also understand that the council offers adult learning opportunities but, of course, providing support for parents means that we have to have a greater emphasis on adult education, to enable them to learn Gaelic and use it with their children.

I will attempt to vary my answers. I am pleased the there is such interest in Scotland week from members. The benefits of our promotional activities during Scotland week will be realised in various ways. Some are immediately obvious, such as the media coverage in the US and Canadian print and television media of events such as the Scotland run, the "Dressed to Kilt" event and the Harry Benson photographic exhibition, which brought Scotland to the attention of hundreds of thousands of people. The benefits of our engagement with existing and potential investors in Scotland and with travel operators might become apparent only in the medium to longer term, as companies shape their future investment plans. We are confident that engaging with two of our largest international markets is absolutely the right thing for us to do.

It will come as no surprise to Murdo Fraser that Scottish independence is the policy of the Government; it would be highly unusual for a Government not to explain such a policy. However, there is an important point here. As Michael Russell said in his debate at Carnegie Mellon University, everyone recognises that the issue of constitutional debate is no longer about whether change is needed, but about what form that change should take. Even the Conservatives would agree that constitutional change is required; indeed, it is something that Murdo Fraser has advocated. Rather than leave our international colleagues in the dark, among the 80 events promoting Scotland it was appropriate to ensure that at at least one event we gave information about Scotland. I understand from Mr Russell that people asked very pointed and informed questions, and were very interested in ambitions for Scotland. I hope that the Conservatives would agree that we should be ambitious for Scotland when we travel abroad.

Scotland week provided an excellent opportunity to promote Scotland's unique culture and creativity. In New York, I attended engagements relating to the Harry Benson photographic exhibition, the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama's American foundation and the Clan Currie Society's "Scotland's Gifts" exhibition, and made a number of connections. I had an extremely productive meeting with an off-Broadway theatre producer about future cultural collaborations. In Tennessee, I attended a musical showcase at which I had the opportunity to meet John Carter Cash, Laura McGhee and a number of senior figures in the music industry, who all expressed enthusiasm for working with Scotland. Regarding my ministerial colleagues, Mr Mather attended a special dedication service to commemorate Scottish connections to the Alamo, and Mr Russell visited the Pittsburgh Creative and Performing Arts School, where he learned about the benefits that arts can bring to the wider curriculum.

I hope that the member appreciates that our job is to promote all aspects of fashion, design and textile production from Scotland. I was pleased that we were able to finance an event with the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York. This year we provided a merchandising store promoting Scottish fashion and textiles, and we had the elite of fashion students showcasing events on fabric—indeed I was proud to wear a Harris tweed jacket, designed by one of Scotland's top designers, to the event. Importantly, Scottish interior design was also showcased, and formed part of a competition. The Government will continue to use and promote Scottish fashion design and fabrics whether they are produced in the Borders or in Harris.

As part of my varied answers to that question, in 2010, our most ambitious Scotland week programme to date saw ministers undertake more than 80 engagements in 10 cities across North America. All three ministers held important business meetings with existing and potential investors in Scotland. We forged important new relationships for Scotland at state and provincial level in Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Texas and Ontario. Our business first message, which is about Scotland being an internationally competitive location, received media coverage on Fox, CBS and NBC and in major dailies in New York, San Francisco, Toronto and Pittsburgh, as well as in many local and specialist media outlets—all for less than half the budget the previous Administration spent on tartan week in 2007.

That was a rather churlish question. I record my thanks to Patricia Ferguson and the previous Administration for producing a good North America plan, to which we are still operating and conducting our business. However, as the member recognises, it is important to refresh the plan. One of the key challenges that the previous Administration faced was to join up the work of Scottish Development International, VisitScotland and the Scottish Government. As Irene Oldfather indicated, that was the subject of an inquiry by a previous committee of the Parliament, so it is not a new challenge. It is more useful to see at first hand what the relationships are and what opportunities exist. We will build on the good work of the previous Administration, but it is important that we refresh that, extend our reach beyond the initial plan's focus on diaspora issues and New York and Washington, and look for opportunities from coast to coast. There is much more that we can do, although we acknowledge the good work that has been done in the plan. I reassure Patricia Ferguson that the refreshed plan will be in place before the summer recess, but ask  her to give me time to develop my thinking on what it should include.

The Scottish Government regards community arts as important in providing participation, appreciation and enjoyment of arts and culture. The national performing companies and collections bodies that we fund are expected to provide outreach activities that engage communities. Our partnership with local government also promotes the benefits of community arts for improving quality of life and wellbeing in local communities.

The member's question relates to the future position on public funding. We have concerns about the impact on Scotland of potential cuts by the Westminster Government. All of us, including local authorities, will have to face up to that. I understand that the community planning team in the member's constituency of Glasgow Pollok is developing a community arts strategy and that voluntary sector groups can access funding locally from a budget of £100,000. She makes an important point about the need for us to recognise how arts and community arts projects can help to stop offending, to address mental health issues and to improve self-esteem, and can help in a range of other areas. For precisely that reason, a few weeks ago we held a seminar with local authority partners to identify how culture, arts and community work can be mainstreamed and recognised as a vital part of support in the areas that the member has identified. I am more than happy to send the results of that seminar to the member.

Since BBC Alba's launch, Scottish ministers have made it clear that we believe that the service should be made available on Freeview. During 2010, I wrote to the BBC trust about the issue three times. I wrote to Sir Michael Lyons, the chair of the trust, following last week's debate in the Parliament on the Gaelic action plan. In my letter, I informed him of the cross-party expression of disappointment by many MSPs about the BBC's delay in taking a decision on Freeview access to BBC Alba. I also wrote to Sir Michael Lyons on 16 February, following the unanimous vote in the Scottish Parliament on 11 February on the desirability of BBC Alba being available on Freeview. In addition, I responded to the trust's consultation on Freeview access for BBC Alba on 15 January. That consultation response can be found on the Scottish Government website.

We have and will work collectively with members of other political parties, and certainly with BBC Alba, on presenting the case. The strength of that case is further supported by the cross-party support for it.

The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that Scotland has the right number of teachers to meet the needs of our pupils and our class size objectives commensurate with the economic conditions prevailing and likely for the foreseeable future.

The curriculum for excellence recognises the value of the expressive arts and culture in providing learners with opportunities to be creative and to develop skills in art and design, dance, drama and music. Ministers hosted a successful seminar on 15 December 2009 to explore opportunities for strengthened collaborative working across the education and culture sectors. We will bring forward an action plan that builds on the needs that were identified.

I am tempted to say that I refer the member to the answer that I gave some moments ago. I add that the employment of teachers is primarily a matter for local authorities. However, the Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that Scotland has the right number of teachers to meet the needs of our pupils.

No, there is not.

I congratulate Charlie Gordon on securing this debate and on his passionate and informed speech. The Scottish Government's recognition scheme was created to celebrate, promote and invest in nationally significant museum and gallery collections around Scotland that are held outwith the nationally run institutions. I am pleased to acknowledge that the Scottish Football Museum achieved this richly deserved recognition status in October 2009. On behalf of the Scottish Government, Museums Galleries Scotland manages the recognition scheme, which has been designed to be flexible and can channel capital and revenue funding to important collections, such as the Scottish Football Museum. On top of the revenue funding that the museum has received, £70,000 in capital funding has been allocated to it for 2010-11, and it has received £20,000 for a project that I will talk about later. As everyone who has spoken has acknowledged, football holds a unique place in the lives and hearts of the Scottish people, and the national recognition award acknowledges the importance of the collection at national and international levels. I have fond memories of my first Scotland game, watching Scotland against Argentina in Hampden in 1979. Sadly, we lost 3-1. However, one of the goals was scored by an 18-year-old Diego Maradona—his first international goal—so, even in defeat Scotland still managed to get international recognition. As a child, I watched Ayr United, and I will join the team in celebrating its centenary this year. With the indulgence of the Presiding Officer, I would like to congratulate Linlithgow Rose, a team from my home town, which on Saturday gained a place in the junior cup final for the fourth time in nine years, which is a major achievement.  Scotland has been an important pioneer of the game of football at home and on the international stage. Glasgow-born architect Archibald Leitch was the premier football stadium designer of his day. By the 1920s, 16 out of 22 of England's first-division stadiums were Leitch designs. His most famous work that is still in existence is probably Ibrox. Archibald Leitch is not alone in promoting football. Another Scot, Alexander Hutton, set up the Argentine Football Association—the oldest in South America—and John Prentice introduced the game to China. It is no wonder that we have such a strong collective pride in our small nation's impact on the world stage. All of those facts about our beautiful game are just a small part of the story of Scottish football that can be found at the Scottish Football Museum, which is the very first of its kind in the world. That is another significant achievement to add to our list of firsts. Recently, the museum has been not just about football, but has been at the forefront of an important dementia project. A report on the reminiscence project that was published on 17 March shows that extraordinary results had been obtained from pilot schemes in care homes and at Alzheimer Scotland groups. Glasgow Caledonian University evaluated the benefits of the nine-month scheme and, although it acknowledged that the scheme was obviously not a cure for dementia, it found that it brought considerable and significant changes to sufferers. The project was initiated at the Scottish Football Museum after a casual conversation about the benefits of the game. The chairman, Robert Craig, went on to obtain funding of £20,000 from Museums Galleries Scotland to set up several projects, all of which were scrutinised rigorously in respect of their benefits. The pilot reported that many Alzheimer's sufferers became more self-confident and obtained a sense of enjoyment and engagement as a result of the scheme. Alzheimer Scotland now aims to build on those positive results by taking over the short-term funding, and will work in partnership with others to ensure that enough support is secured to roll out the initiative across Scotland. As part of that, it has been advertising for volunteers to talk to the men about football. Judging by the speeches that we have heard, we might have some volunteers in the chamber. Spending time showing a person photographs and programmes and encouraging them to talk about football is surely a task that many people would not find onerous, especially as it gives them the opportunity to look at items of football memorabilia. It is marvellous to think that something so simple and enjoyable is having such great benefits and is making a difference to the  lives of dementia sufferers. Many sufferers are said literally to come alive again when being shown photographs and discussing events like Archie Gemmill's unforgettable goal against the Netherlands in the 1978 world cup in Argentina. It is worth noting that the great Ally MacLeod, who led us in Argentina, also succumbed to dementia. The Government's policy on mental health is to maintain the mental wellbeing of people in Scotland. There are 70,000 dementia sufferers in Scotland, and the figure is set to increase, so anything that alleviates the stresses that are caused by the disease is to be applauded. That helps to tell a tale of the role and place of museums. That role is about heritage and preserving our memorabilia, but it is also about how we ensure that the Government and other resources that are invested in our museums are spread more widely and have benefits that go beyond the obvious. Our museums play a vital role not just in telling the stories of the collections that they house, but in using those collections to enrich our society on many levels. Research has shown that recreational activity such as culture can significantly improve health care by aiding recovery, reducing anxiety and promoting positive mental health and wellbeing. We should reflect on the role that it can play for young people, in particular. In addition to providing health benefits, our museums make an enormous contribution to our economy and to education. They often generate community-focused projects that contribute to local pride, to a sense of empowerment and to a greater commitment to the local area. It is important to note that, during this time of recession, visitor figures for museums and other places throughout the country that people want to visit have increased. We should reflect on that point when we consider what resources should be made available in the future. People of all ages can benefit from the richness of what our museums offer. I am pleased that the current museums think-tank is articulating the enormous contribution that our museums have to make. As the Scottish Football Museum is independent, it is rightly the preserve of the museum's trust to determine its operational policies, including admission charges. As a registered charity, the trust ensures that all profits that it makes are used to fund research and new exhibitions and to improve the museum's many services. All the speeches that have been made today have made a strong case for ensuring that the museum thrives and grows in the future. With its evocative collections, the Scottish Football Museum offers enjoyment to visitors. I congratulate the museum on its success in the  projects in which it has been involved and on obtaining recognition status. I trust that it will welcome many more visitors for years to come. It is right that the Parliament takes the time to reflect on the beautiful game of football, the wider contribution that it can make and, importantly, the strong work that the Scottish Football Museum does in the wider community and in ensuring that we as a country can celebrate an important part of what makes us Scotland: our football heritage.   Meeting closed at 17:37.

Tha mi air leth toilichte a bhith a' bruidhinn mu Ghàidhlig a-rithist. Seo cuspair cudromach, agus iomairt cudromach. Tha mi gu pearsanta air a bhith taiceil dhan Ghàidhlig airson ùine mhòr agus ann an iomadh dòigh, ann am foghlam, craoladh agus tron lagh fhèin. Cuideachd, tha mi air a bhith a' sgrìobhadh ann an Gàidhlig, ag obair ann agus ag iomairt às leth a' chànain. Tha mi air leth toilichte a bhith a' bruidhinn mun adhartas a nì sinn dhan Ghàidhlig. Tha e an-còmhnaidh a' toirt toileachas mòr dhomh a bhith ag obair agus a' cuideachadh na Gàidhlig. Tha teachdaireachd shìmplidh againn an-diugh: feumaidh sinn àireamhan luchd-bruidhinn na Gàidhlig fhàs. Tha mi den bheachd gu bheil dùbhlan mòr romhainn, ach bu chòir dhuinn uile a bhith air an aon ràmh. Sin an obair a tha romhainn.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  I am happy to speak Gaelic again. The subject is important, as is the initiative. I have supported Gaelic for a long time and in different ways—in education, broadcasting and legislation. I have written and worked in Gaelic and campaigned on behalf of the language. I am again happy to speak about the progress that we should make on Gaelic. It always gives me great enjoyment to work for and to help Gaelic. Today we have a simple message: we must increase the number of Gaelic speakers. In my view, there is a great challenge ahead of us. The task before us is to be together on that.  The member continued in English.  Today's debate and the motion that is before us are uniquely important. The motion is of paramount importance to four people, none of  whom have taken part in the debate. I refer to Arthur Cormack, the convener of Bòrd na Gàidhlig, and the triumvirate that is presently running the bòrd, two members of which—Hugh Dan MacLennan and Jo MacDonald—are here today. They are the people on whom the burden of turning this focused plan into reality will rest. I do not want to put too great a burden on their shoulders, but the challenge that they face is nothing less than to ensure the survival of the Gaelic language. The entire chamber and the Government also face that challenge. There must be a sense of urgency about the task that lies in front of us. Peter Peacock addressed the issue well when he pointed to the progress that has been made. If we were to write that story, we would go through all of the things that the member mentioned in his speech. I am grateful for receiving a small mention, even in a slimmer incarnation. However, now the questions that require the most urgent answers are those that Pauline McNeill asked: how well have we done, and how well do we need to do to make the language survive? There is an urgency to the issue, because the answers to Pauline McNeill's questions are, at best, mixed. We know how many Gaelic-medium education units there are in schools and how many pupils are in those units. We know how many children are at Gaelic-medium pre-school and how many Gaelic speakers there are, although the figure is difficult to assess because we run from census to census. We know how many ulpan students there are. Rightly, much reference has been made to ulpan, as it is a major initiative. However, we know that there are not enough Gaelic speakers and that we are not bringing forward enough people to speak it. We also know that those who speak Gaelic cannot speak it in all circumstances. Alasdair Allan gave great testimony to the fact that, at present, Gaelic does not have the normal reach of a language that allows it to be spoken, to live and to develop in all circumstances. We face a challenge to which we need to respond. The action plan is the answer to that challenge and requires urgent implementation, which must be based on present resources.

Does the member agree that one of the arguments for Gaelic-medium education is to do with the strength that bilingualism brings? I think that that shows the progress that has been made in recent years, in which the member played a part when he was Minister for Education and Young People.

It is important that Pauline McNeill highlights the wider family. Does she recognise that, within the action plan, Bòrd na Gàidhlig specifically tries to identify easy and accessible support for parents to help the family learning that she has identified? The children might draw the parents in, but we need to ensure that the family is supported.

Feasgar math, a chàirdean. Seo iomairt chudromach, agus tha mi toilichte a bhith an sàs anns an deasbad seo an-diugh. Gaelic is more than a language—Gàidhlig, còrr is cànan. The motion emphasises Gaelic's value to Scotland, its fragile condition and the need for urgent action. The Parliament has collectively supported Gaelic. All the parties that are represented here have contributed to and supported Gaelic initiatives at national and constituency levels. Just last week, Glasgow City Council launched its Gaelic plan, the University of Glasgow established a chair of Gaelic, Sabhal Mòr Ostaig announced record numbers for its Easter courses and an exhibition of the work of Gaelic pupils opened at the Fruitmarket gallery in Edinburgh. However, despite all parties' efforts, a challenge still faces Gaelic. Last year, the Scottish Government said that we wished to develop an initiative that is aimed at increasing the numbers of Gaelic speakers, to safeguard the language's future. We have found widespread support for that in our many discussions with interested parties. Our request to Bòrd na Gàidhlig for an action plan emerged from the desire to create a secure future for Gaelic in Scotland. That must remain our goal. If we have an impressive Gaelic infrastructure, yet speaker numbers continue to decline, that will not serve us well. I acknowledge the bòrd's support and co-operation in the process and thank it for its work in providing the action plan, which was published earlier this week. Our aim is to increase the number of Gaelic speakers. The bòrd has identified action areas, which are key areas of Gaelic development, and initiatives that can help to make the progress that is needed. The Scottish Government fully agrees with the bòrd's analysis of current needs and about the importance of the action areas that are identified. The bòrd's action plan contains five priority action areas. We expect that several important actions in the plan, including parent support and Gaelic promotion, can be included under the three headings of Gaelic-medium early years provision, Gaelic adult education and Gaelic-medium  education in schools. Our response focused on those categories. The initiative does not undermine the efforts and campaigns of many Gaelic interests over the years, but it means a renewed emphasis and a refocusing of effort. We will continue to recognise the crucial importance of Gaelic plans, Gaelic broadcasting, Gaelic publishing, Gaelic arts and Gaelic education at all levels. Our aim will be to strengthen them. Our top priority must be a focus on initiatives that have the potential to increase the learning and—most important—the use of Gaelic. We agree with the bòrd that early years promotion is critical. More young people need to learn Gaelic from an early stage and go on to Gaelic-medium education in primary school. To achieve that, a new initiative is needed in the sector to support early years Gaelic provision and support councils in relation to Gaelic pre-school provision. We look to the bòrd to develop practical proposals on how progress can be made with the new initiative in early years Gaelic learning. The Scottish Government also agrees with the board that momentum needs to be maintained on a range of matters that relate to Gaelic-medium education. My colleague Michael Russell will develop that subject in his speech. We need to ensure that good support is in place to assist with the progress that we would like on establishing Gaelic classes and schools. A number of council Gaelic-medium projects have benefited from support over recent years. We are keen to find ways of supporting new projects that will assist the sector to expand and contribute to our overall aim of increasing the number of Gaelic speakers. We are confident that the strategic use of available Gaelic funding and closer working with the bòrd will enable us to make progress in that area. To support our focus on early years and Gaelic-medium education, I am pleased to announce an additional £100,000 to support primary education and the bòrd's work in early years. The funding will be used, first, to address pressure at Edinburgh's Tollcross primary school, where a record intake of 43 pupils is set for enrolment this August, by providing a second Gaelic primary 1 class, and, secondly, to help to kick-start the bòrd's work in early years. The funding demonstrates our commitment to acting quickly on the measures that are outlined in Bòrd na Gàidhlig's action plan, which was published this week. We are confident that the action plan is a strong foundation for support in education. Working with the bòrd, we will consider how further legislation could assist in making Gaelic-medium education more accessible in the future.  We agree with the bòrd's assessment that adult Gaelic learning is essential. Work in that area will cover a wide range of activity, including addressing ulpan's current development needs, Gaelic e-learning, workplace learning and parent learning. It is vital that Gaelic learning at further education and higher education level and distance learning opportunities should be part of any adult learning strategy.

Use of broadcasting and work with BBC Alba, in particular, will provide opportunities. That is one of the areas in which there can be early action to ensure that there is coverage. I am not sure that I recall the television programme to which the member refers, but I recognise that the use of broadcasting is important in mainstreaming the availability of Gaelic. We should recognise the impact that Gaelic has had in the early years, in particular. We will look to the bòrd to take forward work on adult education, to allow ulpan to develop more, and to consider what practical structural proposals should be put in place to support ulpan and other Gaelic adult learning opportunities. In its action plan, Bòrd na Gàidhlig indicates that it is important that current delivery mechanisms operate as an effective network for the promotion of Gaelic. We expect the bòrd to ensure that the funding that it allocates to Gaelic groups is achieving its purpose. I note the comments in Pauline McNeill's amendment. It is important that we constantly review funding and delivery, and I will ask the bòrd to review its funding of and delivery by the organisations that it supports. I will also ask it to consider where we can make quick progress. For example, there is potential for demonstrating quick progress with ulpan, working with MG Alba on the planned learners website and more. Further to Jamie Stone's point, I note the development that has taken place and the technology that is now available. The website was not available previously, but we can now link together different media to draw people into learning Gaelic. We should use contemporary means and methods to do that. We understand that work with MG Alba can move forward quickly, so we expect quick progress in that area and on ulpan. We would welcome the bòrd's clear views on the initiatives that offer the potential for prompt delivery.  As the bòrd takes forward work in the key areas of early years provision, adult learning and school learning, we expect it to ensure that those have a central place both in the Gaelic plans that are being developed and in community initiatives. The point of the progress that we are making and of the action plan is to ensure that there is momentum, pace, a sense of urgency and an emphasis on delivery in what we do on Gaelic. A great deal has been achieved, and the Parliament has put in place a great deal of institutional support. We now need practical measures. The bòrd has come up with a series of such measures in its action plan. I also want to use this debate to express the Scottish Government's concern about the BBC trust's recent decision to delay its decision on BBC Alba and Freeview. The Parliament agreed to a motion that made clear its unanimous cross-party support for putting BBC Alba on Freeview. Our position remains that BBC Alba should have access to Freeview, and I will continue to pursue that with the BBC trust. Our reasons for asking the bòrd for an action plan are straightforward. The Scottish Government recognises that Gaelic is more than a language—Gàidhlig, corr is cànan—and, as such, it strengthens and enriches many aspects of Scotland's social, cultural and economic life. In New York during Scotland week, while promoting Scottish design and fashion, I met two Scottish designers, Judy Clark and Alison Macleod, whose designs are deeply rooted in Scotland while clearly appealing to an international audience. Alison's designs feature Gaelic prose sewn and embroidered into the garment. In that way, Gaelic can truly be described as part of the fabric of Scottish society. In Tennessee, I was delighted to hear Dundee-born Laura McGhee's music, which in one song combined a Gaelic waulking song with traditional American gospel music. Such musical links are another example of the ability of the Gaelic language to enrich our culture. Gaelic is more than a language. Most of those wider aspects depend on the continued existence in Scotland of a living language. It is right that wider aspects of Gaelic should be valued and should continue to be promoted, but our current focus is on initiatives that have the potential to increase the size of the speech community. It is, therefore, our strong view that specific initiatives need to be put in place that are designed with the clear purpose of increasing the numbers of speakers and thus securing the future of Gaelic in Scotland. We believe that Gaelic is more than a language and that, as such, it enriches many aspects of Scottish life. If we lose that language community, we will lose more than a language; we will lose a  speech community that enriches our current cultural life and gives us an enduring link to our land, our heritage and our past. Mòran taing. I move, That the Parliament recognises that Gaelic is more than a language and, as such, it strengthens and enriches many aspects of Scotland's social, cultural and economic life; also recognises that the current condition of Gaelic needs urgent attention, and welcomes the programme of action provided by Bòrd na Gàidhlig, which is designed to achieve the outcome of increasing the number of Gaelic speakers and bring renewed attention to the important place that Gaelic holds in Scotland.

The curriculum for excellence puts a strong emphasis on developing responsible global citizens and includes specific outcomes on energy sources and sustainability at every stage. Pupils also benefit greatly from participating in the hugely successful Scottish Government-funded and world-leading eco-schools Scotland programme, in which more than 97 per cent of local authority education establishments are registered, and make use of the global footprint resource to understand and act on energy use. A range of resources are available through Learning and Teaching Scotland and other partners, and schools regularly use energy as a context for enabling young people to make informed, ethical choices.

I thank all seven parliamentary committees that were involved in scrutinising the bill, as well as the witnesses, various civil service teams and public body staff who all played a valuable part in developing the bill to this final stage. The Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill makes a significant contribution to the development of the Government's wider public services reform agenda. That agenda, which the First Minister announced two years ago, is focused on simplifying and integrating public services and on promoting the sharing of services through closer collaboration on matters such as procurement. We are working closely with local government and with public bodies as part of our effective public bodies programme to improve the alignment of objectives towards achieving the Government's overarching purpose of sustainable economic growth. The Government's simplification programme, including the proposals in the bill, will deliver net financial savings of around £127 million over 2008 to 2013 and recurring annual savings of around £40 million thereafter. Derek Brownlee made points about the need to go further and faster, particularly bearing in mind the current economic climate. Important points were made in the debate—not least by Derek Brownlee, Margo MacDonald and Malcolm Chisholm—about how the order-making powers in part 2 of the bill will be exercised. That is critical. None of us, whether in the Government or any party in the Parliament, should assume what will happen. The will of the Parliament will prevail in the exercise of those powers. I am pleased that, if we pass the bill, we will take a further step on the way to establishing social care and social work improvement Scotland and healthcare improvement Scotland by April 2011. They will provide more streamlined, better co-ordinated, proportionate and risk-based scrutiny and will focus on supporting improvement, which is important. I emphasise that the expertise and staff of HMIE's current child protection team will move to SCSWIS and, in SCSWIS, will still be  able to work with the remainder of HMIE. I hope that that gives members some reassurance, particularly on child protection. The new powers in the bill will allow bodies to build a comprehensive picture of how the needs of the people who use their services are met. The Parliament has also approved a package of amendments in relation to the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland. The commission will focus on the needs of individuals with a mental disorder or learning disability and will be able to work with other scrutiny bodies. There is also an update to the commission's governance structure, which will ensure that service users and others with expertise and knowledge of mental health services are more formally involved in its work. I am delighted to say that, if it is passed, the bill will also establish the long-awaited single, unified national body for arts and culture: creative Scotland. I regret the Liberal Democrats' rejection of that. The development of creative Scotland has not been smooth or easy, but the final organisation should be all the better for the work that has been undertaken over the past 12 months. In successive generations, Scotland has produced musicians, sculptors, writers, painters, dancers and composers whose hugely varied talents have received national and international acclaim. That wealth of talent exists in Scotland and needs to be nurtured and supported. I expect creative Scotland to help realise the potential contribution of art and creativity to every part of our society and economy. I say to Pauline McNeill that the use of the Scottish Screen brand will be an operational matter for creative Scotland, and I will pass on her remarks to the body. Creative Scotland will help to promote Scottish culture at home and internationally. It will be modern, vibrant and progressive; it will draw on our rich heritage but project Scotland in a contemporary way. I am ambitious for the body and what it can achieve. The appointment of its chief executive designate has been well received. His contract was negotiated as a new contract without a bonus—a negotiation that was without prejudice in law in advance.

No, I must finish. A new state of the art office is being identified, a new business model is being established and we are now recruiting for a chair and board. Scotland owes immense gratitude to Ewan Brown and the team of Creative Scotland 2009 Ltd for getting us here. With the Parliament's approval, our new dynamic arts and culture body, creative Scotland, will shortly be established. The momentum and dynamic exist. I hope that it has the best will of Parliament.  I thank everyone who was involved in developing the bill. It is unusually large and varied in its scope. It is testament to the hard work and robust processes of all those involved—including John Swinney's determined and formidable leadership—that such an extensive bill can be brought together and reach fruition within a year. I know that, across the Parliament, members have a keen sense of public service as individual MSPs. We may have different political views as to how public services are organised, but I am sure that, as a final note in the debate, members will join me in paying tribute to all the staff who work in our public bodies day in, day out to deliver quality public services to the Scottish people. I ask members to endorse the Public Services Reform (Scotland) Bill.

It has been evident over many years that there has been a mismatch between the number of teachers being trained and those entering employment after their induction year. We have taken action in this Government to address that situation by initially reducing intakes to initial teacher education courses by 42 per cent between 2009 and 2010. We have also brought forward the publication of the teacher census to better inform the planning process. I will take decisions on workforce planning at the end of this year and I am determined that I will do so on the best information available on the numbers of teachers leaving the profession and the local authority demand for teachers.

This group of amendments relates to the power of direction that the Scottish ministers will have over creative Scotland under section 30. Notwithstanding our previous debate, Mr Brocklebank has consistently stressed the importance of an arm's-length approach in ministers' relationships with creative Scotland. My predecessors and I have made it explicit that we are committed to that arm's-length relationship and that no ministerial direction will be given on artistic or cultural judgment. We have included a provision to that effect—such a provision did not appear in the previous Administration's draft culture (Scotland) bill. Amendment 45 would ensure that ministers gave only general directions, but prohibiting specific directions to creative Scotland would  considerably restrict ministers' ability to give important non-artistic directions on matters such as governance, auditing and finance. A strong argument for ensuring that specific directions may be made is that it reassures the public that ministers could intervene quickly in the event—albeit unlikely—that serious governance or financial problems needed to be addressed. The Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act 2005 refers to ministerial directions of a "general or specific" nature to Bòrd na Gàidhlig and such a provision also applies to national park authorities under the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000. Such a provision is generally available to ministers, but it will not mean interference with artistic or cultural judgment. Amendment 46, which would require directions to be laid before Parliament, is unnecessary. It would be unprecedented and would risk unwarranted delay when a direction needed to be made urgently—in a parliamentary recess, for example. I have had useful discussions and correspondence with Mr Brocklebank and I know that he understands where the Government is coming from. I understand the intention behind his amendments. Following those discussions and after seeing his amendments, the Government lodged amendment 72, which I hope offers the appropriate reassurance that no artistic or cultural direction can be given to creative Scotland through any variation of directions. Amendment 72 provides reassurance that the power to vary or revoke a direction is subject to the arm's-length principle on matters that involve artistic or cultural judgment, to which section 30(2) refers. I hope that, with the reassurance that he looks for, Ted Brocklebank is satisfied that amendment 72 is better in legal terms at doing what he tries to achieve in amendments 45 and 46. I urge him to withdraw amendment 45 and not to move amendment 46.

I want to set the record straight.  On 2 April last year, Mr Russell explained that in relation to creative Scotland's work with the creative industries—that is at column 16433 of the Official Report .

The scope of amendment 44 is so broad as to give ministers the power to direct creative Scotland to co-ordinate the activities not just of public bodies but of any organisation in the voluntary or the private sector that is involved in the arts and culture or creative industries. Creative Scotland would thus be placed in the invidious position of being directed to co-ordinate bodies such as Equity, Voluntary Arts Scotland or the Visual Arts and Galleries Association, which, in turn, would face the choice of being swept under purported Government control or turning their back on the productive relationship with creative Scotland that they might otherwise have had. Such a role would be alien to the partnership working for which members throughout the chamber called when the bill was debated at stage 1. Amendment 44 is also so loosely worded as to capture artistic and creative activity in all its forms, even in organisations for which such activity is peripheral. Creative Scotland does not need the amendment. Robin Harper referred to section 27(3), which says: "Creative Scotland may encourage and support such persons as it considers appropriate in the exercise" of its functions. Work is under way—without legislation—to improve support for our creative  industries, which is the main focus of interest of Ted Brocklebank and Pauline McNeill. Creative Scotland is taking the lead through the Scottish creative industries partnership, which includes representation from Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, creative Scotland, Skills Development Scotland and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. Creative Scotland is also establishing a productive relationship with local government on the basis of consensual partnership, without the need for legislative direction. A point of principle is involved. Great care has been taken to avoid meddling by ministers in creative Scotland's artistic and cultural judgment—we will debate that in relation to the next group of amendments. Amendment 44 would undermine that principle, which I do not think is Ted Brocklebank's intention. The amendment would be positively unhelpful to creative Scotland and its credibility as an arm's-length body. It would allow ministers to meddle in and get in the way of creative Scotland's development of relationships. Creative Scotland does not want the amendment and the arts sector is seriously concerned that the Parliament would seek late in the day to provide for such ministerial interference. If the amendment were agreed to, the Government would take every opportunity to make it clear that we believe in the arm's-length principle for arts and culture and that the Tories' proposal is alien to that. I know that the Tories are trying to reinvent themselves, but I say politely that creating a nanny state or, even worse, a command state of Government direction of all bodies—private, public and voluntary—that are involved in the arts and culture in Scotland is surely a step too far, even for the Conservatives. I know that that is not Ted Brocklebank's intention, but that would be the practical consequence of agreeing to the amendment. On that basis, I urge him to withdraw the amendment. It is clear from the provisions and responses to requests from members that I have made a commitment. Scottish Enterprise, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and all the other public bodies are part of the Scottish creative industries partnership, which is ably convened by creative Scotland and met only yesterday in the Parliament. Great progress is being made in swathes of the creative industries. Most important, the bill is about artists and creative practitioners in Scotland. They deserve the arm's-length approach that amendment 44 would undermine. I urge Ted Brocklebank to withdraw the amendment.

I welcome this debate and the opportunity to inform members of the outcomes of my recent visit to Malawi and the progress that is being made on addressing the key priorities of the Scottish Government's Malawi development programme. Scotland and Malawi have a long history of collaboration. Scots have worked with the people of Malawi for more than 150 years, particularly in the areas of health and education. Scotland's relationship with Malawi is about people and communities working together to develop further the strong civic bond that exists between our two countries. We have developed a unique model that demonstrates good practice in international development. Credit must go to other parties in the Parliament and, indeed, to the previous Administration for helping to develop that co-operation agreement.  The Scottish Government's Malawi development programme builds on the strengths of that unique relationship. It also provides a more focused contribution by addressing the four key priority areas that were identified by the Government of Malawi and which are set out in the co-operation agreement—health, education, sustainable economic development, and civic society development and governance. That work is being taken forward by organisations in Scotland that are working in partnership with colleagues in Malawi to meet the specific needs of the people of Malawi. I visited a number of projects representing each strand of the co-operation agreement. I was particularly interested in and encouraged by the partnership approach. I was encouraged not only by the work that non-governmental organisations are doing but by the time and effort that communities are investing to ensure that local people are part of the decision-making process and that they can create and shape their own futures. It is essential that vulnerable and disadvantaged groups are given help and support to empower them to make changes to develop longer-term sustainability and provide a lasting legacy. Nowhere was that more evident than when I launched the capacity building for enterprise  project in Blantyre. That project has been taken forward by the Scotland-Malawi business group in partnership with Challenges Worldwide and key businesspeople in Malawi. It is providing much-needed business support and advice to individuals and small businesses, many of which are run by women, to help them with the initial start-up and to help them to become sustainable. However, it would be naive not to recognise that there are big challenges, some of which are not without controversy. We have seen the accusations in the media regarding the inappropriate use of resources and concerns about human rights in Malawi. Let me set out clearly the Scottish Government's position and response. On funding, Scottish Government funds are provided to organisations in Scotland that have demonstrated that they have the relevant skills, capacity and expertise to deliver services on the ground directly to the people of Malawi. We do not provide grant funding directly to the Government of Malawi. Our approach remains to support communities and organisations through an open and transparent process. All grants that are awarded have strict conditions, and there are checks to ensure that money is directed to our priority areas and agreed development activities. Our approach includes a commitment to rigorous monitoring and evaluation procedures. As a minister, it would be inappropriate for me to comment on individual cases that are currently subject to the independent judicial system of Malawi, but during my meetings with the Government of Malawi I relayed concerns that have been expressed in Scotland about the general issue of human rights in relation to gay rights. As part of our international development policy, the Scottish Government will not consider funding projects that discriminate between individuals or groups in that way. The Scottish Government believes that there is no place for prejudice or discrimination, and that everyone deserves to be treated fairly, regardless of their religion, race, sexual orientation, gender, age or disability.

The member makes an important point. That issue is one of the reasons why the Scottish Government has supported  Waverley Care, for example, and proposals that it has made in working with people with HIV and AIDS, regardless of their sexual orientation. It is important that we have a respectful discussion with a Government that has a judicial system and experiences that are different from ours. One point that I relayed to the Government of Malawi was that human rights must be respected across the globe. Perhaps because of their culture, people come to the issue at different times and from different perspectives. Iain Smith clearly identified the health agenda. There are many challenges in Malawi—I saw at first hand what they are—and addressing them demands an atmosphere of respect, confidence and trust. I made it clear that that is our view. I am keen that we work more closely together on civic society development and governance. There is much that we can do to work with the people of Malawi to strengthen the human rights context within civic society and governance systems. I recognise the important contribution that the Scottish Parliament is making towards civic governance in Malawi. I was pleased to host jointly, with Michael Matheson and Karen Gillon, a workshop for members of the National Assembly of Malawi. More than 70 per cent of that Assembly's members are new since the elections in May 2009. Furthermore, the Government has moved from being a minority Government to being a Government with a significant majority. That in itself brings a further set of challenges for the parliamentary process. The National Assembly of Malawi indicated that it would welcome support from the Scottish Parliament to explore some of the challenges and barriers to strengthening governance. I look forward to hearing more from Michael Matheson and Karen Gillon about their experiences if there is the opportunity to do so, and to hearing about how the Scottish Parliament is looking to take forward its work with that Assembly. I offer the Scottish Government's co-operation and support for that work. The core of the Scottish Government's engagement is, of course, to deliver on priorities that reflect the needs and preferences of the people of Malawi, not something that is imposed by others. Our focus remains firmly centred on people and empowering communities to address specific development outcomes. However, it is essential that the Governments in both countries have a shared vision and direction for the programme, that they continue to monitor progress, and that we encourage the sharing of best practice and learning from each other. During my visit, I met ministers from the Government of Malawi to reaffirm the Scottish Government's commitment to deliver on the co-operation agreement. It is important that we continue to achieve outcomes for the people of  Malawi that further strengthen our relationship with both the Government of Malawi and our key delivery partners. I met a number of ministers and officials who cover the key areas of Scottish Government-funded activity in Malawi, and was encouraged by the commitment that was expressed and the enthusiasm for working more closely to deepen the relationship between our two countries. I place on record my thanks to the Government of Malawi for its invitation to visit and for the time and commitment of ministers during my visit. I was briefed on the President's priorities for the African Union for the next year, now that he has been appointed its chair. Those priorities are food security, infrastructure and energy, all of which are areas in which Scotland has something tangible to offer. I raised the issue of Malawi's engagement with the European Union and discussed the potential for us to work together to support project sponsors to unlock EU funds. An example of that is the Scottish Government support for the Opportunity International programme, which has been instrumental in releasing additional EU funds. I also met the head of co-operation for the Flemish Government and discussed our respective programmes and areas of mutual interest, including food security and agricultural exchanges. Our support for the Malawian people through aid continues. Earlier today, I was pleased to announce a funding package for Malawi of more than £7 million over three financial years. We have already committed a minimum of £3 million for the financial year 2009-10. Together with on-going projects, more than £4 million will go directly to Scotland-based organisations to support their work in Malawi in 2010-11. I was pleased to see applications for some of the less-developed areas of the programme, such as agriculture. For example, the application from the Scottish Crop Research Institute will strengthen the development of sustainable potato production in Malawi, which will contribute to food security and improve the livelihoods of workers. Scotland has a lot more to offer in skills and knowledge. There is a clear and genuine willingness from the people of Scotland not only to be involved, but to ensure that we do it well. Members are all aware of the strong links that exist in our constituencies, ranging from church groups to universities, colleges, schools and wider community groups. I cannot go anywhere in Scotland without finding someone or some community that has a long and deep relationship with Malawi. All that contributes to the on-going work to help Malawians to work themselves out of poverty. However, I recognise that the answer is not always about funding. The Government also has a role in encouraging and facilitating others to  make progress with important and innovative ideas. Where we can, we should broker partnerships to ensure that we contribute to the delivery of effective aid and development. We will continue to consider new approaches and other areas in which the Scottish Government can provide support or assistance. I reaffirm the Scottish Government's commitment to our work with Malawi and assure members that I will continue to drive forward a programme that is focused and based on the priorities that have been identified and agreed with the Government of Malawi and models of best practice. Several members have visited Malawi in recent months and years, and I look forward to their speeches. We continue to forge a relationship that has lasted 150 years. The strength and depth of that relationship has been enhanced by the work of the Government, the previous Scottish Executive and the Parliament. It is important that we share that experience. We must also take the temperature of where we are now and reflect on what the direction of travel should be in future.

Employment of teachers is primarily a matter for local authorities. However, the Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that Scotland has the right number of teachers to meet the needs of our pupils. That is a logical step that I am sure would appeal to all in these straitened times.

The Government is fully committed to securing increased opportunities for all pupils to access outdoor learning. The Forestry Commission and national parks, which receive Scottish Government funding, promote the key role of outdoor learning in supporting delivery of the curriculum for excellence. In addition, we provide funding to, among others, the Royal Highland Education Trust and the National Trust for Scotland and we support visits to farms, Bannockburn, Culloden and other places. I will shortly launch "Curriculum for Excellence Through Outdoor Learning". That guidance and a supporting online resource have been developed alongside Learning and Teaching Scotland to help local authorities and schools to embrace opportunities that the new curriculum presents for learning in the outdoors to be embedded in learning and teaching.

The Scottish Government regularly discusses issues of strategic importance with COSLA. The First Minister and the president of COSLA, with the support of all the political group leaders—I stress the word "all"—have each written to the Chancellor of the Exchequer and relevant Opposition members at Westminster to emphasise the adverse impact that an emergency UK budget could have on Scottish budgets and public services. We will continue to make the strongest possible representations on the matter in the interests of the people of Scotland.

In fulfilling their duty to provide adequate and efficient education within their areas, local authorities regularly review their school stock in light of many changing factors, including population patterns and educational needs. Major planning developments might lead to changes in the local school age population, which should, of course, be taken account of by education authorities. Whether such changes require changes to the local primary and secondary provision will depend entirely on local circumstances.

In line with a commitment made by the previous  Administration, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education inspects on a generational cycle. Currently, all primary schools and pre-school centres will be inspected over the seven years from 2008-09 to 2014-15, and every secondary school will be inspected over the six years from 2008-09 to 2013-14. In all sectors, some schools and centres will have additional follow-through inspections, and further inspections might be carried out in response to special circumstances.

The Lighthouse building is not closed. Government support has enabled it to stay open. Staff from the Lighthouse Trust transferred to Architecture and Design Scotland, to maintain our architecture programmes. Proposals are being explored to find financially viable options for the Lighthouse so that it can continue to make a major contribution to architecture and design in Scotland. Creative Scotland will work with a wide range of partners to support architecture and design in Scotland, which are an important part of our creative industries. One of the new reference groups that are being established under Scotland's creative industries partnership will consider how best to support the needs of design services, including architecture, to ensure that the sector can flourish.

I reassure the member that I share his concern to ensure that we have a vibrant and dynamic sector. It is important that we listen to everyone involved. Discussions are going on that involve Glasgow City Council, which owns the Lighthouse building. It would be wrong to pre-empt the outcome of the discussions, but positive suggestions are coming forward, which we will consider carefully.

The Scottish Government has regular discussions with the National Galleries of Scotland on a wide range of issues. The galleries are developing the concept of a gallery without walls, to embrace all their partnership activity. In 2009, exhibitions or displays were lent to galleries in Aberdeen, Dumfries, Glasgow, Inverness, Banff,  Kirkcudbright, Kilmarnock, Perth and Stromness. There will be further tours to Aberdeen, Banff, Glasgow, Perth and Inverness and NGS will also travel to Dundee, Stornoway, Thurso, Fort William and Helmsdale in 2010 with its latest exhibitions.

The member is aware that I cannot direct the National Galleries of Scotland and would not seek to do so. However, I am sure that NGS will pay close attention to what the member has said. There has been major progress on sharing the artworks of Scotland, through exhibitions. On managing collections, we must ensure that we reach out and internationalise, and celebrate Scotland's exhibitions in other countries. It is equally important that we take responsibility for our collections when they are here and ensure that we maximise them. The painting "Diana and Actaeon" is at Kelvingrove art gallery and museum from 1 July to 1 August, and I hope that Bill Butler will be first in the queue to welcome it.

I can seek answers from the National Galleries on behalf of Ted Brocklebank. I, too, welcome Jack Vettriano's talent and the pleasure that many people experience from his work. However, despite constant requests from others for me to direct the National Galleries, the member will understand that it would not be appropriate for me to do so.

I commend the member for his active pursuit of sharing the available resources. I encourage the National Galleries and Glasgow City Council to work collaboratively on a range of issues. Decisions about what would be permanent and what would be loans would obviously be up to the two bodies concerned, but I would expect a constructive approach from both. Indeed, I encourage them to have further dialogue with Bill Kidd to ensure that we make best use of our best exhibitions and have the best opportunities to share across Scotland the talent that we have in Scotland.

The Scottish Government has long enjoyed strong cultural and other links with Catalonia. In December 2008, the First Minister met the Catalan president and agreed to strengthen economic, cultural and sporting links between Scotland and Catalonia. Scottish international fixtures are a matter for the Scottish Football Association. The SFA has told us that the 2012 qualifying campaign is its priority at the moment and any fixtures chosen will be expected to support that. However, I would encourage Catalan officials to contact the SFA to discuss further their ambitions to hold football matches with the Scotland football team.

Unfortunately, my responsibilities as minister do not extend to fixing or arranging matches and international fixtures. However, I agree that collaborative approaches, whether in sports or culture, should be pursued. Indeed, the First Minister spoke with the Catalans about, for example, BBC Alba and TV3, the Catalonian television station, sharing programme experience. Obviously, we have just had the fantastic Gaudi exhibition at the Lighthouse, to which I referred in my previous response to Des McNulty, who has unfortunately now left the chamber. Therefore, we are pursuing collaborative approaches in such areas. However, I am afraid that I might have to leave the subject of football to the Minister for Public Health and Sport and, probably more important, the SFA.

I think that Glasgow would welcome any Barcelona fans, as I am sure it has done in the past. The only time that I saw Dundee United play was during Celtic's centenary year, when I think Celtic beat them in the Scottish cup final.

I apologise to the member, who probably did not like my last answer. The V&A in Dundee is being created through a partnership between the V&A Museum and the University of Dundee, the University of Abertay Dundee, Dundee City Council and Scottish Enterprise. The Scottish Government is supporting the partnership in developing a robust business case to help to seek funding from a variety of private and public sources. The partnership has launched a high-profile architectural competition for the new building. I look forward to meeting the  partnership later this month to hear of further progress.

I understand that there has been extensive international interest, but the people who are in charge of the project will be able to give a better summary of the situation. I am looking forward to getting feedback from them on that. The project has extremely strong potential to help develop Dundee, but as far as the Scottish Government's responsibilities are concerned, we look forward to receiving a strong and robust business case for the V&A in Dundee. We are highly appreciative of the fact that there has been such strong international interest in what could be a groundbreaking project involving the design of a purpose-built facility. We will all try to support it in whatever way we can.

I do not think that the member was at the event at which I was involved in launching the architectural competition. I know that Shona Robison, Stewart Hosie and Joe FitzPatrick were, and they will have heard my firm commitment on behalf of the Scottish Government. We obviously have to see the business plan, which we expect to be robust, but when I gave my commitment, the Government was highly supportive of the project and it continues to be so.

Scottish Opera is expected to receive £8,628,000 in core funding from the Scottish Government in the financial year 2009-10, and £8,713,000 in 2010-11.

I certainly know that there have been co-productions in the past. I do not know the answer to the question about current collaborations, but I will find out and get back to the member on that. I took the opportunity to look at the most recent figures that we have to hand comparing Scottish Opera with Opera North. The question is not just the amount of money that is spent on a particular company, but what it does with that money. I am pleased to say that in 2008 Scottish Opera had audiences of 76,523 and Opera North had audiences of 78,223. That represents only a marginal difference of 1,700 in what were large numbers. On education, the figure for Scottish Opera was 35,973 and that for Opera North was only 5,000, so we must recognise the work that Scottish Opera is doing in that area. On outreach, it is doing a great deal more. I also commend The Scottish Sun for its sponsorship and support of Scottish Opera's recent performance of "La Bohème". It helped to provide tickets at the cut price of £9.50, and it was a sell-out. It was a fantastic performance, but what was important was the reception that the people of Glasgow gave to Scottish Opera. That will benefit the city and Scottish Opera, and I understand that ticket sales have improved for the whole run of "La Bohème", perhaps because of The Scottish Sun 's popular campaign.

Prior to the gathering event last July, the Scottish Government provided The Gathering 2009 Ltd, a private limited company, with a loan of £180,000 to assist it to address specific cash flow difficulties. A range of public sector partners provided grant support to the gathering event in order to increase its economic impact.  The gathering event was a success, generating £10.4 million for Scotland, but it became apparent some weeks after the event that The Gathering 2009 Ltd had encountered serious financial difficulties. The public sector partners involved in the gathering event judged the company's debts to them to be irrecoverable and took the decision not to recover the amounts that they were owed.

The private company is now in liquidation and any future questions on that can be directed to Jim Mather. On Government support, a business plan was put forward in 2008 and at that time the Government supported the Highland games element of the gathering and the educational outreach. As I said in my first answer, subsequently we gave support in a number of areas to help to promote economic activity and the loan that helped to support the event.

Fife has a thriving musical and cultural scene, which is supported in a number of ways. The Scottish Government pursues its aims for the cultural sector through working with our partner the Scottish Arts Council, particularly through the youth music initiative, and through supporting the work of higher and further education institutions. In addition, the Scottish Government provides funding for local cultural services through the local government finance settlement.

I remind the member that my responsibility for funding of musical tuition is in the form of the youth music initiative, which continues to be paid more than £0.5 million, which is the same as previously. I understand from Fife Council that the member's figures on the impact of the cuts are 34 per cent out. The member would be better to direct her attention to the Labour Government at Westminster where she should seek reassurance that there will not be an emergency budget that will put greater pressure on the Scottish block and on councils. That would be the best thing for the member to do if she wants to continue to support music and music tuition in Scotland.

I had an introductory meeting with Bailie Liz Cameron, the chief executive officer of Culture and Sport Glasgow, on 19 January 2010, during which we had an initial discussion about current and future plans for museums and the arts in Glasgow. I intend to visit Glasgow in the near future to hold full discussions with Culture and Sport Glasgow colleagues and to visit some of the cultural service providers. Scottish Government officials last met representatives of Culture and Sport Glasgow on 22 February 2010 at the 2012/2014 cultural strategic overview group, which the Scottish Government chairs. The group received an update on the cultural legacy for the Olympic and Commonwealth games and discussed activity relating to the Delhi handover.

I congratulate the member on having so many museums and galleries in her constituency. The newly refitted Kelvingrove art gallery and museum makes a fantastic contribution to the cultural scene not just in Glasgow, but in Scotland. She said that the museum receives no Government funding, but the Government did provide capital funding to support its refurbishment. The museums think tank was set up by my predecessor to consider how we can have a more integrated, supportive sector that provides support and access throughout Scotland, not just in Glasgow. The think tank has been active in its deliberations and I look forward to the results of those soon. I will be happy to share the conclusions of the think tank with the member once we have them.

I congratulate Elizabeth Smith and the Conservatives on initiating the debate. As I have often said in a variety of guises, it is right that we in the chamber openly and constructively debate future patterns of activity. The only really jarring point in Elizabeth Smith's speech was the prospect that Mr Macintosh and I might be having a socialist love affair, which has quite put me off for the rest of the day. However, as I suspect that  any such discussion would be X-rated, we can move on. Jeremy Purvis raised an important issue. It is important not just to import into Scottish education what Michael Gove thinks. I have no doubt that he thinks interesting thoughts but, from what I have heard, I do not think that many of them are relevant to the system that we have developed in Scotland and to the different way in which we want to take that forward. Perhaps some confusion will arise in coming weeks about that. For example, in last night's education debate on "Newsnight", three individuals debated a topic for which they have no responsibility in Scotland. I hope that Scottish voters noticed that and that the BBC noticed the ridiculousness of that debate for Scottish viewers. I will start from where I came from. It is probable that the starting point for all of us in the debate is our experiences in schools. I attended a rather odd school—a grant-aided comprehensive. It was perhaps typical of Scotland that such strange hybrids could exist. I was a pupil at Marr college in Troon; my father was in the first intake there in 1935. The school was established by philanthropy—by a vast sum of money that Charles Kerr Marr left. He was a coal merchant who made his fortune in London and left it all to educate young people in Troon. The school building was unique in its time and cost about £35 million. The first chairman of the school governors was Sir Alexander Walker of whisky fame. Marr college admitted every child in Troon and nobody else. It continued as a grant-aided school until a Labour Government abolished such schools in the 1970s. By that stage, problems aplenty could be observed. I am probably the only education secretary, and certainly the only Opposition education spokesperson, to be barred from his former school when I achieved those offices. I was barred because I wrote several articles that examined how that great school had fallen from greatness and asked why that was so. The baseline of my thinking is that the principles of access and excellence on which Marr college was based—the principles that no exclusion should take place through academic or financial selection and that every child should aim as high as they can—underline my educational philosophy and are the principles that Scotland should take forward.

I welcome the debate for several reasons, not least because it gives me the opportunity to set out my strong belief—a belief that was buttressed by my period as Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution—that, in order for Scotland and its people to succeed and flourish in the globalised 21 st century that we live in, we must all become and live as global citizens. The term "global citizens" covers citizens who have a knowledge and understanding of the world and Scotland's place in it; citizens who are confident about travelling widely for jobs and working with other nationalities, and who enjoy speaking other languages; citizens who are respectful of other cultures, traditions, religions, beliefs and attitudes; citizens who appreciate that their behaviour and actions have an impact on their environment and the environment of others in other countries, and who acknowledge that we must change our consumption habits to ensure that we have a sustainable world for future generations; and citizens who care about their society and locality, and who appreciate the good things that we have in our lives, in comparison with millions of others in less fortunate places. All those things are essential if we are to educate and prepare this country and society for success in the 21 st century. It is part of the Government's job to show ambition, leadership and direction to achieve those aims. It is also essential that we are global citizens so that we can successfully engage with and get the best from the rest of the world, not least for the benefit of our economy, our prosperity and our reputation as a country of integrity, passion and pride, as well as a beautiful country with a rich culture, heritage and history. All that starts with education. This afternoon's debate gives me the opportunity to restate the Government's commitment to international education and developing global citizens, and to promoting learning in contexts that go well beyond our borders. It also allows us to restate the importance of meaningful international engagement with our European and world partners, and to draw attention to our ability to share with other people the exciting range of  associated work that we are doing in Scotland that is admired elsewhere. The Government is determined to ensure that, from birth to adulthood, all young people have opportunities to develop a knowledge and understanding of the world and Scotland's place in it. To put it another way, we must give our young people a strong understanding of Scotland's position in the wider world. That is essential to our new approach. I am therefore delighted that "International education: responsible, global citizens"—the report published last month in Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education's popular "Learning Together" series, which has inspired the debate—confirms that there are many examples in our schools of exciting, innovative and inspiring approaches to international education. At this early stage in the debate, I pay tribute to the retiring HMIE senior chief inspector, Graham Donaldson, whose work led to that report and who has shown a strong commitment to international education. On its publication, he said: "Scotland's future economic prosperity requires an education system within which the population as a whole will develop the kind of knowledge, skills and attributes which will equip them personally, socially and economically to thrive in the 21 st century". In preparing the guide, HMIE found some outstanding examples of international education in Scottish schools, with some young people's lives being transformed. At its best, learning in an international context enables children and young people to become more outward looking and confident about themselves and their nation; to be more skilled and competent users of world languages; to develop an evolving, informed world view and an understanding of Scotland's place in it; and to learn about and understand other cultures and religions at first hand—in other words, to participate fully as active, responsible global citizens.

I echo members' sentiments and thank Bill Butler for securing today's debate. I have been encouraged by members' supportive comments, which show that fair trade is above politics and has cross-party support in Scotland. I understand that the inaugural meeting of the cross-party group on fair trade will take place after the debate; I wish it well. I welcome the establishment of the group and look forward to hearing the outcomes of the meeting. As we know, many more people now know the meaning of fair trade and understand its importance. That has been no more evident than at the events in which I have participated as part of Fairtrade fortnight. Those have included addressing the fair trade experience in Glasgow, which was sponsored by the co-operative movement. Bill Butler was right to salute the work of the co-op movement, especially in this area. At the event in Glasgow, I met people from Stonelaw school and the daughter of Jim Kelly, who has just spoken—although I am not sure that he is paying attention. I also attended a fair trade fashion show in Linlithgow, at which the models were pupils from the local fair trade group. At the Glasgow event, fashion was modelled by pupils from Strathaven academy. In paying tribute to the excellent work that has been done on fair trade across West Lothian, Mary Mulligan will recognise the challenges that arise in relation to local authorities. Marlyn Glen identified that what happens in local authorities is a key area in which we can move forward. I have had the pleasure of meeting Haitham Hasasneh, a livelihood development officer who works with olive oil producers in Palestine. He has been taking part in events throughout the country, courtesy of the Scottish Fair Trade Forum. My fair trade swap has been to Palestinian olive oil. Gavin Brown talked about quality, and I can testify to the quality of olive oil from Palestine. Fairtrade fortnight is drawing to a close, but that should not mean that we forget the cause. As members have said, promoting fair trade is a year-round challenge. Events such as this debate help to raise awareness, and the message seems to be getting across. It is a pity that Jack McConnell has not stayed to hear my response to the debate, because I want to address a point that he made about fair trade and school tuck shops. I make it clear that there is flexibility in legislation to allow schools to sell products that are not normally allowed, such as fair trade confectionary, including chocolate—Robin Harper alluded to that. The Minister for Children and Early Years, Adam Ingram, wrote to  all directors of education on 11 February to highlight the flexibility that exists in regulations to enable schools to achieve a balance between providing for healthy, balanced diets and addressing wider issues, such as support for fair trade. The minister's letter also highlighted the flexibility to ensure that social and cultural activities can be enjoyed and celebrated. Fair trade is about social responsibility in that regard. I hope that members will ensure that people are aware of the minister's letter. It is important that we recognise the commitments to convert to fair trade that have been made by global companies such as Cadbury, Nestlé, Green and Black's and—recently—Ben and Jerry's. There has been a big shift in recent years. Large retailers and independent shops around Scotland stock a diverse range of fairly traded products and ensure that there is more choice. Such companies are helping to mainstream fair trade into our daily lives. As a result, the Fairtrade Foundation has confirmed another increase in the value of fair trade sales to almost £800 million in 2009. Two out of three Scots continue to buy the same number of fair trade products despite the current economic climate, and 57 per cent of Scots buy fair trade products regularly. That is a good baseline from which to build as we take our country towards fair trade nation status. The programme is gaining momentum and good progress has been made. I am delighted that all of Scotland's six cities are already Fairtrade. A number of universities, schools and local authorities have also achieved Fairtrade status. However, we cannot be complacent; there is still a great deal of work to be done. The Scottish Government is serious about making Scotland a fair trade country and remains committed to driving forward progress to achieve that. I commend the efforts of churches, faith groups, charities, schools and individuals in promoting the benefits of fair trade. I was particularly interested to hear about the glow fair trade group, which David Whitton mentioned. I hope that the strong fair trade movement in Scotland continues to flourish. The Scottish Fair Trade Forum has launched its final push campaign, which is about finishing the work that is needed to become a fair trade nation and moving on to the next stage. To achieve the fair trade nation criteria, we must treble the number of Fairtrade towns in Scotland, which is no small task. However, it is a testament to the hard work and dedication of the Scottish Fair Trade Forum that we have reached this point. I look forward to continued collaboration between the Scottish Government and the Scottish Fair Trade Forum. There is great excitement about the challenge of exploring how we can best support each other in  the final push. The forum has just produced its call to action and has yet to approach Government, but I encourage it to do so. It is not simply about raising awareness in Scotland; producers in developing countries are beginning to realise what fair trade can do for them. Fair trade can bring us closer together. Countries such as Malawi, which I visited a few weeks ago, are becoming increasingly engaged. During a visit to the Scotland-Malawi business group I saw for myself producers' hard work and dedication and witnessed the lives that they lead. Many producers live below the poverty line, but there is hope. Malawi produces tea, nuts, sugar and many other products that people in Scotland consume in some quantity. I was interested in the point that was made about rice. There is an issue to do with procurement in that regard. I was also interested in Robin Harper's points about the health service. Scotland has reached a certain level and status in the context of fair trade, but we must push much harder and ensure that there is depth and range in our activity. I look forward to taking the issues forward.  We have achieved a lot, but the fight goes on. I hope that members of the Parliament will continue to support fair trade here and in their constituencies to help to end the poverty that producers face. The fair trade movement is a campaign for fairness and solidarity. It is a shared responsibility for all global citizens who want the world to be fairer. Fair trade is trade with dignity, meaningful trade and sustainable trade. It is a deal but, as Gil Paterson said, it is a fair deal. I am delighted to respond to the debate for the Government. I congratulate Bill Butler on bringing the subject to the Parliament for debate. I wish the cross-party group every success not only for tonight but in a good future campaign to take Scotland and the Parliament to Fairtrade status.  Meeting closed at 18:10.

The Scottish Government shares with all the people of Scotland a pride in our nation's built heritage. It inspires us and gives us our sense of place. Our built heritage makes an important contribution to the Scottish Government's purpose of increasing sustainable economic growth. The Scottish Government demonstrates its commitment to the built heritage by investing more than £12 million a year in direct support through grants to owners and local communities, and in the work that Historic Scotland does to grow our traditional skills base.

I acknowledge Aileen Campbell's passion for New Lanark and I am delighted to accept her invitation to visit it and to see its contribution as a world heritage site through its historical significance and through education. I am sure that members across the chamber look forward to inviting me to their areas so that I can see and benefit from understanding the passion and commitment to our built environment.

Jeremy Purvis has previously asked me to visit Abbotsford, when I said that I would be delighted to do so. I put on record the Government's recognition of the fabulous fundraising effort to support Abbotsford, and I look forward to learning more about the project and to addressing some of the serious issues that he raises about where the project will go from here.

Historic Scotland has made a significant effort in recent times to become more flexible in order to address some of the legitimate concerns that Malcolm Chisholm raises. The agency has a keen interest in seeing what it can do to contribute to the climate change agenda. I hope that it will announce something shortly that might satisfy the member's inquiry.

I thank Margaret Smith for lodging the motion and I hope and expect to thank Liz Smith, Des McNulty, Ken  Macintosh and others for their positive contributions to the debate. I am glad that members throughout the chamber accept that we are not talking about the curriculum for excellence as something that should or should not happen. I will marginally correct Margaret Smith—it is wrong to say that the issue is the beginning of the curriculum for excellence, which is working well in primary schools. The issue is its implementation in the secondary sector. We can all agree that that is the core matter that we are discussing. The timetable is not arbitrary. The management board has set the timetable, which education ministers of two Governments have agreed again and again. We are talking about a timetable that is not arbitrary—that word was used—but was agreed. However, I agree that it needs to be looked at from time to time. We all know that our children and young people must be equipped to respond to the demands and opportunities of our changing world. That is axiomatic. In Scotland, we have been talking about change for nearly a decade. I was going to say that several of us in the chamber were members of the Education, Culture and Sport Committee when it held an inquiry into the purposes of Scottish education in 2002-03, but I think that I am the only member in the chamber who was a member of that committee at that time. [ Interruption. ] Mr Macintosh is indicating that he, too, was a member. How could I have forgotten that? Perhaps I wanted to blank it from my memory. Mr Macintosh and I took part in the inquiry. The objectives that the committee set for the future of Scottish education are fully reflected in the curriculum for excellence, as are the outcomes of the Liberal-Labour Executive's national debate on education. We have now arrived at the point where the national policy decisions that were presaged in 2002-03 are being fully realised. However, it is entirely proper for the chamber to stand back and say, "Do we need to do more?" Let us remember why the changes are coming in, but let us also ask ourselves whether we are doing things in exactly the way that we should, because circumstances and times change. There is no doubt that Scottish education performance compares well internationally and with the other parts of these islands, but children's attainment has plateaued over the past decade. We perform well, but not well enough; others are catching up with us and, in some cases, exceeding us. Yesterday, all of us across the political spectrum were united in expressing concern that the Scottish survey of achievement results have plateaued too. There is a very obvious deterioration the further through the  system one goes. That is why secondary education needs to change. It is axiomatic; it is there before our eyes in the SSA. We have to accept that, instead of there being a cost in going ahead, there may be a cost in delay. I raise that as a genuine issue. The cost may be in the achievement of children in the secondary sector, if we accept, as the chamber does, that the curriculum for excellence is the right set of reforms for the secondary sector. Another cost may be in building and developing the professionalism of our teachers. That issue must be put in the balance.

It takes two to tango. We are certainly talking about a matter of months and well before summer. There is a strong technical reason for not choosing Easter.

I am grateful to colleagues for their comments and their support for the motion. We have had much reflection on the journey that we have travelled, and there has been support for the Gaelic language from various parties. This is a short but important debate. I am especially grateful for the constructive spirit in which most members have approached the debate. Interesting and informative points have been made—not least, we  have had an insight into Alasdair Allan's eating habits. First, I will respond to some points that have been made in the debate and, in particular, the amendments that have been lodged. On Iain Smith's amendment, I agree that the decision to place BBC Alba on Freeview should not be made at the expense of access to digital radio stations. The Scottish Government's response to the BBC trust's consultation made it very clear that we want a better solution and I am happy to re-emphasise the point. However, I share the perspective of Pauline McNeill and Peter Peacock on this matter. Indeed, when Pauline McNeill said that this should not be an either/or option, I noted that Iain Smith was nodding in agreement. Perhaps that shows that we can reach consensus in this area. Iain Smith also pointed out that, even after digital switchover, not everyone will be able to access all Freeview channels. Indeed, approximately 15 per cent of the population, almost half of whom live in the Scottish Borders, receive only the public service channels instead of the full range of more than 40 channels. The Scottish Government has already made representations to the UK Government on that matter and I am happy to do so again. However, because broadcasting is reserved to the UK Government, our ability to change the present state of affairs is greatly limited. The Scottish Government welcomes the BBC trust's support for Gaelic media and the current interest in detailed matters relating to the operation and availability of BBC Alba, and the trust's review of the channel and its consultation on Freeview access are also welcome. We have recently emphasised the urgent need to increase the number of Gaelic speakers in order to secure the language's future and have recognised BBC Alba's vital role in that respect. We are encouraged by the channel's current performance and are strongly in favour of its being made widely available. Given that digital switchover in Scotland will be completed by June 2011 and that Freeview is now regarded as normal telly, the BBC must ensure that Gaelic has a place. Welsh is present through S4C; Irish will also be available; and we are now asking the BBC trust to ensure that Gaelic is included in what we all regard as normal telly. The evidence shows that BBC Alba not only is providing a good service to Gaelic speakers and those who are learning the language but has an appeal beyond the Gaelic speech community and is contributing to the education strategy for the language. Indeed, Lewis Macdonald made a good speech on that very matter. Of course, its educational and cultural contribution would be even greater if more people were able to see it.  That means that it has to be available on cable as well as Freeview and, in that respect, I support Pauline McNeill's call for the BBC and Virgin Media to resolve their differences and ensure that cable viewers have full access to the channel. As Ted Brocklebank's amendment rightly points out, BBC Alba has played a crucial role in supporting Scotland's independent production sector. Last year, almost three quarters of its content budget was allocated to the 27 companies outwith the BBC from which it commissioned programmes. Over the past 17 months, BBC Alba has established itself as a crucial element in the Scottish broadcasting industry and in Gaelic as well as Scottish culture. However, its long-term success relies on its being available to as many people as possible in Scotland and, for that reason, I urge all members to support the motion as amended.

We agree with the suggestion in Iain Smith's amendment that there should not be an either/or option, but I acknowledge and agree with the Labour Party's argument that there should be no delay in this matter. Of course, that will not stop us making it imperative that the BBC trust come up with alternative solutions. Indeed, I believe that the chamber can come together on that very point. I urge all members to reach a consensus on this matter, support the motion as amended at decision time and ensure that the Scottish Parliament speaks with one voice.

Will the member give way?

Madainn mhath is fàilte. I am very pleased to lead this debate on BBC Alba. Since its launch in September 2008 it has provided an essential service in supporting Gaelic heritage, identity and culture. It has clearly demonstrated that it deserves to be available to a wider audience, and I hope that everyone in the chamber will join me in supporting that position. The Scottish National Party Government wishes to advance three key messages. First, we value and recognise the importance of the Gaelic language and Gaelic media. Secondly, BBC Alba has achieved much over the past 17 months. Thirdly, BBC Alba should be available on Freeview, and the BBC trustees should take that decision sooner rather than later. The Scottish Government recognises Gaelic as an integral part of Scotland's heritage and its current cultural life. Our aim is to create a secure and sustainable future for Gaelic in Scotland. We are at a critical point in our support for Gaelic. There have been a number of important campaigns over recent years, which have led to important structures being put in place. We now have a Gaelic education sector, a Gaelic bòrd, a Gaelic act—the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Act 2005—and much more. It is crucial that we use those structures effectively to increase the use and learning of Gaelic throughout Scotland. Today, our focus is on an essential support for the Gaelic language: BBC Alba. The Scottish Government believes that Gaelic media, consisting of radio, on-line delivery and television, is of critical importance for the future of the Gaelic language. Gaelic media have access to the home. Gaelic broadcasting appeals to young people. Gaelic programmes have the potential to support Gaelic language learning at every level. A Gaelic media industry supports artistic and technical skills and creates opportunities for Gaelic to be used in those contexts. Those opportunities are vital for the future of the language.  The importance of Gaelic media explains why there was such a long campaign for a Gaelic television channel before BBC Alba's launch in September 2008. The service has undoubtedly been a success and it is a welcome addition to Scottish broadcasting. It now has an average weekly reach of more than 220,000 adults. In Scotland, it has a higher approval score than BBC 2, BBC 3 and BBC 4. It has clearly demonstrated its ability to attract a wide range of people in Scotland as viewers of Gaelic television. We understand that, for every Gaelic speaker, BBC Alba has, since its launch, attracted at least three non-Gaelic speakers. It is Gaelic speakers, of course, who use the channel most intensively. Research surveys conducted by the Lèirsinn research centre show that 70 per cent of Gaelic-speaking viewers who are able to receive the channel do so, and that their average viewing time is about six hours per week. MG Alba supports new talent. In Inverness last week, for example, it hosted the FilmG awards, its awards ceremony for Gaelic short films. The awards attracted 54 entries in total, 23 of which were from young people. The awards exemplify the talent, creativity and enthusiasm of many young Gaelic speakers. BBC Alba plays a vital role within the Scottish broadcasting industry. It spends about 75 per cent of its content budget on independent production companies in Scotland. It has created business models to enable the sustainability of the independent Gaelic TV production sector. BBC Alba's impact would be even greater if it were more widely available. The reason for holding this debate now is that the BBC trust has recently been reviewing BBC Alba and consulting on whether it should be made available on Freeview. We expect a final decision to be made in March. It is important that, at this critical time, the Parliament speaks with one voice regarding our wish that BBC Alba be made available on Freeview. The Scottish Government's long-standing view is that it should be available on Freeview and all other relevant platforms, including cable. We acknowledge the wider point about access that is made in Pauline McNeill's amendment. We made that view very clear to the BBC trust in our response to its consultation. At present, only 43 per cent of Scottish viewers have access to satellite services. There are therefore significant numbers of people who are being denied access to BBC Alba. I agree with a point that I know that Iain Smith will stress. The choice with which we have been presented is not the ideal solution. Under BBC  management proposals, access to BBC Alba will be gained only at the expense of access to radio stations on the television. Although it is crucial for BBC Alba to be placed on Freeview as soon as possible, I urge the BBC to find a way to address the issues around the availability of radio stations. Over the past 17 months BBC Alba has clearly met the criteria that the BBC trust set in order to determine whether it should be available on Freeview.

On numerous occasions, we have made the point to the United Kingdom Government that the availability of broadcasting—not just BBC Alba but other channels—is unsatisfactory in certain parts of the country, including the member's constituency, and that resolving that issue must be part of the overall solution. The Government has demonstrated that the appeal of BBC Alba extends beyond its core audience of Gaelic speakers and learners. We recognise that BBC Alba has significant potential to support learners of the Gaelic language, regardless of which stage they are at. BBC Alba is an essential part of the range of initiatives and programmes that are in place to support and promote the Gaelic language in Scotland. It is also an essential part of the Scottish broadcasting industry and plays a vital role in supporting the independent production sector in Scotland. Ted Brocklebank's amendment rightly stresses the importance of BBC Alba to those companies, as well as to its own employees. However, BBC Alba will achieve its full impact only if it is available to viewers across Scotland, so I urge colleagues to support the motion. Mòran taing. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the contribution made by BBC Alba to Scottish culture and the promotion of the Gaelic language since its launch in September 2008; believes that this contribution would be even greater if BBC Alba was available on a wider variety of broadcasting platforms, and urges the BBC Trust to decide to make BBC Alba available on Freeview following its recent consultation on this issue.

First, I congratulate Christopher Harvie on securing the debate. In doing so, I also pay tribute to the late John Burnie. Members have set out the achievements and contribution of that remarkable man. Members might be aware that the Scottish Government's recognition scheme is designed to celebrate, promote and invest in nationally significant museum and gallery collections around Scotland that are held outside the nationally run institutions. The Scottish Railway Preservation Society achieved that recognised status in 2007 for its core collection, and the project to have the collection recognised was of course led by one John Burnie. The recognition scheme is designed to be flexible, to channel capital and revenue funding to important collections such as that successfully developed by John Burnie and the Scottish Railway Preservation Society. For the first time, the Scottish Government, through Museums Galleries Scotland, has a structured mechanism to fund nationally important collections at a local level and to demonstrate and evidence their importance in the international context. The Government provided £1.2 million in revenue funding for the scheme to enable the recognised collections to develop and to increase their impact. In January, I had the pleasure of announcing an additional £750,000 in capital funding for the scheme for  2009-10, and I plan to announce the successful projects in March. I am aware that one of John Burnie's ambitions was the creation of new workshops and apprenticeships with a view to rebuilding the industry that existed when he was a child, and the Scottish Government shares that vision. In 2009, we had the first ever apprenticeship summit, which was undertaken through the Scottish Government's six-point economic recovery plan to help individuals to get through the downturn. Part of the money for that plan was reserved for apprenticeships. Only last month, we announced an additional £4 million to help businesses across Scotland to take on new apprentices. That is part of ScotAction, which is an integrated package of new and improved measures to help individuals and businesses through the recession. It is important to relate that to the new industries that Hugh O'Donnell and Christopher Harvie talked about, because through the recession we need to develop engineering for the renewable energy industry and to build on the skills, experience and practice that those workshops can provide. A bit of joined-up thinking might enable something for the future to be built on the experience of the past. We should also acknowledge the involvement of the many enthusiastic volunteers who are instrumental in the maintenance of the collection. The society has about 350 active volunteers, some of whom are from the railway industry. I met a delegation to the Parliament a few weeks ago, and I was amazed at the phenomenal skill level and amount of experience among the volunteers. The flow goes two ways. Several of the younger volunteers subsequently found new careers with Network Rail, First ScotRail and other train operating companies, which is testament to the role that the society can play in developing skills and expertise. John Burnie has left the Scottish Railway Preservation Society as a forward-looking and healthy organisation. It has enjoyed a period of growth in visitor numbers during the past six years—2009 saw a record 70,565 visitors. The impact of those figures cannot be overestimated. The Bo'ness museum is a beacon for rail enthusiasts, and the passion with which Robin Harper delivered his speech shows how infectious enthusiasm for the railways can be. However, the museum also attracts the wider public who are interested in experiencing the world of the railway. I look forward to visiting the museum in my new capacity as minister. In 2006, the National Museums Directors Conference and the Museums, Libraries and Archives Council jointly commissioned a report that analysed the impact of a number of British museums and galleries. We have some of the best  museums and galleries in the world. No other country has such a powerful group of them within a relatively small space. The annual turnover of the major museums and galleries exceeds £900 million, and a report commissioned by Museums Galleries Scotland identifies that the sector in Scotland is estimated to generate £78 million in direct and £44 million in indirect revenues, with another £600 million coming into the economy via other impacts. That is business for the economy. Our museums and collections are very much part and parcel of our visitor and tourist attractions. We have more than 25 million visitors a year—a figure that increased by 24 per cent between 2003 and 2007—and 47 per cent of them are tourists. Museums and galleries are a significant factor in attracting visitors to Scotland, but they need to develop if they are to continue to compete against institutions that are developing in other countries. Cathy Peattie referred to the museums think-tank, which was established after the museums summit in June last year and whose members represent the museums and galleries sector. It is examining difficulties and opportunities that the sector faces. I very much appreciate its work and I will assist in the development of a national policy for the sector. Just a few weeks ago, I chaired the think-tank's most recent meeting, at which we agreed to consider how to develop our industrial heritage. The SRPS will have a role in that—I gave that commitment to the delegation who visited the Parliament a few weeks ago.  I am sure that John Burnie's family are especially proud of his achievements. I am grateful that we in the Scottish Parliament have had the opportunity today to pay tribute to him and to acknowledge the unique role that he played in the Scottish Railway Preservation Society's development. Scotland is a better place because of him. Our heritage, culture and opportunities for the future based on the experience of the past have been well served by him and by the Scottish Railway Preservation Society as a whole.  Meeting closed at 17:41.

The First Minister wrote to the Prime Minister on 24 November 2009 and again on 17 December 2009, setting out a timetable that would have allowed orders to be laid in this Parliament and at Westminster to transfer responsibilities to the Scottish Parliament before the UK general election. The Parliament agreed to a motion on 9 December urging the UK Government to work with us to implement the relevant recommendations quickly. The deadline for laying orders passed on 15 January 2010. It is disappointing that we have missed the opportunity to transfer responsibility in important areas such as the regulation of air-guns, drink-driving limits and speed limits.

I agree with the member that the foot-dragging by the Labour Westminster Government is regrettable, bearing in mind that in 2008-09 air weapons accounted for 47 per cent of all offences involving firearms and 80 per cent of all acts of vandalism involving firearms, and that they were used in 66 per cent of offences of reckless conduct with firearms. That example alone makes it clear that in Scotland we should be  making policy for Scotland, not making work for Labour's Secretary of State for Scotland.

Orders have been used in relation to freedom of information, railways and latterly the Somerville judgment, so it is clear that orders can be used on substantial areas of policy development. It is deeply disappointing that the delay means that progress on this vital proposal, which Dave Thompson has been championing for some time, and for which there is cross-party support, has been delayed by the current Labour Administration.

According to the 2008-09 review of the commission's centenary year, the Scottish Government provided 75 per cent of the commission's total income as direct funding in that year. In addition, Historic Scotland provided approximately £221,000 in grants for specific projects as part of the remaining 25 per cent of the commission's income.

Yes, I do. I understand that members have been sent the report from the commission's centenary year. We should recognise the initiatives that took place in that year and the on-going work that RCAHMS does for the benefit of Scotland. I urge people to engage  further to ensure that they understand the impact of RCAHMS in respect of places in Scotland.

I acknowledge the member's continued interest in the area. Although I cannot provide any detail, the area is under active consideration. Obviously, RCAHMS has both office space and, as the member indicated, storage space, particularly for archive material that has to be deal with sensitively. It is important to look at where co-operation can take place with other organisations and public bodies. I am pleased that RCAHMS is actively involved in that pursuit.

Yes, we are aware of the good work of the READ International book project in supporting schools in Tanzania and Uganda and promoting global citizenship here through its awareness-raising work with Scottish schools. Since August 2009, 21 schools in south-east Scotland have been involved in the initiative, which across the UK has provided more than 500,000 quality, relevant textbooks for schools in both countries. We are, of course, already supporting international education and global citizenship as key cross-cutting themes under the curriculum for excellence. Scottish schools have a long tradition of developing learning in an international context and many outstanding examples of current practice are detailed in HM Inspectorate of Education's new guide, "Learning Together: International education: responsible, global citizens" , which was published earlier today.

I was very pleased to learn of the University of Edinburgh project. I congratulate the students and staff on what they have achieved thus far. The target is ambitious, but if more people get to know of the initiative and help to support it, we can ensure that Scotland again contributes as we should do to global citizenship and learning. We should ensure that the initiative is well publicised. I am more than happy to support the member in that regard.

As Michael Russell explained to the member in written answer S3W-27995 on 27 October 2009 and to Ken Macintosh in oral questions on 29 October 2009, funding for the youth music initiative is committed until March 2011. Longer-term options for the initiative, as with all Government expenditure, will be considered in the next spending review.

In the last four years of the previous Executive, £27.5 million was spent on the youth music initiative. In the three years to date of this Government, £30 million has been spent on the initiative. In pursuing the issue of music tuition, the member may be interested to hear that the Scottish Government is holding a joint seminar with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and creative Scotland to take forward culture in the wide sense. We will look at the relationships and how we can ensure that support is given, particularly in the education area. We want to  ensure that we drive forward some of the fantastic and successful achievements that, as the member knows, the youth music initiative and other initiatives have delivered. We need to ensure that we drive that forward even further.

I commend the traditional arts working group on its work to ensure that people are aware of the positive suggestions that have been made about the traditional arts in Scotland. There are specific challenges and opportunities. The report is practical and contains a number of key suggestions. We are already committed to providing mentoring and support for young artists, so that they can work with those who have expertise. When presenting the traditional musician of the year award on Sunday night, I reflected on the important impact that traditional music and dance have on young people. The working group's report is partly about how we can improve and enhance the status of traditional arts. The youth music initiative is one way of achieving that, but there are many others. We will pursue the issue with COSLA in the seminar to which I referred in my answer to Pauline McNeill's question.

I am sure that the member will not be backward in coming forward to speak to her Labour colleagues who run Midlothian Council about the priority that they give to music education. It is important to stress that £2 million out of the youth music initiative budget of £10 million is not delivered in more formal educational surroundings, thus providing an opportunity for more flexible and, perhaps, more innovative work to support youth music.

The Lisbon treaty has significant implications for Scotland. There are new areas of European Union competence and practice relevant to Scotland's devolved responsibilities—in energy, justice, agriculture and fisheries, among others. That underlines the importance of the Scottish Government's proactive approach to inputting into the UK's European policy, as well as engaging directly with EU institutions.

I agree that Scotland, not Westminster, should take the lead on matters affecting Scots law. Over the past 10 years, there has not been a situation in which the Scottish Government has wanted to opt into European legislation and the UK has not. However, we must ensure that the Scottish Government is fully consulted before the UK position on all European policy that affects devolved matters is settled. We will continue to work in that way, following the procedures that are in place. At the joint ministerial committee on Europe, Scottish Government ministers have emphasised the importance of close consultation, especially on justice and home affairs matters, in respect of Lisbon treaty implementation.

I will focus my attention on how we can use the Lisbon treaty to our best advantage. I know that the work of the European and External Relations Committee will inform that  process. However, we fully acknowledge that it is the responsibility of the Parliament and the Presiding Officer to establish the terms on which they want to engage with the Government to ensure that the aspects of the treaty to which the member referred are taken forward. We stand ready to co-operate with the Parliament, but we respect the fact that it is the Parliament's role to do that. I discussed the issue with David Miliband at a recent meeting of the JMC on Europe. Working with the UK Government, we can ensure that the Scottish Government and, more important, the Scottish Parliament, are heard within that procedural context.

That is a critical point about the operation of the Parliament and the Government. I am not sure that it is necessarily for the Scottish Government to ensure that parliamentary procedures are put into effect to ensure subsidiarity. I know that several members are impatient with progress on the issue. We can learn from how other nations are pursuing the issue. I understand that Irene Oldfather's European and External Relations Committee is examining best practice in other areas. If we are to be consulted in a short window of opportunity on subsidiarity and timescales, we need to get the processes in place. We stand ready to co-operate with the committee and the Parliament in that regard.

Immediately following the announcement of the Disasters Emergency Committee appeal, I met representatives from the main Scotland-based non-governmental organisations that were already operating in Haiti to be briefed on their experiences and activities. Following that meeting, I set out several ways in which the Scottish Government could support NGOs. I announced funding of at least £250,000 to assist Scotland-based NGOs with their humanitarian efforts. Officials are assessing the  bids that have been received and I will announce the outcome soon. The Scottish Government will continue to provide support to Scottish NGOs through raising awareness and facilitating links between NGOs and Scotland's organisations, public agencies and public bodies. For example, we were able to link Scottish Water and Save the Children—working together, they will provide fresh water, which is a basic but vital requirement in Haiti.

We continue to have dialogue with DEC members. We will announce shortly our decision on the bids that have been received, but they are from NGOs, which have been able to assess the needs. The funding from the Scottish Government will reflect their assessment. As Jim Hume and I heard at the eyewitness account last week, communication is a key concern. As there is so much movement of people away from Port-au-Prince, we need to ensure that there is activity on support and communications elsewhere in Haiti. The member might be interested to know that somebody from Historic Scotland is in Haiti helping with map-reading in the distribution of aid. That helps with the logistics and communication issues to which the member referred.

Indeed, I do. In answer to a previous question, I referred to the importance of global citizenship and our responsibility in Scotland. People's willingness to offer help and the overwhelming response of the Scottish public are to be congratulated, but we must maintain the momentum and the profile of the disaster to  ensure that people continue to donate and provide help as they can.

Discussions at the JMC on Europe cover a range of issues, including co-ordination between the United Kingdom Government and devolved Administrations. We raise matters in a variety of ways with the UK Government. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth wrote to Her Majesty's Treasury on 16 December to express disappointment that the UK Government budgeting rules in effect prevented the establishment of a JEREMIE fund in Scotland. We have yet to receive a reply.

Scotland is taking forward its own policy. The Scottish investment bank, which has been announced by the First Minister, currently holds about £150 million, which can be used to support business. Clearly, we will continue to have dialogue with other Administrations about their experiences in using their own initiatives.

The new school estate strategy, "Building Better Schools: Investing in Scotland's Future", recognises that schools are major public and community assets and should be open to serve their communities accordingly. That is shown in its ninth principle, which sets out that schools should best serve their  communities and which will be reflected in each of the 55 schools built under the new £1.25 billion school building programme. It is, of course, for individual local authorities to manage their school estate in each community's best interests.

As at present, the number and range of qualifications that are undertaken by young people will be for schools, education authorities, colleges, parents and young people themselves to decide. The new  qualifications will be designed to build on prior learning and will be flexible enough to be timetabled in many different ways. Our aim is to raise the level of achievement and to ensure continued breadth in the S4 to S6 senior phase. We expect young people to have the opportunity to study up to eight qualifications from S4. Under this Government, work is being done at national and local levels on appropriate structures and to build schools capacity in order to offer a range of qualifications and other opportunities for personal achievement in the senior phase. I know that that is supported by members across the Parliament.

I am sure that the member knows that the proposed closure of primary schools in North Lanarkshire or anywhere else is entirely a matter for the council concerned. Local authorities are under a statutory duty to ensure adequate and efficient provision of school education in their area and, in that context, they may review their school stock and how the location and condition of their schools reflect population patterns and meet educational needs. There is, of course, a legislative framework. New legislation on school closures will come into effect on 5 April.

Yes.

In June, we announced an extra £28.1 million to help colleges to offer more places, particularly to young people. That was on top of a 2009-10 budget of nearly £650 million. Over the period 2007-08 to 2010-11, we plan to spend more than £2.5 billion, which is an increase of nearly 20 per cent on the previous four years. That is significant investment that recognises that colleges are central to supporting people and businesses that have been affected by the recession.

I thank Pauline McNeill for giving us the opportunity to discuss this topic. Local newspapers in Scotland have been and continue to be the source of much-needed and appreciated news and information. As David Whitton pointed out, their content is trusted and they are vital to ensuring that the cohesive fabric of our communities is maintained, as they reflect life in each and every distinctive community in Scotland. In many regards, local newspapers are local institutions, but if we see them simply as heritage to be preserved by state subsidy, we do them a disservice. They must be considered as vibrant, independent, private companies competing successfully in a modern market. It is that changing modern market and the new challenges and opportunities of the digital age that must be addressed in the round. As many members have noted, the challenges facing local newspapers did not just appear in December when the PINs consultation took place. We know, because local newspapers have told us, that the circulation decline has taken place over decades, and that the biggest pressures most recently have been the recession and, of course, access to the internet and digital television, which were on the march well before December 2009.

I want to develop my point. It is the core of that decline that must be addressed. That is why I am pleased that Jim Mather will hold a summit with local newspapers to follow on from the discussions that he has been having at national level, and that is why I supported Scottish Enterprise's proposal to focus on publishing when we met earlier this month at the Scottish creative industries partnership meeting, which was chaired by Creative Scotland 2009. It is also why I look forward to the conclusions and, I hope, constructive suggestions later this year from the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee's inquiry. I urge MSPs to accept the invitation from Pat Watters of  COSLA to work with local government and the Scottish Government to support local newspapers.

It is far from being a useless consultation; it has flushed out many issues that have to be addressed. Government, at national and local level, has a duty to provide value for money in public service delivery. It is right that we consider steps that local authorities want to take to secure value for money and to release money for front-line services, perhaps to support home helps for the elderly people whom Cathie Craigie is so concerned about.

No, I want to continue. Local government has asked national Government to consult on proposals to allow local authorities to have the flexibility to advertise public information notices online rather than just in newspapers. As we have seen, the consultation has provoked strong views. I encourage as many people as possible to respond formally before the consultation closes.

That is exactly why engagement with local councils, which also have not only a responsibility but a desire to help and support local newspapers, is vital. I will come on to the either/or argument in analysing how the debate has developed. We want to take account of the many issues that have been raised in this debate, so let me highlight just a number of the questions that have been raised. One question is the degree to which restricting public notices to print-only formats could limit democratic participation. A counter-question, perhaps, is whether continuing with a single format monopoly is correct, or indeed defensible, in a multimedia age. I am not sure whether Labour's argument is that the current system is perfect and cannot be improved. In giving us an intergalactic perspective, Iain Smith highlighted an important distinction between  availability and accessibility, which is a crucial issue in the debate. One suggestion is that text messages could be sent to registered people to draw their attention to any area of interest that they are focused on. In contrast, Karen Whitefield suggested that it is preferable for people to stumble across information rather than have it targeted to them. An important question is how democracy should work as we migrate to a multimedia and digital age. Given that television can be a far more reliable way of reaching people, issues of access and availability might be addressed by exploring whether PINs might be advertised using digital television. Take-up of digital television is at 91 per cent, which perhaps introduces a different dimension to the debate.

That is a vital issue, which the consultation must address. The member is absolutely right to raise the issue of inclusion and access—[ Interruption. ]

However, the consultation will also consider some other fundamental questions. Is it healthy for an independent newspaper sector to be overly dependent on state funding? Does overreliance on council advertising compromise criticism of local councils? Yes, some great campaigning journalism exists, but so does quiet compliance. Cathy Jamieson confused news stories with public notices, which is very dangerous indeed. Ken Macintosh's line of questioning in the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee was very pertinent: should privately owned newspapers of large profitable companies be subsidised by taxpayers at a time of public sector constraint? Can that be reasonably justified? Kenny Gibson and Aileen Campbell made a strong case that large profitable companies should support and invest in their journalists, in particular trainee journalists, in a climate in which newspapers are still making profits. Ted Brocklebank made the important point that change needs to be carefully managed. That reflects Pauline McNeill's point that access to the internet—which is perhaps not at the levels that we might expect—is crucial. We all acknowledge that we are in a situation in which change needs to  be managed, so we need to concentrate on the pace of change and the activity involved. In dealing with change, we cannot stand idle in the wings, perhaps paralysed by the norms of the past. We need to work together to manage change and to position ourselves for the future. That is the strongest message from today's debate. Ultimately, we need a viable future for our newspapers, and we intend to support the newspaper industry to achieve that. We have been criticised for responding to the desire of Labour, Tory, Lib Dem and SNP local authorities to consult on the PINs order, but the proposals are out to consultation. As David Whitton said, we do not yet have the results of the consultation. The consultation finishes on 12 February, so I urge members to ensure that they respond to it. Ultimately, we need to strive to help local newspapers to develop sustainable business models. Technological change represents a real opportunity to newspapers—and their readers—as well as a threat. Newspapers that provide quality content will still find an audience for both their print and online editions. In doing so, they will be able to remain where they have always been—at the heart of local communities. We want to work with local newspapers to take advantage of the opportunities that they face, but we will serve the Parliament and the people best if we address those challenges collectively by working with the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, COSLA and the creative industries partnership to secure that. Important issues have been raised in this debate. I reassure all members that, if they read our amendment carefully, they will see that we will listen to the views that are expressed today. I support the amendment in the name of Jim Mather.

This has to be a broad debate about the future of newspapers. However, does the member acknowledge that Labour-led North Lanarkshire Council is part of local government's request to the Government to consider and debate this issue in Parliament?

Indeed, the member asked that question of me in the chamber previously, and I quoted the figures provided by the Westminster Government and the Cabinet Office. If the member thinks that Westminster wants to pursue the matter further as part of its digital research, I will gladly take representations.

Mr Whitton is still in denial.

I welcome the debate, as it gives me another opportunity to thank publicly the members of the literacy commission—some of whom are in the gallery—restate the Scottish Government's commitment to continually improve literacy, remind members about the work that is under way and anticipate further necessary work. I also thank Mr McNulty and the Labour Party for initiating the debate and, indeed, Rhona Brankin and others for establishing the literacy commission. It has been a valuable innovation and its report is of great importance to us. I think that Iain Gray called it a wake-up call, and I hope that the debate will reflect across the parties the concern that the commission has reminded us that, although improving literacy skills is not a new priority for the Government or its predecessors, it is important to refocus from time to time on what needs to be achieved in Scotland. That is what we need to do now. Reducing adult literacy and numeracy problems is one of the indicators in Scotland performs. That indicator is moving in the right direction; in adult literacy, we are making progress. We await the results of a national survey into adult literacy and numeracy levels throughout Scotland. It is the first such survey in more than a decade and will provide an updated baseline to measure progress better. The Scottish Government and previous Administrations have identified the relationship between literacy and poverty. We have done so particularly in the health inequalities framework and "Achieving Our Potential: A Framework to tackle poverty and income inequality in Scotland", our anti-poverty framework. People with good literacy skills are more likely to maintain and enhance their own health and wellbeing and that of their family. They are also more likely to adapt and improve skills, get a job and stay in productive employment. Those are positives that arise out of reducing adult literacy problems in particular. I am grateful to the literacy commission, which has considered a range of issues independently and come to some important conclusions about how we advance literacy across society. Those conclusions can add to, help to develop, underpin and expand the work that is already going on. It is important to note—without in any way being complacent—that the need to improve literacy is not unique to Scotland; it is a persistent problem throughout the United Kingdom and internationally. International attainment surveys show that the performance of young people in Scotland in reading and writing compares not  unfavourably with performance within the UK and internationally, although much more needs to be done. I will start with what is being done. I acknowledge the good work of our nurseries, schools, colleges, communities and libraries—all the individuals and institutions that help people to improve and build literacy skills, whatever age they are. For example, in West Dunbartonshire, a literacy initiative tailored to local circumstances was aimed at transforming the achievement of all children in the four-to-seven age range and eradicating illiteracy in the school population. The programme involved a range of approaches—including synthetic phonics, about which I am sure we will hear more—and resulted in a 6 per cent reduction in illiteracy levels. Also in that local authority area, practitioners from all social studies departments came together to produce resources to help to embed the building of literacy skills into the teaching of history, geography and modern studies, thereby encouraging the idea of literacy across learning. I am aware of an active literacy programme in North Lanarkshire, with all teachers receiving associated continuing professional development. Teachers are provided with resources to help them employ tactile approaches to phonics and to encourage young people to learn from one another. The programme has sparked cross-authority sharing—pupils from Kildrum primary school recently visited a school in South Ayrshire to discuss their positive experiences. As Mr McNulty said, I met members of the literacy commission this morning and enjoyed an interesting discussion about its report and recommendations and how it might go forward. The discussion reflected the aims of this Government—certainly my own aims—to drive up standards of learning and teaching to ensure that our young people have the literacy skills they need, and I am in complete agreement with many of the commission's recommendations. I agree that we need to take continuing action to improve literacy in Scotland; that we need sustained commitment from all levels of Government and educational management to improve standards of literacy at all levels; and that all local authorities have a strong role to play and should have literacy plans suited to their individual circumstances.

The Government is committed to supporting the games industry in Scotland and Dundee, which is a European top three and world top 10 location for excellence in games. Some examples of our support include the centre of excellence for games development education at the University of Abertay Dundee; the state-of-the-art facilities at Seabraes Yards; access to investment from a variety of funds, including the digital media IP fund; and developing talent with accredited degree courses at Abertay university and with national competitions such as dare to be digital. Scotland's creative industries partnership brings together the public agencies that are involved in supporting the creative industries, ensuring better co-ordinated and more effective support.  On Monday 7 December, I announced a grant of almost £1 million from the European regional development fund for a prototype fund managed by Abertay university. Alongside Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council resource, that brings Scottish public sector support for the project to £2.4 million, which will benefit Scotland-based games developers and build on Scotland's reputation as a destination of choice in this area.

Yes. Despite the disappointing news in the PBR last week, we will continue to make the case to the United Kingdom Government until it acknowledges the problem. We need more support for this high-growth area, and we need the right fiscal powers to provide it. If we are to compete with the likes of Canada, France and Ireland, we must ensure that we progress the issue of support. The UK Government's decision is disappointing, but we will continue to pursue it on the matter.

Yes, I will undertake to do that. We must ensure that we are aware of that issue. Indeed, part of our discussion with the Westminster Government is about how to support parents with regard to internet safety. We must educate our young people to be responsible citizens in a digital age. Ms Smith's point is well made in that regard.

I welcome the opportunity for Parliament to discuss and debate this most fundamental of human issues: the desire to live in peace and safety. The ambition for a peaceful world is one that I know everyone in Scotland will share with others around the world. The diversity of the people who endorse the march for peace and non-violence demonstrates how peace unites people. There are modern cultural leaders, religious leaders and members of the monarchy. They come from different countries and cultures and have different aims in life, but they share a common ambition to have a world that is free from violence and hatred. That ambition must be at the heart of every Government's policy. As we pursue world peace, countries must also secure peace and safety within their borders. We have had a stimulating discussion on a subject that is now and will be in future of prime importance to Scotland. There are steps that we can and should take towards having a world that is free from violence. We can start by removing nuclear weapons. On moral, economic and political grounds, renewal of the United Kingdom's nuclear system is untenable. Bill Kidd's membership of the council of Parliamentarians for Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament and  his attendance at the PNND assembly and council meeting in New York in October are a testament to his commitment, and I congratulate him on securing this debate. I know that his commitment is shared by many members. Global opinion is changing. In September, the United Nations Security Council pledged its backing for broad progress on long-stalled efforts to staunch the proliferation of nuclear weapons and ensure reductions in existing nuclear stockpiles. When President Obama spoke to the council summit after the resolution was passed, he said: "The historic resolution we just adopted enshrines our shared commitment to the goal of a world without nuclear weapons. And it brings Security Council agreement on a broad framework for action to reduce nuclear dangers as we work toward that goal." The Scottish Government is clear in its efforts to reduce violence and promote peace. Putting an end to all forms of violence is consistent with our national outcome: "We live our lives safe from crime, disorder and danger." Elaine Smith was right to talk about the importance of tackling violence against women. The Scottish Parliament has done and continues to do much in that area. We are 100 per cent committed to supporting Scotland's ethnic minority communities, including refugees, asylum seekers, migrant workers and Gypsy/Travellers, who in many ways are the most discriminated against in our society. We have allocated £9 million over a three-year funding period to organisations that try to tackle discrimination and improve the lives of minority ethnic communities in Scotland. Scotland is a nation of many cultures and beliefs and we have built a reputation as a rich and vibrant place to live and work, but even today there are people who harbour outdated and ignorant prejudices, which detract from the kind of Scotland that we want to be part of. There is no place for racism, discrimination and religious intolerance in Scotland—not now, not ever. We are one Scotland and we must stand together to tackle the challenges that we face and rid our society of inequality and discrimination, which hold our nation back. A clear focus for peace and non-violence must be the elimination of nuclear weapons. The UK Government has spent £320 million on the replacement of Trident—before it has even started to build the first new submarine. The approximate cost of procuring the submarines is a staggering £25 billion and the potential total cost of maintaining the system, including new infrastructure and missiles, and extending the life of the current submarines, brings the total to  approximately £90 billion. It already costs £2 billion per year to keep the current Trident fleet operational. In a letter to The Times in January, three prominent defence heads wrote: "Nuclear weapons have shown themselves to be completely useless as a deterrent to the threats and scale of violence we currently, or are likely to, face—particularly international terrorism ... Our independent deterrent has become virtually irrelevant except in the context of domestic politics."

Many people take a moral and ethical view on nuclear weapons. That is an important point that must be made, and it has been well argued in the debate. People are beginning to understand other arguments, which are to do with economics and foreign relations, about why nuclear weapons have become redundant in many ways, but for many people they were always redundant from a moral standpoint. Scotland has historically played a role in facilitating peacekeeping efforts globally, for example through the Edinburgh Conversations and the Craigellachie peace talks, which were co-ordinated by Angus Robertson MP—Linda Fabiani mentioned them. Leading Scots have acted in a peacekeeping capacity and have shown that violent action is not the answer in any dispute or disagreement. However, we should not be complacent. Climate change, peak oil and other global changes contribute to political instability and we need to remain alert to the potential for us to play a greater role on the global stage. We can start by leading by example on nuclear disarmament. I know that many of the members present—although, to judge by his speech, not Ted Brocklebank—would support me in encouraging the UK Government urgently to reconsider the renewal of Trident at a cost that we simply cannot afford. Our recent white paper, "Your Scotland, Your Voice: A National Conversation" outlines opportunities for an independent Scotland to go further in its role as a leader in peacekeeping efforts. That is the point that Linda Fabiani made. Under current devolution arrangements, we can press the UK Government to consider its position on nuclear weapons, lead by example in our efforts to eliminate violence and go further to promote true peace, meaning not only the absence of violence but the presence of justice and the wellbeing of people. An independent Scotland would have further opportunities to build  on that and to foster peace in Scotland and the wider world. Scotland may be a small country but, like Bill Kidd, I believe that we have a big part to play in the long road to world peace. In Scotland we believe that diplomacy over military intervention, understanding over hostility and integration over exclusion are the only way forward. Only by understanding others' political, economic, cultural and religious differences and ambitions will we ever hope to gain the right basis for working towards peace. I congratulate Bill Kidd on bringing the debate to Scotland and on fostering the opportunity for the march to come to Scotland. Perhaps the debate might, like the march, be a stepping stone into the long march towards peace. It has a strong basis and strong support in Scotland. I thank him for securing the debate so that MSPs could stake out their position and the Parliament could express its view for peace and non-violence in Scotland and throughout the world.  Meeting closed at 17:31.

Will the member give way on that point?

Mr Salmond is pursuing the interests of Scotland. My responsibilities include the joint ministerial committee and relationships with the Westminster Government and Europe. Murdo Fraser might be pleased to know that Struan Stevenson, one of his colleagues, has written to the Presiding Officer about improving relations with the European Parliament. In a letter copied to me, he says: "I would be very grateful if you could therefore examine the Calman proposals insofar as they impact on the Scottish Parliament/European Parliament liaison, to establish whether these recommendations can be implemented as soon as possible".

Does Murdo Fraser agree with his colleague?

I am intrigued by Rhona Brankin's comment about the recession. Does she acknowledge that the Calman commission's provisions on taxation and borrowing would, in a recession, make it difficult for the Scottish Government to deal with such problems? That was well articulated by Iain Smith and the Liberal Democrats. Rhona Brankin should address the point: does she recognise that there is a fundamental flaw in the taxation and borrowing proposals of the Calman commission, particularly if the Scottish Parliament has to face a recession in the future?

Does Cathie Craigie agree with what "the man from outside Glasgow" says on borrowing proposals in the UK Government white paper, or does she agree with the Calman commission? If she recognises that there are  differences of opinion on borrowing, does she also recognise that we should move forward on areas on which there is consensus?

In one part of my speech, I debated the tax, finance and borrowing powers. I did so because they are the areas on which there is no consensus. If the Parliament is to be a place of consensus, what is wrong in debating the areas on which there is consensus and on which the Parliament has voted?

In developing the debate, will the member tell us the Conservatives' view on the tax elements of the Calman commission proposals and whether the Conservative party in Scotland supports Calman's borrowing proposals or those of the Labour Party in the UK Government?

Will the member take an intervention?

There is an issue to consider about the several trillion pound debt in which the UK Government will find itself in 2013. Does the Labour Party in the Scottish Parliament support Calman's view on borrowing or does it support the UK Government's view?

It is now more than 12 years since the referendum to establish the Scottish Parliament and determine its powers. After 10 years of devolution, all parties have turned their attention to the future powers of the Parliament. The question is no longer whether the Parliament should have more powers but which powers and which constitutional arrangement it should have and when that can be achieved. This Government believes that independence is the normal state for a nation, and that is what we seek for Scotland, but we also respect the position taken by other parties. The establishment of the Calman Commission on Scottish Devolution also recognised an appetite for change in Scotland. However, from the beginning, it was hamstrung by its remit, so its response was restricted. The remit that was given to the commission meant that it could not consider independence or federalism, which is why the Scottish Government decided not to participate. We have, however, engaged constructively with its report.

The commission's report and the response from the United Kingdom Government show that the opportunity for consideration of a federal option was highly limited. We published our response to the commission on 9 November, and the UK Government responded on 25 November. Members might be interested to note that the Scottish Government accepted 29 recommendations—although we believed that some did not go far enough—and that the UK Government accepted 23. Of course, on 30 November, the Scottish Government published its white paper on Scotland's constitutional future, pushing even further the debate and the Scottish people's right to decide that future. The purpose of today's debate is to acknowledge that there is common ground in  certain areas and that we should press ahead where consensus can be found. The UK Government was keen to see Calman as an indivisible constitutional package. It has ceded that ground with its response on tax and finance issues—an extremely serious matter that I will return to later. Today's debate must be about what we do about the powers that we can agree on, and how and when we extend the powers of the Parliament. Power for its own sake is what puts the public off the political process and distances them from politicians. Power for a purpose is what quickens the democratic pulse and reassures the public that powers are being used to benefit the people, not to protect politicians. Powers over air-guns, drink-driving limits, speed limits and so on are all practical proposals that have secured cross-party support since the parliamentary debate on the commission's report in June.

The powers that we can agree on are something that we can take forward now, and I want to develop my arguments about why we should do that and why we should respect the decision that this Parliament has already made that those powers should be transferred. We already have a procedure for extending devolved powers. Just as powers relating to freedom of information, railways and so on have been changed by orders that have been laid in Edinburgh and London, today's measures can be delivered promptly and effectively. Presenting them as a package of constitutional powers for politicians means unnecessary delay. The powers should be extended now, for the purpose of helping us deal with the heart-rending impact on people of the abuse of air-guns, drink-driving and irresponsible driving. Let us consider what could be done in two specific areas. In Scotland, air weapons accounted for 47 per cent of all firearms offences in 2008-09. That is less than the year before, but it is still too many. With devolved responsibility, we would build on the consensus for action that exists within Scotland, which was demonstrated through the firearms summit that was held in May 2008, following a debate in this Parliament. We would put air weapons on a similar footing to other potentially lethal firearms by introducing a pilot system of licensing. We would co-operate with others to consider whether a licensing scheme  could work without a complete overhaul of firearms legislation. Alcohol still accounts for too many of Scotland's road deaths—around one in nine is alcohol related. Research has indicated that around six fatalities a year could be prevented by a reduction in the drink-driving limit, from 80mg per 100ml of blood to 50mg.

The consensus that already exists in this Parliament is that there is evidence that, under the proposals, fatalities would be reduced by six a year. That highlights a serious point about delay in decision making. The member makes a correct point about the need to enforce existing legislation, but the debate today is to do with whether we could make a difference to people's lives if we and Westminster were to move now on issues around which we know there is consensus. On 18 December 2008, this Parliament debated and voted in favour of a reduction in the drink-driving limit. The Scottish Government agrees that the limit should be reduced and, if responsibility were devolved, we would act to make our roads safer. In June, the Scottish Government published draft orders to show how the relevant responsibilities could be devolved. On 3 July, the First Minister wrote to the Prime Minister and sent copies of the orders so that Whitehall officials could consider them with a view to early implementation.

I want to develop my point. The Secretary of State for Scotland responded that the commission has to be viewed as a "comprehensive package" and said that he would "not embark on an exercise of cherry-picking". Five months after the commission's report, the UK Government published its response and confirmed that there is substantial consensus in some areas of the report, which we already knew. The secretary of state told MPs that the UK Government would take the commission's proposals forward as a constitutional package and would introduce a Scotland bill early in the next Westminster Parliament. That puts implementation into the long grass, and even that timetable depends on the result of the UK general election. It prioritises the powers as a constitutional  package for politicians' presentation, rather than as powers with a purpose to serve the people.

I have already taken a number of interventions. The transfer of responsibilities in the areas in which there already is consensus would make a real difference to the lives of the people of Scotland. Early action could be taken to tackle some of Scotland's most pressing problems. The First Minister wrote to the Prime Minister on 25 November to set out a timetable for passing the orders to transfer responsibilities. There are two Privy Council meetings between now and the general election that could have been used to agree the orders. We have drafted the orders and asked the UK Government to take action to implement them. The UK Government has missed the deadline for the February Privy Council meeting, but it is still possible to lay the orders at Holyrood by 20 January, and Westminster by 15 January, in time for the March Privy Council.

That is an important point. There are areas in which there is consensus, but Patrick Harvie is right to identify the economic, tax, finance and borrowing issues as the substantive issues that would make a difference to the powers of this Parliament. We will continue to argue for independence as the best way to execute those powers, but it can be contended—I will develop this point—that the arguments around taxation, borrowing and finance, in the Calman commission and particularly in the UK Government's response to it, are extremely problematic and expose extreme risks and dangers to this Parliament as it currently exists. I propose that we move forward on the powers on which we have agreement, while identifying—as the member rightly points out—taxation as the issue to which we will need to return. We are keen to consider proposals to improve the machinery of intergovernmental relations. A discussion of those issues has been proposed through the joint ministerial committee—that is right, because many of the proposals equally affect the Welsh and Northern Irish  Administrations. We look forward to those discussions, with the aim of progressing towards an even more productive working relationship. We criticised some of the commission's proposals for confusing the accountability of Scottish and UK ministers to their respective Parliaments, but that does not mean that we would not welcome steps to improve mutual understanding between our institutions. We warmly welcomed the recommendations on improving Scottish Government participation in influencing the UK's position in European Union matters, on the need for better devolution awareness training in Whitehall and on the fundamental principle that there should be mutual respect between the Parliaments and the Governments. The commission's recommendations to extend devolution powers have been widely welcomed. Recommendations on intergovernmental and parliamentary co-operation are clearly worthy of further debate and discussion. However, the commission's financial recommendations have not been as widely welcomed. The taxation proposals have the potential to impose significant costs on our budget and economy. Since the publication of the final report, we have made it clear that we believe that the commission's proposals on income tax are not right for Scotland. A range of independent and distinguished economists share that view and have identified significant difficulties with the proposals. The proposals simply do not match the ambition that we have for Scotland. They will not give the Parliament the tools that we need to maximise—

I need to develop my point. The proposals will not give the Parliament the tools that we need to maximise Scotland's competitiveness and future levels of economic growth. If implemented, they will represent an opportunity cost of tens of thousands of jobs. Only independence and full fiscal autonomy allow the maximum degree of policy discretion and accountability over fiscal and economic policy. It is the arrangement that has been chosen by similar nations around the world, and we believe that it is the only option—

I have taken a number of interventions, Mr Kerr. We believe that it is the only option that would enable Scotland to achieve its full potential.  Although we are clear that the commission's analysis and subsequent recommendations have not gone far enough, the UK Government, and the Treasury in particular, obviously believe that the commission went too far. The UK Government has watered down the commission's financial recommendations. Despite the secretary of state's assertion that the commission's recommendations had to be viewed as a package, the UK Government has cherry picked and revised elements of the financial proposals. The debate focuses on the areas of agreement in the commission's recommendations and on the importance of acting quickly, but what the UK Government seeks to do has a clear and present danger to Scotland's interests. The UK Government's tax reform proposals would not improve the transparency or accountability of the fiscal framework—in fact, they might reduce it. The Barnett formula would remain the single most important determinant of the Scottish Government's budget and would continue to be set at the UK Government's discretion. Key policy levers would remain reserved and autonomy over income tax would be more apparent than real. The proposals would expose the Scottish budget to significant risks. Unilateral changes to the income tax system by the UK Government could reduce the income tax revenue that was assigned to Scotland, which would result in immediate and unplanned cuts to our budget.

For example, Mr Kerr, under the commission's proposals, the Chancellor of the Exchequer's decision in May 2008 to increase the income tax personal allowances and reduce the threshold for higher-rate taxpayers would have led to an immediate cut of almost £140 million in the Scottish Government's budget. The Scottish Government's lack of opportunities to stabilise tax revenues, as other Governments can, would mean that, if the Scottish economy entered recession, a future Scottish Government might have to cut key expenditure programmes at the worst possible time in response to falling income tax revenue. The commission's recommendations on borrowing autonomy have merit, and I know that there is consensus in the Parliament on the issue, but the UK Government has rejected that and devised an alternative format that would impose significant costs on Scottish taxpayers. Under the UK Government's proposal, any borrowing would have to be self-financed through increased taxation in Scotland above that for the rest of the UK. That would be a significant risk. If the UK Government adopted the same approach to its  borrowing, it would add 20p to the UK income tax rate in the next decade. The proposition is ridiculous and highlights the damaging changes that the UK Government proposes to the original Calman borrowing proposals. It is almost six months since the commission produced its report. The UK Government suggests that any implementation of the report—even on subjects on which agreement is widespread—must wait until after the UK general election, which could be another six months away. Even then, progress will not be made unless the Labour Government is re-elected, introduces a Scotland bill and secures the Westminster Parliament's agreement to that bill. Six months would become 12 months and then 18 months. We do not see the logic in deciding that widely supported changes to devolved competence on matters such as air-guns and drink-driving should have to wait for the development and introduction of taxation proposals.

We support and can progress many proposals. Orders to achieve that can be proceeded with. The Scottish people may show little patience for a Parliament that seeks delay when consensus exists, but they would welcome an extension of powers for a purpose and to make a difference—a real difference to people's lives, which would in some cases save lives—sooner rather than later. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the recommendations of the Calman Commission on Scottish Devolution that responsibility for the law across a range of areas be devolved to the Scottish Parliament and also welcomes the recommendations for closer working between the Scottish and UK Ministers to ensure that the needs of Scotland are properly represented, and urges the UK Government to work with the Scottish Parliament to ensure that, where there is consensus, all such recommendations are implemented before the dissolution of the current UK Parliament.

We are satisfied but not complacent. Scotland has a good performance record: in 2009, there were record high pass rates at both higher and advanced higher, entries to higher and advanced higher have increased, and the standard grade pass rate is at its highest since 2000. Two main international attainment surveys show Scotland's performance at well above the international average. We are determined to drive up standards. That is why we are introducing the curriculum for excellence, which will improve both knowledge and skills through a broader teaching and assessment framework, a new framework for qualifications, and wider opportunities for young people through 16+ learning choices.

I have had warmer welcomes, but I approach this task in the constructive and listening manner in which I approach all my tasks. I pay tribute to my predecessor Fiona Hyslop, who has been a tremendous cabinet secretary. What the First Minister said was entirely true, but I will add something that members should remember. I take exception to only two things that have been said in the chamber. First, Tavish Scott said that he spoke for parents in Scotland. With respect, we all speak for parents in Scotland, and those who are best able to do so are those who have young children and are watching them growing up and working. If Tavish Scott speaks for parents, so did Fiona Hyslop, and she not only spoke for them but acted, worked and delivered for them. Secondly, I note that there has been great admiration for my writing. I am tempted to issue my collected works. It would certainly make the job of David Maddox and political researchers easier if they had all my texts in one place. It would also make my life easier, as I would hear my words quoted in full, rather than partially. I was, for  example, interested to hear the remarks that I allegedly wrote about COSLA. Those remarks were made in a column for the TESS —I enjoyed my time as a columnist for the TESS over three years—in the context of the closure of rural schools: a programme that was being pursued with some vigour, I am sad to say, by the previous Administration. I am glad, therefore, that my prescience and support led to the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill, which was passed unanimously in this chamber—I regard the campaign on that as a success. We should now start from where we actually are, not from where people think we are. Since devolution, the Scottish Parliament has demonstrated its long and sustained commitment to Scottish education. The Parliament has a commitment and an ambition to retain our long-standing international reputation for excellence. As we approach the second decade of this century, we know that our education system works well, but we all agree that we need it to be better if we are to compete with the best in the world. Today, as I speak, hundreds of thousands of children are being taught—and being taught well—by tens of thousands of teachers in thousands of schools throughout the country. Scottish education does its job well. Our job in the chamber is to support it and to help it to do better, and that is the task that I take on with my colleagues.

Given normal lead-in times for major capital projects, it is not unexpected that planning and construction began on a good number of the 236 schools prior to May 2007. The same situation was faced by the first Scottish Executive Administration: of the school projects completed during the first Administration's term of office, over half were pre-devolution projects. Responsibility for funding those projects fell largely on the first Executive Administration, just as responsibility for paying for most of the 236 projects has fallen on this Government. Well over 250 school renewal or refurbishment projects will be completed over the four years of this session of Parliament as a result of the more than £2 billion of investment in schools that is currently under way. That is significantly more than were completed over the previous Administration's last four years. Just this morning, I announced another 21 school projects that will benefit from this Government's new £1.25 billion school building programme.

Since May 2007, 236 schools have been completed. I must caution the member on this matter: I think that the public want schools to be built with public money and despair when they hear the Labour Party's quibbling over which of them are Labour schools and which are SNP schools. This Government is making a £2 billion investment in school refurbishment, which is helping construction and is improving the terms and conditions of our pupils and teachers.  The Labour Party has made much of this issue by putting out research suggesting that many of these schools were somehow set before May 2007, publishing league tables and so on. However, I point out that in Labour's list of schools that it says were built or, indeed, started before 2007, four of the nine that it says were started in May 2007 are actually the Falkirk schools that were built under the non-profit-distributing model, the consent for which was signed off by me as minister. Indeed, it was one of the first things that I did when I came into office. That is a classic example of this Administration not only matching brick for brick previous Administrations' policies but actually funding those policies. In fact, not only are we funding them, but we are supplementing that funding. In the coming financial year, for example, we have found £40 million to plug the black hole left by the previous Administration.

We anticipate that the Scottish Futures Trust's support for the £1.25 billion school building programme will ensure that the first school will be delivered by 2011.

The local government settlement is resourced at a level to maintain teacher numbers and posts. Yesterday, I announced a scheme to enable councils to fund early retirement schemes for up to 500 teachers in order to support new employment opportunities for others. That follows on from the reduced intakes to initial teacher education courses in both 2009 and 2010, which will reduce the number of probationers who require employment in the succeeding year and increase the job opportunities for other unemployed teachers.

The Scottish Government established the teacher employment working group, and 14 or 15 recommendations have been taken forward that will help to relieve the situation. In addition to maintaining resources in the local government settlement to maintain teacher numbers, I provided an additional £9 million for 300 teachers in 2007, and only this year the Scottish Government funded another 100 teachers to support the curriculum for excellence. The scheme that I announced yesterday will enable local government to achieve savings and new and existing teachers who are looking for employment to secure posts. We believe that that represents an innovative way forward. A number of councils have come forward and expressed interest in looking into the scheme further. We seek to ensure that we provide opportunities for new teachers, existing teachers and particularly the post-probationers to whom the member refers, so that they can get not just into employment but into permanent employment.

The member might be aware that teachers retire during the academic year all the time. The focus on replacing teachers is particularly important in the primary sector, because that is the area where we want to see reduced class sizes. There is clear provision in the local government settlement for those opportunities to be provided now. It is deeply regrettable that, last year, four local authorities were responsible for more than 50 per cent of the reduction in teacher numbers. If councils took up their responsibilities as employers not just by supporting existing teachers but by looking after the probationers that they have had and ensuring that there are employment opportunities for them, we would not find ourselves in the situation that we are in today.

I met representatives of East Ayrshire Council on 1 May 2008 as part of a programme of visits by ministers to all local authorities to discuss a range of education issues. Those visits focused on our shared agenda of improving outcomes for all Scotland's children and young people. I also met the leader and the deputy chief executive of the council on Tuesday this week when I opened the customer service centre at Kilmarnock College, which was funded from the accelerated capital that the Scottish Government provided.

Responsibility for the school estate lies with East Ayrshire Council. I have received representations from parents of pupils at Crossroads primary school. As the member will appreciate, under the terms of either the existing legislation or future legislation, I need to be careful what I say about any individual school. However, I will certainly ensure that my officials respond both to the parents who have contacted us and to East Ayrshire Council. We will alert the council to the concerns that the member has raised.

There are 192 employers that have had applications approved for funding through the adopt an apprentice scheme.

We are already working with the Scottish Chambers of Commerce and the Federation of Small Businesses in Scotland to ensure that details of not just the adopt an apprentice scheme but the range of measures under the ScotAction programme are communicated to local employers. The uptake of the adopt an apprentice scheme has been recognised by a number of sector skills councils. ConstructionSkills, which is a United Kingdom-wide organisation, has indicated that there is a higher percentage—43 per cent—of redundant apprentices in construction in Scotland than in any other part of the UK. Chris Horton, who is the chair of the national skills academy for process industries, has urged UK ministers to follow Scotland's lead and apply innovative thinking to come up with a similar scheme. We have one of the best provisions in the UK, but there are still a lot of challenges. We are contacting individual apprentices who have been made redundant. We have a clearing house through Skills Development Scotland to help identify those apprentices and to get them into alternative employment or training. I urge all members in the chamber to advertise the ScotAction plan. We will provide the details to all MSPs to ensure that they can also communicate the plan, along with the FSB and the Scottish Chambers of Commerce.

Regular discussions take place between me and the Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution both about the wider direction of Gaelic policy and about the progress of GME in Scotland more widely and within Glasgow.

Yes. Policy responsibility for Gaelic education lies with education and lifelong learning divisions. Wider Gaelic duties—including the budget for Gaelic and Gaelic-medium education—remain the responsibility of the Gaelic unit in the culture, external affairs and tourism directorate. The working relationships are good. We continue to work with officials and authorities to make progress on Gaelic education in mainstream schooling.

Will the member give way?

I am conscious that the member was late in arriving for the debate. In my opening speech, I addressed some of Carole Ford's concerns and explained how she was reassured by explanations of the future qualifications that she had criticised. I am sorry that the member did not hear that—he might otherwise have reflected on it.

The member makes a good point. That is why we want to bring back the work of the history curriculum for excellence group, which has looked at pedagogy and the Scottish spine to ensure that there is context and knowledge. I agree with the member that we cannot replace knowledge with skills; rather, we must ensure that skills are in addition to knowledge. I am with her on that. Does she acknowledge that that is where the Government is taking history and curriculum for excellence work?

I have two points to make. First, we have not had a history summit, but we have had a summit on science in schools. Secondly, history is about facts and evidence. There has been a great deal of assertion throughout the chamber, which is reflected strongly in the content of some of the amendments. What evidence or facts can Margaret Smith produce to show that her view of what might happen is happening now?

Will the member give way?

On the member's point about the different views of particular events in history, one aspect of the online resource is interviews with history professors who take different perspectives on the same period in history. That will help to develop skills for analysis and debate and to get people to make up their own mind. Does she welcome that part of the online resource?

Elaine Murray touches on an important point, which is why emphasis has been placed on science in the baccalaureate. It is important to note that, in the experiences and outcomes of the curriculum for excellence, an understanding of the likes of James Clerk Maxwell is exactly what we want people to have.

Does the member accept that the Scottish Government was not involved in any in the content of Scotland's history online, and neither should it be? The content was developed by professional historians.

Does Ken Macintosh think that the use of taxpayers' money by the BBC to create programmes about Scottish history is some kind of nationalist plot to overtake the public in Scotland?

Ken Macintosh might not be aware that the cost of the website is £60,000.

As we approach St Andrew's day, the Government believes that the time is right to recognise the importance of learning about Scotland's history. Today also provides a welcome opportunity to celebrate the contribution of our children and young people to a successful year of homecoming. Over the past 10 months, the homecoming has provided a focal point for a range of activities. As well as encouraging people who have Scottish heritage and those who have an interest in Scotland to come home and visit, the homecoming has inspired thousands of children and young people to reflect on our nation, on its history, heritage and culture and on its place in the globalised world of the 21 st century. More than 270 schools and nurseries have highlighted their activities on the homecoming map and, in June, Iochdar primary school in South Uist was the winner of the homecoming award at the Scottish education awards. Through the homecoming, Scotland's young people have been reclaiming our history—a story of immense achievement in industry, medicine, science, law, world exploration and literature on a scale that belies the size of our population. That learning about Scotland's history, heritage, culture and place in the world is a key part of the legacy of the homecoming.

This is an opportunity for young people to explore their history and to learn about aspects of it of which they were not aware. I will go on to explain why we have, through the online resource, ensured that resources about parts of Scotland's history that have not been known to our young people have been made available. It is not my job as the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning—nor, indeed, is it the job of any member of the Government—to dictate the content of the curriculum. I agree that there should not be political interference; the attack on teachers' professional integrity in the Conservatives' amendment is, therefore, regrettable. It is my job, however, to show leadership and to provide a framework within  which our education system flourishes and further improves. The curriculum for excellence is such a framework.

The Conservatives should perhaps be more explicit, rather than talking about things that are potentially the case. The way I read the amendment, the Conservatives are questioning the abilities of teachers. We trust Scotland's teachers to ensure that history is taught in a way that reflects their professionalism and understanding, and is not interfered with by politicians of any colour. Although today's debate is about learning about Scotland's history, it is clear from some of the amendments that members want to consider a wider agenda around the curriculum for excellence. There was a considerable amount of media coverage at the end of last week following comments from Carole Ford—the now-retired president of School Leaders Scotland—about details of qualifications for 2013-14, which have yet to be determined, and on which SLS will be fully consulted. There have been misconceptions around assessment and qualifications. It is not the case that the views of SLS and the other headteacher associations have not been taken into account. I am proud of the unparalleled involvement of the education profession in our work; indeed, SLS was a member of the curriculum for excellence management board, which made recommendations on national qualifications to me, which I accepted. SLS will continue to be involved in discussions and decision making on assessment and qualifications, in particular through the management board and the qualifications governing group. After hearing my speech to the headteachers conference last Friday, Carole Ford stated publicly that she was reassured. School Leaders Scotland also supports our approach to learning about Scotland's history in the context of a global perspective. Professional engagement has been vital: we established the history in curriculum for excellence group, which brought together eminent professionals in the teaching of history to address some of the concerns that had been raised by teachers in respect of history in the curriculum. We engaged with educators not only to identify why the teaching of Scottish history has been neglected, but to look at ways in which that neglect could be rectified. One of the themes that were considered by the group was the concept of  a Scottish spine that would include the key events and eras in Scottish history. In response to that, Learning and Teaching Scotland produced a Scottish dimension planning tool for history that is consistent with the principles of the curriculum for excellence. The Scottish Association of Teachers of History has played an important role over a number years and has provided us with invaluable input and support, including help with development of the Scotland's history online resource, which it warmly welcomed. The history in curriculum for excellence group will meet again early in the new year. I will be delighted to update Parliament on the work of the group.

That is exactly why the history in curriculum for excellence group is considering ways in which we can ensure that we create the time and space that will ensure that the teaching of history—not only the resources that we are talking about today—can be developed. The remit of the history in curriculum for excellence group focuses on pedagogical issues and will include consideration of continuous professional development and the transition from primary to secondary school, as well as proposals for new topics on the history resource. I was delighted to launch Scotland's history—a world-leading online resource—last month. The quality and quantity of material is outstanding. Professor Tom Devine described it as "potentially taking Scotland from the end of the queue in terms of teaching national history to the top." At launch, the resource covers more than 200 topics from prehistory to the 21 st century, including fascinating topics that are not usually taught in schools, such as the Caledonians and Picts and the history of Gaeldom. It also features resources that were commissioned specially for the year of homecoming on subjects such as the Scottish enlightenment and Scots and Australia. There are links to more than 1,000 resources and interactive supporting materials to help to enrich our young people's critical skills of analysis and interpretation through the study of Scotland's history. It is important that Learning and Teaching Scotland has marshalled and mobilised the  resources of Scotland. Indeed, all the members of the heritage education forum Scotland have made their resources, image archives, staff time and experience freely available, which has made a huge difference to the resource. I have encouraged all members to explore the Scotland's history resource, which is accessible at www.scotlandshistory.org as well as through the LTS site. I am pleased to report that it received 21,946 visits and well over 100,000 page views in its first four weeks online. The range of resources fills important gaps in areas where inspection evidence from Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education shows that aspects of Scottish history have been underrepresented in school teaching, such as the making of the kingdom, the late medieval period and the enlightenment. It is important that, with the 450 th anniversary of the reformation next year, that aspect of Scottish history is dealt with by resource material as well. While at the launch, I had the pleasure of meeting pupils from several schools, who share an interest in Scottish history. Pupils from Queensferry primary school, in particular, displayed a keen interest in enhancing their knowledge through the resources. They and the rest of the young people can look forward to maximising the potential of the resource by adding examples of their local history projects to it via glow, which is the Scottish schools intranet system. We in Scotland can be proud of glow, which is the world's first national education platform. It provides a powerful set of integrated online tools and resources. Those are driving motivation and engagement in Scottish education and are leading teachers, pupils and parents into a rich and innovative learning process that enables them to explore, learn, create, share and showcase. Teachers and learners alike are already using glow to share best practice, and to collaborate to enhance their experiences by cultivating and sharing their interest in the rich history of Scotland. Those 21 st century skills and behaviours underpin the curriculum for excellence, and they showcase Scotland to the world as an evolving, embracing and innovative nation. We must ensure that our young people have the opportunity to learn about Scotland's history throughout the senior phase of their education, which is why we have ensured that the higher history course will from next year contain a mandatory Scottish unit. The unit will give pupils the opportunity to learn about many important points in Scotland's history, including the age of the reformation and the impact of the migration of Scots in the 19 th and 20 th centuries, which will embed the legacy for learning from homecoming. I have been impressed with the passion and  dedication of all those who have been involved in making that positive change to the qualification. As well as the Scotland's history online resource, there are dedicated resources from Learning and Teaching Scotland for the higher history unit, which have received particular praise at recent Scottish Qualifications Authority events. We are bringing history to life for thousands of young people by supporting school visits to iconic historic sites. Through the National Trust for Scotland, we have throughout the year of homecoming funded visits to Bannockburn and Culloden. From St Andrew's day, the education suite at the Burns museum will be open, which will enable our young people to enhance their understanding of our national poet. We know from the National Trust for Scotland that schools are travelling from further afield to benefit from such experiences—the number of those who are travelling for more than an hour to get to Bannockburn and Culloden has increased by more than a third. The widening of access to our history and heritage is good news for young people throughout Scotland. As well as the first-hand experience that is gained from visiting such sites, learning about our past is being invigorated by technology. At Bannockburn, a high-definition film that was launched in September tells the story from the perspective of a young boy who witnesses the battle. It uses computer-generated imagery to bring to life for visitors the size, scale and significance of the events. Learning about and understanding Scotland's history enriches our understanding of how we see ourselves and how others see us. As we help our young people to prepare for the challenges of a 21 st century globalised world, understanding and knowledge of Scotland's history inspires and stimulates critical appraisal. It is vital for the future that we provide our young people with skills for the 21 st century. It is important that we consider the achievements of the past to promote a progressive, successful and confident Scotland in the future. We do not teach our young people what to think; we give them the skills to think for themselves. I move, That the Parliament recognises the contribution of Scotland's children and young people in schools to a successful Year of Homecoming; acknowledges the importance of learning about Scotland's heritage, history and culture and place in the world, and welcomes the recent launch of Scotland's History online, a world-leading online resource from Learning and Teaching Scotland, which draws on resources from the National Galleries of Scotland, National Museums Scotland, the National Library of Scotland, the National Archives of Scotland and other sources.

I thank members for what has been an extremely useful and constructive debate. The whole tone of the debate on the bill has been hugely constructive at every stage, both within the Parliament and beyond, and I am grateful to everyone who has participated in it. It was interesting that Murdo Fraser commented on how refreshing it is for Opposition parties and the Government to have such a positive and constructive discussion. He observed that it might be a passing moment, but perhaps I could persuade him to linger a little longer in the sunshine of progressive, constructive politics rather than return to the dark shadows of confrontation. Some extremely interesting points were made during the debate, some of which I would like to respond to. Claire Baker and Ken Macintosh made important points about guidance on material considerations. We have said that we will issue such guidance, but we must be careful not to be overly prescriptive. I warned at previous stages that if we provide for a tick-box exercise, it will be easy for councils to go through the motions, instead of considering all the issues. We are conscious of that risk and of the potential for making improvement through guidance.  Important points were made about the strength of rural schools. Murdo Fraser referred to the social aspects of such schools—their strength of character and the opportunity that they provide for many young people to engage not just with their peers but with other people in the village, as part of their wider development. Karen Gillon, who is, unfortunately, absent from the chamber, made representations about community schools, which have great strengths. A number of members made that point. Aileen Campbell made an important point about transition. I urge all members in whose constituencies consultations on rural school closure proposals are taking place to look at schedule 3 to the bill. We must await commencement, but transition arrangements are built into the bill to make clear to everyone whether the previous provisions or the new legislation will apply. Margaret Smith and Elizabeth Smith mentioned the important role that HMIE has to play. That is part of front-loading provision—why should the cabinet secretary be the only person to see the content of HMIE's educational advice on these matters? Alasdair Allan and Ken Macintosh referred to Gaelic. Our intention is to increase the number of young people who have access to Gaelic-medium education. In line with that initiative, we have asked Bòrd na Gàidhlig to produce an action plan of initiatives to increase the number of speakers. We look forward to acting on its advice; I refer members to the commitments that we have already made. One of the most striking contributions was by Willie Coffey. He and Christina McKelvie made the point that the bill requires councils to make the case for closure. Too often, it is the protesters or those who are seeking to protect rural schools who have had to make the more detailed and well-argued case. In the bill, we say that responsibility for making the case should be placed on the shoulders of councils, who must do so from their resources. That is one of the biggest improvements that the bill will make.

I agree with the member. Many people have mistakenly assumed that closing rural  schools is a great revenue saver. In fact, although education authorities may realise the capital value of the building, the majority of costs relate to staffing. Unless they are using the closure of rural schools to cut staffing, all that they are doing is displacing members of staff to neighbouring schools, usually with the pupils who are moving there. We need to recognise the true value of rural schools, which is not always measured in pounds, shillings and pence—it may also be measured in the quality of the education that they provide. Murdo Fraser's point is well made. The bill may be modest in size, but its aims are much bigger. The scope is relatively narrow, but the impact on those affected will be considerable. The bill aims to change not just the framework within which all school consultations will be undertaken in future but—importantly—the culture of local consultations, leading to a more open and trusting relationship between councils and the communities that they serve. We know that school consultations are often emotive and difficult proceedings; we also know from Government consultations prior to the introduction of the bill that many parents start from a position of suspicion or mistrust. The bill is partly about recognising the relationships that can be built and building an element of trust. It is never going to be easy, and it is never going to be perfect, but part of what we propose is to change the culture around school closures. The bill will deliver a process that is open and transparent. It will ensure that those who are consulted are given comprehensive information right at the start of the process. Consultations will be launched with the publication of a proposal paper, which must set out the details of the proposal, the proposed date of implementation and any supporting information that the council in question considers appropriate. Each paper must include an educational benefits statement, in which the council will set out the educational basis for its proposals. That statement must address the likely effects on all pupils at the affected school and at other schools in the council's area, as well as the effects on other users. It is often argued by councils that that is implicit in a consultation, but the bill provides an opportunity for it to be made explicit. It is not only the pupils at the school who are concerned; there are other people to be considered. The educational benefits statement must also set out how the council intends to minimise or avoid adverse effects from its proposals, as well as setting out its benefits. In cases where consultees—or anyone else—allege that information in the proposal paper is inaccurate, or that relevant information has been omitted, councils must respond to those allegations, and they must report the action that has been taken or justify it if they conclude that no  action is required. Margaret Smith's contributions in that regard at stages 2 and 3 have been very important. Sometimes a process develops in which the information is accurate right at the start but, unless a problem is addressed, it will fester, fuelling the suspicion that something has been put in a deliberately misleading way. Factual inaccuracies will sometimes be made, but the point is to address the problem up front. Trust in the relationship, openness and transparency are important from the start. Again, I thank Margaret Smith for her contribution. The bill extends the consultation period, which must now include at least six weeks of term time. I have seen consultations in which the injudicious timing of the start date has led to great difficulty.

I hear Christmas eve being mentioned. Those days will now be gone. That is common sense, and it respects those involved in the consultation. In cases where consultation straddles school holidays, the consultation period will need to be extended to accommodate that period. HMIE will now contribute to every consultation, and its report will be included in the council's consultation report, so that everybody has the opportunity to see it. The council will be required to publish its response to the HMIE report in the consultation report. The consultation report will include a summary of all oral and written representations, as well as the council's response to those representations. The consultation report is also where the council will publish details of alleged inaccuracies and omissions, and its response to those. The internet provides the opportunity to share those details more fully. Following publication of the consultation report, there will be three weeks for consultees to consider it and to make further representations to the council before it makes its decision. It is important to remember that the council retains responsibility and accountability for decisions throughout the process, particularly in the three weeks leading up to the final decision, when there is still an opportunity for local people to contact and lobby their councillors as part of the decision-making process. In the case of proposals to close a rural school, the bill puts in place three factors to which the council must have regard before moving to consult. Those factors—viable alternatives to closure; the likely effects of closure on the community; and the likely effects of closure on travelling arrangements—will make a decision to close a rural school a decision of last resort.  The bill will mark an end to the current, rather arbitrary, grounds for the involvement of ministers, such as occupancy and distance. That approach will be replaced with a safeguard for the most contentious decisions, school closures. In those cases, ministers will be able to call in decisions where they perceive serious flaws in the consultation or in the decision-making process. I emphasise the word "process"—it is not about second-guessing the decision that is made by the council; it is about ensuring that the process, as set out by law, has been carried through. That is why we could not rely on guidance alone and why we wanted to introduce legislation in this regard. Although I suspect that most closure cases will be subject to representations to ministers in the early stages of implementation—I heed Ken Macintosh's warnings on this—I do not envisage more than a handful of cases being called in. That is, of course, in the hands of councils. Ministers may call in a case only when there are grounds to do so. If the process works and is sufficiently front-loaded, there should be no reason why a council will have carried out consultation in such a way that call-in will automatically be needed. There will be issues in the early stages of the bill's implementation, but I have given my commitment to ensure that we respect the decision making of councils and that we uphold the law, which will help parents and communities. The bill will create a framework for fully informed, transparent and rigorous consultation. Decisions will be taken by people who are locally elected and accountable and ministers will intervene in closure cases only when there have been serious failings in the process. I am confident that if the letter and the spirit of the bill are followed, communities will develop greater confidence and trust in the process and in their councils, which will ultimately lead to better local relationships. I thank everyone who was involved in developing the bill, which is an example of good practice for the Parliament. The role of the Scottish rural schools network was important and demonstrated that the experts are not always the people who are in administration, whether they are in the Government or in councils. The experts on local communities are often the people who live in and have experience of those communities. Such people have made careful and meaningful contributions on school closures and, as Karen Whitefield said, the bill will be a lasting legacy to their work. I distinctly remember introducing many of those people to one another—at the time I did not expect to be the cabinet secretary who would respond to proposals and introduce legislation. I am proud to have been responsible in small part for the bill, not just in government but in opposition.  I acknowledge all the people who have contributed to the debate and to the bill. The bill has been shaped by all the political parties in the Parliament. Presiding Officer, you often talk to people in countries throughout the world about the best aspects of the Scottish Parliament; perhaps you will use the bill as a good example of how we can work collectively and consensually and be part of the participative democratic process that should be the hallmark of how we go about our business in the Parliament. I ask members to endorse the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill.

That is an important point to raise; indeed, it is important for the bill that we are passing to set out the transitions between the previous system and the new system. I understand that East Renfrewshire Council will make a decision on its proposal, which is currently being consulted on, on 21 January 2010. Under the current regulations, it will be for the council to determine whether a decision needs to be referred  to ministers for consent under the prescribed criteria. I understand that the case is likely to be referred to ministers, as the school in question is currently running at over 80 per cent of its capacity. I repeat: it will be for the local council to determine whether or not that is the case.

It might be a long time since you dealt with stage 3 proceedings, Presiding Officer, but the bill has been a long time coming for many of us. I record the Government's thanks to all those who have contributed to the bill's development and its journey through Parliament. I start by thanking the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee's convener and members for their constructive approach and valuable input at each stage, and the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee for their scrutiny. I also thank the committee clerks, who have assisted my officials as the bill has progressed. The bill did not begin life only when it was introduced to Parliament earlier this year. It has evolved through the work of many people over the past decade. Cathy Peattie played an important role 10 years ago through her report for the then Education, Culture and Sport Committee. Professor Neil Kay was also involved in that work. My interest in the issue was shaped by my experience of school closure consultations in Midlothian in 2004—I lodged a motion on a presumption against closure of rural schools in March that year. More recently, Murdo Fraser contributed to the process through his extremely full consultation and proposals for legislation. Sandy Longmuir, the Scottish rural schools network and their colleagues have, of course, also played a key part. I thank them all for their efforts before the introduction of the bill and as it has passed through Parliament. I thank the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland for their assistance in developing the bill and, specifically, for their assistance in identifying costs for the financial memorandum. My thanks also go to Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education, which provided  invaluable assistance to my officials and to the committee. In addition, I thank those who responded to the Government consultation and those who gave written or oral evidence to the committee. I have been extremely gratified by the degree of consensus around the bill and its aims at every stage. The bill has been a model of good practice for the way in which people with strong interests and equally strong, often polarised, views have been able to put aside their differences and come together to create legislation of which we can all be justifiably proud. Everyone in Parliament takes legislation seriously and rightly so. When we change the statute book, we do so because we believe that we are improving the law for the people of Scotland. The Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill is no exception. School closures, catchment changes and even changes of site can generate much emotion in local communities, and the bill aims to make that process as open, transparent and fair as possible. I have always acknowledged that good practice exists in many councils, but we are all aware of examples in which communities have not been properly consulted, which has resulted in much angst for pupils, parents, staff and the wider local community. In drafting the bill, we sought to increase local participation, to create a genuine dialogue between councils and their communities, and to foster a greater sense of trust between councils and local people. Closure of a school is rarely a popular option, even though it is sometimes the right thing to do, but if people feel that they are given the full facts at the start, that they have the opportunity to make known their views and, most important, that the council will listen to those local views and respond to them, they are much more likely to accept any decision. The safeguard of the ministerial call-in should give people confidence that if a council does not fully engage in an open and genuine consultation on a school closure proposal, ministers can call in the decision. If there have been serious flaws in the process, or important information has not been taken into account, ministers will be able to refuse consent for closure of the school. I turn to what was described at stage 2 as the genesis of the bill—the desire to protect rural schools. At the start of the bill process, not everyone agreed on the need to offer specific safeguards to rural schools, even though there was widespread agreement that rural schools play a significant role in sustaining many rural communities. Members expressed the view that urban communities can also be deeply affected by closure. I do not dispute that, so the processes that I have described will put in place a rigorous  framework for all consultations, whether they are in rural or urban areas. I took issue with the argument that the application of the rural factors to all schools would benefit urban schools without having a disbenefit for rural schools. Instead, I made the case that rural communities face harsh realities associated with the loss of local services, which can undermine the future sustainability of those communities. The threat of the loss of a village post office, shop or pub already hangs over many communities, and the threat of losing the village school, which is often the sole community asset or public building, can be the final straw. This Government wanted to send a message to such communities that we intended to protect them, their schools and their long-term viability, so I was extremely glad that the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee supported us in sending that message at stage 2. Today, I will be proud of this Parliament if it joins the Government in sending out the message that we value and will protect our rural schools and communities. Parliament and its committees often engage in consultations, and often make decisions on the basis of the response to those consultations. As the Presiding Officer knows, many people look to the Parliament to demonstrate best practice on involvement, consultation and responsiveness. Indeed, we see our Public Petitions Committee as a highlight and an example to others of how they might conduct their business. I hope that the bill that we are considering today sends out the message that best practice is about being open and transparent and respecting the people whom we consult. One provision in the bill that I would not underestimate is the requirement on councils to evidence their responses to issues that have been raised. For too long, consultations have for many people been just about sharing information about decisions that they already want to take. If we can do one thing in the bill, it is send out a message that, in the new democracy that is Scotland, the ability for people to engage, participate and have their views heard and listened to is important, whether it be at Parliament, Government or council level. The bill has its genesis, in part, in people's engagement with members of the Parliament—for example, through a petition. Many people have been touched by the content of the bill—many members have had to deal with school closures in their constituencies. We can take pride in the fact that today we are giving evidence of Parliament's ability to respond to big issues that affect communities, and of individuals' ability to shape legislation. The bill is an example of what the  Parliament can achieve if we work together. I hope that all members will support it. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Schools Consultation (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I will start by addressing amendments 1 to 12, which are in my name. At stage 2, I indicated to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee that I was grateful that Margaret Smith had, through lodging an amendment, highlighted an aspect of the bill that could be improved. Although section 5 will introduce an important new element—namely, a mechanism to challenge the accuracy of a proposal paper—it does not fully address a situation in which relevant information has been omitted from a paper. I am therefore pleased to speak to my amendments, which will insert relevant provisions in sections 5 and 10. They will ensure that the robust mechanism that will enable people to challenge the accuracy of information in the proposal paper will also apply to assertions that relevant information has been omitted from the paper. To address such claims, councils will have to apply the same process as for claims of inaccuracy. I hope that all members will support my amendments, which will serve to strengthen further the consultation process, and to create a means by which omissions from a council's proposal paper can be addressed. I turn to Margaret Smith's amendments. Although I said at stage 2 that I understood the concerns that lay behind similar amendments that were lodged then by Margaret Smith, I hope that I can reassure Ms Smith and others today that my amendments will address those concerns by securing the right of parents and others to challenge the omission of relevant information  from a proposal paper. That, combined with the mechanism that is already in the bill for addressing inaccuracies, should greatly improve the quality of the information that is provided at the start of any consultation. I highlight that the Scottish Schools (Parental Involvement) Act 2006 already places legal duties on councils to provide information to parents and parent councils, when it is reasonably requested. I have discussed with Margaret Smith other statutory consultees who do not have the same legislative rights. Those consultees include community councils, staff, pupils and unions, who will for the first time have a formal role in this new and more robust consultation process. I appreciate Margaret Smith's efforts to ensure that they will be well informed so that they can participate fully in the consultation. As she and I have discussed, statutory guidance will accompany the act; I propose that it will advise councils to answer all questions timeously where possible, but to do so specifically where the questions are raised by statutory consultees in recognition of their formal role. The guidance will also encourage councils to share more widely answers to questions that have universal interest—for example, through a frequently-asked-questions section of the council website. I remind members that a consultation report must address all representations, both oral and written, and that its publication will be followed by a three-week period in which further representations can be made to the council before it reaches its final decision. Finally, any closure proposals can be called in by ministers where there have been serious flaws in the process. Members will be aware that councils are concerned that amendment 13 would place on them an unnecessary and potentially disproportionate burden that could be used to bring a consultation to a near halt. I am therefore concerned that amendment 13 risks jeopardising the remarkable consensus that we have created around the bill. That consensus has been built on the principles of balance and proportionality, which we have strived towards at every stage. Amendment 13 appears to put those principles at risk. I have real concerns that amendment 13A would require all answers to questions to be published, regardless of how personal or sensitive their subject matter, and even against the wishes of the correspondent. I am sure that that is not what is intended, but it is what the amendment would oblige councils to do. I also note that the amendment would not require councils to take the published answers into account in any way. They would not be part of the consultation report, nor would there be a requirement for them to be  provided to ministers in the case of a closure decision. Amendment 13A risks requiring councils to contravene data protection legislation by placing answers about personal or otherwise sensitive issues in the public domain, without any added benefit to the consultation process. For those reasons, I ask Margaret Smith not to move amendments 13 and 13A. I move amendment 1 and urge members to support it.

The debate has been useful. I emphasise that we are debating the issue because Margaret Smith raised at stage 2 concerns to which the committee was sympathetic. All the Government amendments are intended to address her concerns about omissions from proposal papers. The thrust of the bill is to achieve openness and transparency. It emphasises the incentive for councils to put as much information as possible up front and to share that with all consultees at the beginning, in order to prevent questions from being asked later in the process because of omissions and inaccuracies. That is Margaret Smith's concern. The whole bill should help to address that, but the debate has highlighted the added importance of councils' providing as much information as possible up front, to prevent people from having to ask additional questions late in the process. However, if additional questions must be asked, we have said that the Scottish Schools (Parental Involvement) Act 2006 makes provision in relation to parents and parent councils and that guidance will cover all statutory consultees. That should help the process and improve the bill's operation overall.  Amendment 1 agreed to.  Amendments 2 to 9 moved—[Fiona Hyslop]—and agreed to.

Our new school estate strategy recognises the importance of good-quality buildings and facilities for all pupils, including those with additional support needs. It sets an ambitious target of having well in excess of 90 per cent of pupils educated in good-condition schools, and plans for the rest. Following an invitation in the context of the next phase of the new school building programme,  Inverclyde Council submitted a proposal to us, which would improve the school estate for pupils who have additional support needs. Although I cannot say anything in advance of an announcement about the next phase of the programme, I assure Duncan McNeil that Inverclyde's proposal will be considered alongside all the others that were submitted to us and to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, with which we are working on the matter.

As the member knows, the taxpayer is currently supporting Inverclyde Council to the tune of £5.73 million a year over 30 years for a school building programme, the financial close of which was October 2008. He was correct to identify the importance of driving forward the programme and proposals on the estate, particularly for pupils who have additional support needs. The member will appreciate that I cannot pre-empt the discussions with COSLA. However, when the announcement has been made we will move swiftly to engage with all councils for which the announcement means that they will be able to progress the school building programme, and particularly with Inverclyde Council, should it be part of the programme.

The point is well made. It is striking that the successful councils in Scotland are those in which political parties come together. For example, the Scottish National Party group in Inverclyde Council has made representations, as has Duncan McNeil. It is important that the individual child's needs are supported. Political posturing by any party in that context can sometimes hamper rather than support education.

I most recently met representatives of South Lanarkshire Council on 2 July, as part of a programme of visits by ministers to all local authorities in Scotland, to discuss a range of education issues. The council noted that it has reduced class sizes in early primary classes and in deprived areas. It expects an educational impact, through active learning and greater interaction between pupils and teachers. Research shows us that smaller class sizes make a big difference in the early years.

The Government moved swiftly to set up a teacher employment working group, all of whose recommendations are being enacted. I am pleased that, in South Lanarkshire, the proportion of P1 to P3 pupils who are in classes of 18 or fewer pupils increased from 9.4 per cent to 13.7 per cent last year. I look forward to seeing the figures in future. It is important to remember that the resources that are being put into the local government settlement would enable councils to employ teachers. In particular, it is unfortunate that Glasgow City Council has reduced the number of teachers and teaching positions by 300 in one year—that represents 300 jobs that could have been available for post-probationers, had the council chosen to use the resources that it was given to employ teachers. [ Interruption. ]

South Lanarkshire Council has indicated that it wants to use the savings that it can make from falling school rolls to fund its ambitious programme of school building. At one  point, the biggest PFI school project in Europe was in South Lanarkshire. The continuing revenue costs, which are supported by the Government, continue to put pressure on the council's budget. The Government has had to find up to £60 million a year to fund unfunded PPP commitments from the previous Administration. We have honoured our promise to do that, but doing so puts constraints on other parts of the budget.

I am sure that the member is familiar with the Scottish Government's budget. I refer him to the pages that show how much revenue support is being provided by this Government for PFI and PPP programmes, many of which were unfunded when we came into office. I also point out that the reason why South Lanarkshire Council can put so much money into the capital funding of primary schools in particular is because this Administration has put £2 billion of capital funding into the local government settlement for 2008 to 2010. The member should welcome that.

The Scottish Government and the Scottish funding council are continuing to consider how resources that are yet to be allocated might most effectively be used to support learners in 2010-11. Those resources are additional to the significant planned increase for 2010-11 in our funding of the college sector, which will enjoy a cash increase of no less than 6.9 per cent—or 5.3 per cent in real terms—at a time when the Westminster Government has cut the Scottish Government's budget by £500 million in real terms.

It is obvious that we have to ensure that support goes where it is needed. In that respect, we need to look at the claimant counts for September 2009. In Aberdeenshire the increase was 1.4 per cent, in Angus it was 1.6 per cent and in Perth and Kinross it was 1.5 per cent. However, in East Ayrshire the increase was 4.8 per cent, in North Ayrshire it was 4.6 per cent and in North Lanarkshire it was 5 per cent. As the member suggests, it is important that we target resources where they are needed.  Under the terms of the flexible new deal, work-focused training will have to be delivered for young people in the north of Scotland, but as that will not come on stream until August 2010, we need to think about the resources that are needed now. The member is also right that we need to think about where resources will be needed in the academic and financial year 2010-11.

I have already, in discussions with the funding council, brought to its attention the concerns that were raised in the Parliament. The council is aware of the motion that Parliament passed. I reiterate that when we have areas that have five times the increase in claimant count for 18 to 24-year-olds it is important that we address those areas first. We should bear it in mind that the claimant count information for the most recent quarter for which information is available shows that Scotland's figure is 2.7 per cent below that of England. That shows that we must be getting something right somewhere.

I welcome the opportunity to update Parliament on the actions that the Scottish Government has taken to ensure that businesses and individuals have the skills to cope with recession and to build for recovery. When we launched "Skills for Scotland: A Lifelong Skills Strategy" in 2007, we made it clear that the strategy was a call to action to work together on building a responsive and flexible lifelong learning system. That is now being delivered, and the recession has meant that such an approach is even more important than ever. For the delivery of Scotland's skills strategy, we have a skills system that is responsive and has acted quickly and effectively to the challenge that we have faced over the past year of making skills work for Scotland. Last year, we created more than 69,000 training opportunities. With our boost to apprenticeship numbers and the widening of individual learning accounts, we anticipate that the number of opportunities will increase again this year. To support skills for recovery, we have put in place a comprehensive set of measures—under the banner of ScotAction—to provide training for work, training in work and training from work to work. Scotland's unemployment rate remains below that of the United Kingdom—our youth unemployment rate remains 2 percentage points below that of the UK—but we still face major challenges. Through ScotAction, we are doing all that we can to use the economic levers that are under our control to help individuals to learn new skills or to enter employment. The Government will not repeat the mistakes that were made in previous recessions. We do not want to see another lost generation of young people. First, I will address training for work. Over this year and next, colleges are being supported with an extra £16.1 million of funding to provide thousands more opportunities to school leavers and young people to study at college as an alternative to unemployment. Already this year, an additional £7.7 million has been allocated to 23  colleges in the areas worst affected by youth unemployment. A further £8.4 million is being made available in 2010-11. We plan to boost that figure by levering in additional European social fund money, which will almost double the funding available in 2010-11. The expectation is that colleges will use the funding to support young people who seek a college place under the youth guarantee scheme. We are also making it easier for young people and adults to go to university. Last week I announced that, for the first time, a grant of £1,000 will be available for 14,000 independent students, who were previously reliant solely on loans. Our work on co-ordinating and integrating the work of Skills Development Scotland and Jobcentre Plus is ensuring that individuals get access to the right training and advice at the right time. Early indications are that people who access the new service get back into work more quickly, so plans are now being developed to roll out the programme across Scotland from next year. Working with Skills Development Scotland, we have boosted funding for the training for work programme by £2.9 million to £6.5 million, which will provide an additional 3,150 places throughout Scotland. Individuals can now access training for work programmes after only three months, instead of six months, as previously. Accelerating our spend in relation to European funding has already resulted in £58 million being allocated to community planning partnerships to support those who are feeling the worst impacts of the recession. ScotAction's second strand relates to training in work. I can announce that Scotland now has the most comprehensive package of support for apprentices in the UK. The apprenticeship summit that was held in April and subsequent regular meetings with employers and businesses have informed our work. This year, we are providing £16 million for an additional 7,800 apprentices—a 73 per cent increase—which will bring the total number of apprenticeship opportunities to 18,500 this year. Skills Development Scotland has completed contracting with training providers for all those opportunities. The allocation of places focuses on sectors in which opportunities either currently exist or will emerge as we move into recovery. Over the summer I announced: 100 home energy and efficiency apprentices; 50 for creative industries; 500 for the hospitality and tourism sector; 410 for the food and drink industry; 460 for financial and business services; 1,000 apprentices in Glasgow; 1,250 for health and social care; 170 apprenticeship places for early years and child care; 2,000 for the retail sector; and 600 management apprentices.  To support apprenticeships, ScotAction is providing funding to invest in new apprentices, safeguard existing apprentices in their jobs and adopt redundant apprentices. Employers, particularly small and medium-sized enterprises that are struggling to recruit and retain their apprentices, will benefit from the safeguard an apprentice scheme, which provides £75 a week for businesses to retain their apprentice's skills and knowledge. To encourage SMEs to take on a new start, I have launched the invest in an apprentice scheme, which will give employers in the manufacturing, food and drink, energy and textile sectors a £2,000 financial incentive to take on a young person. It also provides a £2,000 incentive for microbusinesses to take on a management apprentice. To ensure that we have enough technicians for the future in the growing life sciences sector, I have introduced the innovate with an apprentice scheme, levering in European funding to put in place our two-for-one apprentice offer. More than half the places are already being taken up, mostly by SMEs. Supporting skills for business growth is essential, which is why I am delighted to be able to announce funding for businesses in the manufacturing and engineering sector to undertake the business improvement techniques qualification. Improving business performance now will ensure that companies are well placed to grow in the future. We have also encouraged and supported individuals to earn and learn on a part-time basis. Individual learning accounts are now available to 16 and 17-year-olds for the first time and the learning threshold has been increased from £18,000 to £22,000, which makes more people eligible. Individuals can now access work-focused learning and have more choice of learning providers. Uptake of ILAs is already up 42 per cent this year in comparison with last year. A £38 million package that replaces loans with grants is supporting up to 20,000 part-time students to access higher education, helping those who have been made redundant and who are working part time to support a family to retrain with a higher education qualification. We are supporting postgraduate study, which is another area in which Scotland is leading the way across the UK: I have also now extended financial support to people who are undertaking part-time postgraduate courses. The third strand of ScotAction is about helping people from work to work. In response to the rise in redundancies, we have moved rapidly to put in  place measures that are helping affected individuals to move swiftly from work to work. We have boosted support to partnership action for continuing employment—our national partnership approach to supporting redundancy—as well as improving and widening the service. Through the strategic use of European funding, we are providing 24 additional advisers across Scotland for the PACE redundancy service, which is ensuring that individuals have immediate access to the right advice and the right training. Those who face redundancy now have immediate access to training for work, and we have broadened the training opportunities available by opening up opportunities in colleges, funded by an additional £7 million. PACE partners have responded to an unprecedented level of demand and I commend them for their work. From January to August, PACE has assisted 234 organisations and 14,232 employees. PACE is also now available to small companies. Support for redundant apprentices, which is available through our adopt an apprentice scheme is a key part of our work, and we are seeing results. In Scotland, construction skills figures show that 43 per cent of redundant apprentices have found employment, in comparison with 33 per cent in Wales and 26 per cent in England. The adopt an apprentice scheme is the most comprehensive in the UK and, to date, Skills Development Scotland has received applications for more than 180 redundant apprentices. The scheme is helping people such as Jonathon Cowper and Thomas Kay, whom I met on Monday. They were delighted to have the opportunity to complete their apprenticeships with Grant Westfield Ltd in Edinburgh, which received support through the adopt an apprentice scheme. More than 140 businesses have seen the value in investing in apprentices and building a future for the trainee, the company and, ultimately, Scotland. Those measures are working. They are making a real difference to real people. I will continue to listen to employers, individuals, learning providers, the voluntary sector and our other partners, including Opposition parties, to ensure that we constantly look at ways to improve support. We are ensuring that employers know about the ScotAction programme by promoting our work in the press and working with partners such as the Federation of Small Businesses and the Scottish Chambers of Commerce. It is important that Parliament and MSPs know the actions that we are taking but also that they help us ensure that their constituents, employers and individuals can access ScotAction programmes.  As a Government, we remain committed to doing all that we can to ensure that individuals and businesses have the skills that are needed to face the challenges of the economic downturn and to support growth and recovery.

That was several statements and a few questions; I will address the few questions. It would have helped if Labour had supported the SNP Government's first budget for 2009-10, which contained funding for apprenticeships.

That fact did not change even when Labour was not willing to support the budget. I am more than happy to share good ideas with Labour. The money for apprenticeships was in the budget the first time and the second time, regardless of whether we had Labour's support. There is £2 billion working in the construction sector to help to ensure that we can build for recovery. The investment of £2 billion in schools alone from 2007 to 2012 is essential, particularly given that most redundancies are in the construction sector. Not for the first time, the Labour Party's figures on apprentices are wrong. Since February, only 397 apprentices have been made redundant. Each redundancy is difficult for the individual concerned, but we can take credit for the fact that 43 per cent of apprentice construction workers have been offered places and are continuing their apprenticeships and that 180 apprentices are in jobs. As for the 300 apprentices who have left, Dave Whitton might not be aware that apprentices leave courses all the time, every year—recession or no recession—for disciplinary reasons or to have children, for example. I do not think that he had that in mind when he said that he wanted us to search them down and bring them back in. We must work constructively with the sector. Ordinarily, Dave Whitton comes to the chamber with constructive suggestions, to which I am more than willing to listen. Rather than trying to nitpick, pick holes or mislead people, he would be better spending his energy on ensuring that employers in his area and his constituents benefit from the variety of options and incentives that are available. That is what people expect of the Parliament during a recession.

On the member's second question, I have indicated that it is important that we ensure that colleges across Scotland are supported. That is why, despite a real-terms reduction in the budget for 2010-11, colleges will receive not only a cash-terms increase but a real-terms increase. However, I remind members of differences in the claimant count for 18 to 24-year-olds across the country. For example, in North Lanarkshire there is an increase of up to 5 per cent; in East Ayrshire, the increase is more than 4 per cent; in North Ayrshire, the increase is 4.5 per cent; in Aberdeenshire the increase is down to just over 1 per cent; and in Angus the increase is 1.4 per cent. Indeed, there has been a reduction across Scotland in the claimant count for 18 to 24-year-olds. Our youth unemployment figures are below those of the UK because we are taking strategic decisions that help us to support areas that need it. However, I recognise that, particularly with the youth guarantee scheme and some of the issues that we will have to deal with post-Christmas and into next year with the flexible new deal, rural colleges as well as others will need support. I should say that I am responding to a request from Parliament to come and update members on the details of ScotAction and the contracting of apprenticeships. The Parliament requested that in May, and I am acceding to it. We refreshed the skills strategy as requested by Parliament, and that was published in January or February last year. However, I have also agreed to a request by Margaret Smith that we come again to the  strategy. I remind members that one of the reasons why we have been able to provide sector-specific incentives is because we abandoned the previous one-size-fits-all strategy. Part of the skills strategy allows for more flexible and responsive attitudes. We might not have been able to take those steps in the recession had we not adopted our skills strategy.

The member has raised a number of issues, but I am conscious of the time. Apprentices in Scotland are employed. We have not taken the programme route, as in England, where apprenticeships can be achieved without employment. The 7,800 additional apprenticeships that we are providing all involve employed apprentices. They have added to the provisions of the economic recovery plan that have helped to create and preserve jobs. Of particular importance is the public sector investment that has been made in rail, as the member knows, and construction across Scotland. That has occurred with particular support from accelerated capital expenditure. I am pleased to tell the member that Keith Brown has met Jim Hume to discuss some of the issues that have been raised in relation to the textile industry, in particular. The announcements that have been made about ScotAction include provisions for the textile industry. Invest in an apprentice is one initiative of which that industry can take advantage. We have put together a programme for all sectors and ages that is the most comprehensive in the UK. That is why a number of national skills bodies are looking to Scotland to provide the lead in the area. We regularly share and exchange information with our English colleagues.

Business improvement to shape businesses for the future is an important area. John Park has pursued the issue, in particular management apprenticeships. Small businesses can invest to enable existing employees to take on business improvement training. Lanarkshire is a key example of an area where support is needed; I referred to the increases in youth unemployment there. That is why colleges in Lanarkshire received  the largest investment in some areas, especially to support young people.

We can follow up the matter with SPICe, but the figures that it cites are for a 16-month period, not the period since April. I gave the figure of 397, with 180 apprenticeships supported by the adopt an apprentice scheme. I am sure that we can pursue the veracity of the figures later. It is better to focus our attention on the success stories and on ensuring that people are aware of what can be achieved. The provision of £75 a week is a good measure that will enable people to keep the apprentices whom they need. The programme is sector specific and includes a range of initiatives. We have been told that the sectors to which the safeguard an apprentice scheme applies are those that will benefit most from it. Small and medium-sized businesses can benefit most from the ScotAction programme.

A number of groups are benefiting. Where people have been made redundant, we are encouraging employers to allow them to retrain while they are in work, so that they can be retrained before moving elsewhere. ILAs and the flexibility that they offer are another outcome. I know that Jeremy Purvis does not like outcomes from the skills strategy, but a 42 per cent increase in the number of those taking up ILAs is important. When we deliver programmes to help those who are unemployed, people expect the Parliament to come together to promote what is available and to ensure that people know about it. All MSPs are being given information relating to this statement to help them to communicate with their constituents, particularly about the short-term courses that ILAs provide. In many ways, those are what employers are looking for, rather than courses that take several years. The flexibility of what is available, from modern apprenticeships to short, sharp ILA courses, is producing a responsive system under ScotAction.

That is a very important question. PACE has been involved with RBS for some time, anticipating that there might be difficulties ahead. The role of the finance sector jobs task force is important. There are jobs and opportunities in the financial services sector, albeit in areas different from those where people are facing redundancy. It is essential that we use the skills of individuals who provide careers guidance. The support for PACE and the increased number of advisers will help with the response to large-scale redundancies. In this instance, it is not just larger companies that will be affected by restructuring; smaller companies within the broad family will also be affected, and they, too, will get support from PACE. I also mention the responsibility of Jobcentre Plus. People are coming out of the labour market, claiming unemployment benefit and then moving on to other jobs. There is still a throughput of people who, having been made redundant, are getting jobs, which compares positively with previous recessions. We cannot make snap judgments in that regard, but there is evidence that much of the support from PACE and other organisations is helping people to get back into work in Scotland.

That is a very important issue. One of the big challenges now relates to training for work for those who are more vulnerable, particularly because of the recession. I have corresponded with Johann Lamont on the matter, and I am happy to do so further on issues around apprenticeships. The perspective of apprenticeships—and even the word "apprenticeship"—can put off many women. I acknowledge that there is a gender imbalance. Johann Lamont has raised the matter before on a number of occasions. I am happy to take the matter forward in developing the strategy.

One of the issues in the skills strategy that Murdo Fraser wishes us to revisit is the opportunity to deliver literacy and numeracy, for the first time, through work-based assessment and learning supported by ILAs. We have already taken exactly that position. The member is absolutely right about improving numeracy and literacy. The biggest survey that Scotland has ever seen is currently taking place to benchmark that, and the 42 per cent increase in ILAs that we have promoted is a great example of how to use flexible learning to help with literacy and numeracy in support of people in the workplace. The FSB and the Scottish Chambers of Commerce have been very much engaged in ensuring that the ScotAction programme is informed, and they are making their memberships aware of the opportunities. Small businesses in Scotland need our support, and we are providing that support with ScotAction.

The report from the CPPR focuses predominately on Scotland's position prior to May 2007. It does not identify anything new about the significant expenditure on Scottish education during that period and the lack of improvement in educational performance under the previous Administration. In contrast, Scotland's current educational attainment is strong, with record exam passes. Those records are the result of steady improvements under the SNP Government and will be further improved through the introduction of the curriculum for excellence, which will drive up standards in teaching and learning.

On the latter question, I do not have the information to hand but I am happy to write to John Wilson with it. Since the start of devolution, a major aspect of Scottish expenditure has been the teachers agreement, which has rewarded teachers for the job that they do but has increased the spend on Scottish education. Audit Scotland's report of 2006 and the report of Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education on Scottish education, which was written by Graham Donaldson and published in January 2008, provide good information about the challenges that we face in improving the quality of teaching. We welcomed the chartered teachers initiative when it was introduced by the previous Administration. Part of its purpose is to ensure that  well-qualified and talented teachers remain in the classroom. We are supportive of the chartered teachers programme; however, I take it from John Wilson's question that he is not satisfied that all pupils—particularly those in deprived areas—are benefiting from chartered teachers. I am, therefore, more than happy to look at the analysis of where chartered teachers are used, now that several hundred are established, to identify whether pupils in more deprived areas are benefiting from teaching by chartered teachers.

The international comparisons do not stack up regarding some of the questions and issues that have been raised—for example, the comparisons between exams and qualifications in England and Scotland. I really think that there should be big health warnings around the CPPR report. There are far more robust analyses, which give us a better understanding of the state of Scottish education. The international surveys that the CPPR cites all took place prior to 2007. Murdo Fraser is, however, right to say that we should monitor our position. In many of the international surveys, Scotland's position has slipped because more countries are now being included in the surveys. Nevertheless, Keith Brown and I have both acknowledged that there has been a flatlining in the performance of some of Scotland's education system and that we must increase the rate of improvement. Steady improvement is not sufficient when we have to compete with international education systems that are improving faster than ours. That is where the quality of teaching comes into play, and we can improve that in two ways. First, we can improve initial teacher education and continuing professional development. Secondly—and importantly—we can improve methods of teaching, and that is exactly what curriculum for excellence is about.

We are continuing to make good progress. Four of the 12 recommendations have been completed. For example, we have held two seminars with local authorities to help improve the alignment between national and local workforce planning. Such seminars will now form a part of the teacher workforce planning exercise—that is in line with recommendation 1. We have commissioned the Government Actuary's Department to review the operation of the winding down scheme. We are currently considering its report and recommendations, which is in line with recommendation 6; we have introduced secondary subject modelling to teacher workforce planning, which is in line with recommendation 7; we have increased the preference waiver payment for secondary probationer teachers to £8,000, which is in line with recommendation 8; we have ensured that information to students contains relevant data about post-probation employment, which is in line with recommendation 10, and we have improved probationer understanding of employment prospects, which is in line with recommendation 11.

On recommendation 4, employment is the responsibility of local authorities. We wrote to them last December on the issue. The impression that we have gained from the seminars that have been held is that recommendation 4 is being adhered to, and that supply vacancies are going to post-probationers as opposed to recently retired teachers. However, I welcome any contrary information or evidence from members.  On recommendation 3, research is being conducted internally, and we need to await the results of the 2009 census. Again, at the local authority seminars that were held in October, views were mixed. Representatives from Glasgow, for example, had detected a rise in the average rate of retirals, but we are continuing to monitor that. Indeed, we can work with the Scottish Public Pensions Agency to see what pattern is emerging.

My ministerial colleagues and I visited every council during the summer and discussed issues such as teacher employment. From the 2008 census, which showed a drop of around 1,000 teaching posts, it is evident that some councils have not been replacing teachers as they retire. For example, we know that one in five of the teaching posts that were lost in primary and secondary schools in 2008 was cut by Glasgow City Council. That council, North Lanarkshire Council and Renfrewshire Council are among the four local authorities that are responsible for more than 50 per cent of the reduction. Of course, Jordanhill is very much a focus for teacher training for many people from that area, including mature students with families, who can be hit even harder than others. Two of those local authorities are reducing class sizes, but Glasgow is not. Quite clearly, we need to continue to focus on Glasgow.

The average weighted ratio of the lifetime unitary charge to the capital value for all signed school PFI projects is 4.8. The individual ratio is a matter for each relevant procuring local authority.

I said in my statement to Parliament in June that we will look to the Scottish Futures Trust to develop, recommend and implement approaches that will secure a better  school building programme across Scotland and provide value for money. The first stages of the new programme will involve direct capital investment, but we want to explore the possibility of using different funding approaches such as the non-profit-distributing model for later phases, and are asking the SFT to provide advice on that.

First, I congratulate Des McNulty on his appointment to his new post and I look forward to working with him. I point out that the unitary charge for previous projects was variable for different schools. He will be aware from the statements that we have made that two thirds of the support for school building for secondary schools and 50 per cent of the support for primary schools will come from the Government, but clearly the contribution of each individual local authority to each individual school will be different because of procurement, value, the size of the school and so on. As the projects develop, the information for contracts that are procured and so on will be publicly available, and information on local authority spend will be available to local communities. Obviously, our contribution is evident through the contributions that we have to make to support any revenue funding or, indeed, capital funding. The capital lines that will support the initial schools will be evident in the local government settlement that will be established with local government and, as I said, two thirds of the support for schools is part of the capital settlement that will be provided for local government from 2010 onwards. I am delighted that in 2010 we have secured an additional £10 million as part of that process—on top of the £2 billion of capital investment that is currently going into schools, which has already delivered more than 200 schools in the lifetime of this Parliament.

Universities are independent, autonomous institutions and as such the Scottish Government does not intervene in institutional matters such as student accommodation.

I welcome the opportunity to congratulate the University of Aberdeen on its impressive achievements. I launched the university's curriculum reform earlier this year. The university's new ranking by The Times Higher Education Supplement , which I think represents the biggest advance in ranking of any United Kingdom university, reflects Aberdeen's success. I understand that the university has attracted about 5,000 new students this year. As I said, student accommodation is a matter for the university, although it has confirmed that, despite its capacity having proved to be insufficient to meet the initial demand from all the first-time students who required university-managed accommodation, all new students have now been accommodated on campus or through their own arrangements. The university is committed to continuing to improve its student accommodation. It has provided almost 3,500 rooms for first-time students in the present academic session, a figure which has increased by almost 1,300 in the past two years. That is symptomatic of success, and we should congratulate the university on that.

That is a constructive question. I know from my constituency responsibilities that the City of Edinburgh Council has had such discussions for several years. There are pressure points—one issue is availability, but another is the provision of quality accommodation for students. I strongly urge councils to have such discussions. Recently, the Edinburgh University Students Association met a number of stakeholders, including the local council, local landlords and others to discuss a common interest. I strongly urge Aberdeen City Council to follow that example, if it is not already doing so. There are big challenges, including affordability and other issues. If the member wants to bring any issues to the attention of my colleague Alex Neil, the Minister for Housing and Communities, he should do so.

Each of the first 14 secondary schools to benefit from the new £1.25 billion school building programme, which includes Dumbarton academy, is different and will therefore be planned and built to a timescale that will be a matter for discussion with each local authority. Precise costings for each school will not be known until the tendering and procurement processes are complete.

I welcome Jackie Baillie's welcome for funding for Dumbarton academy, for which she and the local council have campaigned. The case for Dumbarton academy has been well made by several people. There is no delay; we have only recently announced the provision for Dumbarton academy and I look forward to seeing plans and progress. As the member will well understand, however, numerous problems—not the least of which are historical planning and other issues—need to be resolved. Those include procurement and tendering problems, which need  to be completed before we can supply the information that she seeks so keenly.

I welcome this opportunity to make a statement to the Parliament announcing the decisions that I have reached on how the Scottish Government intends to improve financial support for full-time higher education students, with an additional investment of £30 million from 2010-11. The Government's stated purpose is "to create a more successful country where all of Scotland can flourish through increasing sustainable economic growth." That vision for the future of our country becomes more important, not less, as a guiding principle for responsible government through these toughest of economic times. Despite the tightest settlement that has been received from the United Kingdom Government since devolution, with cuts of about £500 million imposed on our budget in the next financial year, we have put in place a range of policies that will help students today, tomorrow and in the future to overcome the financial barriers that they face. Those measures make a real difference to students and include: abolishing the graduate endowment fee; replacing loans with grants for part-time higher education students; increasing student hardship funds year on year since we came into office; introducing fairer assessment of income for further and higher education students, to ensure that the available funding gets to the students who need it most; and making further improvements to the support that is available for part-time students, through changes to individual learning account 200 and ILA 500. Between April and September, 42 per cent more people attended courses supported by ILA funding than was the case last year. On 15 December 2008, the Scottish Government launched "Supporting a Smarter Scotland: A consultation on supporting learners in higher education". The consultation set out a number of options for how higher education student support could be improved through additional investment of £30 million from 2010-11. It ran for 20 weeks, which reflected the importance of the issues and my express wish to engage widely with students and other stakeholders during the process. I thank everyone who took the time to submit a response.  What I will announce today has been heavily influenced by a range of factors. First, it has been influenced by the evidence in the consultation responses, the findings from the recent higher and further education student's income, expenditure and debt in Scotland survey and findings in the National Union of Students publication, "Overstretched and Overdrawn: A survey of student hardship". Secondly, what I will announce has been influenced by three ministerial meetings with the main Opposition parties in the Scottish Parliament, which have taken place since September, and by our discussions with NUS Scotland. Thirdly, it has been influenced by the operational implications. Any changes must be capable of being designed, tested robustly and delivered by the end of March 2010. Finally, and most important, it has been influenced by the economic situation. According to official figures that were released last week, this is the first time since records began in 1955 that United Kingdom gross domestic product has contracted for six consecutive quarters. This is the worst recession for a generation. When I launched the consultation, I said that we would consider the responses in the context of the wider economic and social environment and that we would listen to stakeholders' views. Our response to the consultation was published on 7 October and set out three options, which I said that I would discuss with the Opposition parties and the NUS before I came to a final decision. I am pleased that I have found common ground with the NUS on the need to improve financial support for independent students, in particular. I welcome the NUS's recent change of approach and its acknowledgement that the Government's direction of travel in the area is fundamentally correct. The overwhelming majority of independent students are over 25 and many have dependent children. Our evidence on student income and expenditure tells us that the budgets of such students are under the most pressure and that those students have the highest levels of commercial debt. The majority of respondents to our consultation highlighted the inconsistency of the current student support system and thought that the additional resources that we are making available should not be focused exclusively on dependent students. This time last week, the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service published data that show that the largest percentage increase in applications to Scottish universities is in applications from independent students. That is another compelling reason why such students must be better supported. I am sure that in many cases the increase has been driven by the impact of the recession, as people enter higher education before they seek to re-enter the job market after being made redundant.  As a result of the discussions that I mentioned and after consideration of all the factors that I set out, I am able to announce additional measures for higher education students at university and college. They are based on option A in our consultation response of 7 October, but I decided to vary elements of that option in light of further discussions with the NUS. Under option A we said that we would provide—for the first time—a new grant of up to £1,000 for independent students who are studying in Scotland, increase by £2 million the amount of money that is available to all students to meet the costs of child care, and increase the maximum level of the income-assessed student loans. We will still do each of those three things. We will also increase the amount of money for young students, as we said that we would do. To ensure that the money goes as far as possible and is targeted at improving the income levels of the poorest students, at a time when other sources of finance are more limited, we will do that through a further increase in student loans, rather than through student grants. We will therefore widen the scope of the additional loan to include independent students, and we will increase it to £785 for those who are eligible. That means that the income of up to 75,900 students will rise by up to £442; up to 44,500 students will see their incomes rise by up to £622; and up to 14,000 new students will now receive a grant and benefit from the introduction of the new independent students' bursary. Those measures will mean that the income of dependent and independent students from low-income backgrounds who are living away from home and studying courses of higher education in colleges and universities will rise to £5,852 per annum. For the first time since devolution, every student who qualifies for an income-assessed student loan, irrespective of their age, will be eligible for the same level of financial support. Over and above that, I can announce another first. These proposals are to provide low-income students aged over 55 who study in Scotland with access to grants through the new independent students' bursary for the first time. Although I have gone further than many in the chamber would have anticipated, I am anxious to make further progress. I accept that the system of student grants and loans should be examined more closely to see what further changes can be made and what scope we have to spend our existing budget smarter. I am prepared to agree to adapt our option A in the way that the NUS requested to ensure that our shared goal of the best possible deal for Scotland's students is achieved. Although the strict terms of the motion that the Parliament passed on 21 May might not have been met, particularly the Opposition's original wish to increase the young students  bursary, the main element of it—addressing student hardship—has, I believe, been realised. Our proposals also demonstrate that the Scottish Government is prepared to adapt its policies in the short term to raise students' income at a time when part-time work to supplement the support that they receive from the Scottish Government is harder to come by. Evidence suggests that banks are lending less money to students and on less favourable terms, with many students resorting to credit card debt. We have no choice but to respond to those concerns with proposals to alleviate debt where we can and make loans available on the best possible terms where debt is still accumulated. Although a number of factors surround access to learning, we believe that the availability of realistic levels of student support plays an important part in any decision to study beyond school. Our colleges and universities have never been more popular: acceptances to universities are up by 5.5 per cent this year alone, and the greatest rise is in the number of independent students who will benefit the most from what I have announced today. In these toughest of economic times, I believe that we have a duty to protect and promote the income and interests of this generation of students. I take that duty seriously, which is why I commend the £30 million-worth of proposals to support students to the Parliament.

One of the issues for a minority Government is responding to the views of other parties. Following the instructions that we had on 21 May, that is exactly what we did. A number of people made constructive proposals, including in response to the consultation, and we listened to them. I agree that the Government has had to compromise on increasing the loan element of the package. I also agree that the Opposition parties acknowledged that independent students needed consideration of a kind that those parties had not included in their initial proposal. The NUS agreed with that as well. We are doing what the Parliament is meant to do, which is to respect the views of minorities and reach compromise and consensus. That is what I have sought to do. From the initial discussions right back in September I indicated that the independent students issue was serious and had to be addressed. I conceded in the September and October meetings with the Opposition that I was also prepared to compromise on the loan element. As far as the meeting on 21 October is concerned, Keith Brown admitted that the NUS proposal had just been delivered to him for consideration, as it had been to Opposition members who were at that meeting. Within the timeframe for consideration, we therefore looked at what the NUS proposed. It proactively and positively came with a view on 21 October that we were happy to consider. Since it was not a brand new option but a variation of what we had already set in train as one of the three options that the Student Awards Agency for Scotland was working on, it was possible to consider it. I was very pleased that, at a constructive meeting that I had subsequently with the NUS, we were able to agree that the proposal would be a way forward. At a time when we have a real terms cut in the Scottish budget for 2010-11, for a Government to come forward with £30 million in that year alone is a considerable achievement. The previous Administration put forward resources of £22 million a year to support students. This Administration is already putting forward improvements to student support of £44 million a year. Today's announcement provides an additional £30 million for student support. I think that that is a good record at a time of pressing financial pressures on  this Government, and that it should be congratulated.

This Administration has increased the university funding share of the overall budget to 3.87 per cent in 2010-11, compared with the position inherited from the previous Administration of a 3.73 per cent share. We also conducted, with Universities Scotland, a thorough joint review of funding mechanisms. Professor Anthony Cohen, former principal of Queen Margaret University, has said: "This Government has I think manifested an extraordinary commitment to the universities since they came to power. The taskforce itself was the closest engagement which any Government in my recollection has had with the universities". On tuition fees, Professor Steve Smith, who is the new president of Universities UK, said: "The issue is almost completely irrelevant in Scotland ... It's not something we are thinking about. Because the funding level is roughly comparable (with England's) it seems to me there is no issue."  Whether or not the cap on fees is removed in England in the longer term, implementation of that will be some way down the line. Our job in the here and now is to ensure that support for universities, as I have evidenced already, continues to be strong. Rather than wait for some long-term review of student support, we are delivering an additional £30 million now. That money will make a difference in the pockets of more than 75,000 students by this time next year. Such action by the Scottish Government is to be welcomed. I acknowledge that we have changed our position on loans, just as the Conservatives have changed their position on independent students, but we have come to that compromise because that is the correct thing to do. Having listened to what everyone has said, we have come up with a package that will make a difference. Given the comments from Opposition members, I hope that the package will receive support.

The member makes an important point about the £2 million child care fund, on which we will obviously make progress as soon as possible. However, she must recognise that issues with the systems of implementation might restrict the introduction of the fund until 2010-11. However, I recognise that we need to try to work on the issue as quickly as we can. Let me say that there was no manifesto commitment for £2 billion servicing of debt. That would not cost £2 billion. As a minority Government, we face a real challenge to get proposals through the Parliament when there is distinct opposition. I am pleased that the Liberal Democrats joined with the Government to abolish the graduate endowment fee, but the vote was very close. Indeed, Labour and the Conservatives would still have required students to pay £2,300 at the end of their period in university. In the teeth of such opposition, attempting to deal with some other debt issues that we want to tackle would have been challenging, especially if one bears in mind the resistance that we have already seen to our proposal to look at grants and loans. For the first time under devolution, students from low-income households will now be entitled to the same income whether they are under 25 or over 25. That is a major step forward. In the past, the Parliament has abolished front-end tuition fees and the graduate endowment fee. Let today be the day that we recognise that we need to provide a universal grant that is available to people from low-income backgrounds, whether or not they are over 25. Such students will get financial support from the Scottish Government.

It is recognised that tuition fees have not been welcomed in Scotland. Indeed, the abolition of the back-end tuition fee through the abolition of the graduate endowment has been welcomed throughout the country. However, there are issues with student support. The Government down south overcommitted £200 million and has had to recoup £100 million from students, which is jeopardising places. England has a complex student loans system, even compared with ours. In considering some of the issues on student support, we have all found and continue to find that more could be done to make a budget that will be limited in future go further. However, as far as the Scottish Government is concerned, there is no place for tuition fees in higher education in Scotland.

The independent universities and colleges are responsible for their own funding streams but, as Karen Whitefield will be aware, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council responded quickly—in fact, within three weeks—when concerns were raised last year. We have to monitor the position closely. Indeed, we discussed that subject in the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee this morning. I have asked the funding council to keep a close account of what is happening in the here and now. As we speak, it is engaged with colleges and universities to ascertain what the initial response has been to discretionary funds this financial year. However, the extra £2 million next year will benefit students across the piece. We are increasing the support for independent students, many of whom have families. That is the key focus of today's announcement.

Although we are investing an additional £30 million for 2010-11, Elizabeth Smith will be aware that we are moving into a new spending review period and that we have heard from a variety of UK parties that there should be cuts, whether savage cuts or other degrees of cut. Going into the next spending review period, we will know what resources are available to us and we will be in a position to consider what improvements can be made. There can be slight adjustments. We have already made some, such as changes to means testing, within a short period of time, and we will make any further improvements that we can in the short term. I expect the review to inform some of our thinking, particularly going into the next spending review period.

Mike Rumbles has pursued the issue previously. Loans are available to help Scottish students to fulfil the tuition fee obligations that they have in England. I will write to him to address the impact that today's announcements would have on any Scottish students who study in England and to address some of the issues that he continues to raise with me. The issue that affects students from Scotland who study in England is not necessarily tuition fee support but income for day-to-day living. I am not in a position to respond to him immediately, but I will do so in writing.

As I mentioned, the UCAS figures show that the number of independent students going to university reduced in previous years but has now increased. Financial support can make a difference to whether they go to university in the first place and, more important, some of the feedback that we have on independent and older students at universities indicates that the issue puts pressure on the retention of such students once they have accepted a place and are at university. The problem can often be issues of income, family responsibilities and debt. The fact that independent and older students have up to £4,000 commercial debt, compared with several hundred pounds for younger students, shows that commercial debt is hitting independent students hard. An income of £1,227 more than they had previously will be welcomed by independent students throughout Scotland.

Ken Macintosh perhaps misunderstood the comments that were made at the committee this morning—£30 million has been earmarked for student support from the start of the spending review period for the year going forward and it was identified for 2010-11. That funding is certainly not resourced by savings identified elsewhere in the budget. Ken Macintosh raises a substantive point about who will benefit. With the Presiding Officer's indulgence, I will give Parliament some additional information. We have focused in particular on lower-income families. The £442 increase in income will apply to under-25-year-old dependent students with household incomes between £25,000 and £40,000. Students from that income bracket—both dependent and independent—will receive an increase of £442. Those under 25 who are dependent students will receive an increase of £622 in their income. The real winners today are independent students with income levels of around  £17,000 or less, as they will receive an increase in income of £1,227.

The announcement today is about support for individual students, but in the university sector we have already introduced measures such as the ILA 500, which has for the first time replaced loans with grants for up to 20,000 part-time students. The ILA 500 was not initially intended to tackle the recession, because it was announced and agreed before the recession, but we are finding that it provides a bridge and an opportunity for some people who have been made redundant and who have to continue to work part-time to keep their families to retrain to go into a different profession and to train at universities. Replacing loans with grants for part-time students has added an extra boost at this time of difficulty during the recession. Independent students, many of whom may have been made redundant and are going to university to retrain—applications are increasing in particular in science, technology and engineering—provide a great opportunity for the country to take that talent and ensure that those people can contribute to the economic recovery in the future. The steps that we have taken help to ensure that they can support their families in the meantime.

We have increased the hardship funds in response to the demands that were being placed on them. The fact that there has been an increase of 17 per cent in the available hardship funds under the current Administration is evidence of that. If any member or constituent has concerns about the response that they are getting about hardship funds, they should please let us know. However, the hardship and discretionary funds are not a guaranteed source of income; they are discretionary and are for the universities to deploy. Nevertheless, we will respond in a timely way to any request that is made in that regard. The experience is perhaps different in different universities. Pauline McNeill is correct to say that, last year, the bursaries and hardship funds in a  number of universities and colleges ran dry and were swiftly supplemented by additional income from the Scottish funding council. However, other institutions did not apply because there was no demand for the funds. There is a difference between institutions in the distribution of hardship funds. As I explained to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee this morning, that is perhaps because of the experience that has been built up over a number of years. However, we are in a volatile situation just now and more women with dependants are entering higher education, so the system must be responsive. A number of institutions throughout Scotland did not have to apply for additional hardship and discretionary funding, but I am aware of all the concerns that people are raising. As of now, the Scottish funding council is working with colleges and universities to see what pressures are arising this year. Last year, it responded within three weeks of concerns being voiced. The funding council is ensuring that it can respond but, until we know what the demand is, it is difficult for it to respond.

This Government has already lifted 100,000 pupils out of poor-condition schools by supporting £2 billion of investment in the school estate the length and breadth of Scotland in our initial phase of school building. We expect more than 250 school projects to be completed during the lifetime of this parliamentary session. More than 200 have already been completed. In addition, I set out to the Parliament on 17 June that I expect the first primary school to be funded by the new, additional £1.25 billion school building programme to be open by 2011. That will help to lift even more pupils out of poor-condition schools.

I say politely to Michael McMahon that his party lost the election in 2007 because people were fed up with a semi-feudal, one-party state in which the Labour Party claimed everything as its own. These are Scotland's schools, not Labour, Lib Dem or SNP schools—[ Interruption. ]

I remind the member that this morning I announced that we have completed 236 schools since 2007, which certainly matches the previous Administration's plans brick for brick. Not only that, but we are funding schools. The previous Administration left a black hole of £60 million per year in the PPP programme. Next year alone we must find £40 million to plug that hole. We are funding and building schools.

On 28 September I announced the first 14 secondary schools to benefit from the new £1.25 billion school building programme. Those schools were identified using the following criteria, which were agreed by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities: the distribution of needs throughout Scotland; the best available information about schools' condition and unsuitability to deliver the curriculum for excellence; additionality; and authorities' own plans, priorities and readiness to proceed. The Labour-led coalition in East Renfrewshire Council indicated that Eastwood high school was its top priority for secondary school replacement. Other schools in East Renfrewshire, including Barrhead high school, will, like those in every other local authority, be eligible for consideration in subsequent phases of the programme.

The problems with Barrhead high school have not suddenly appeared in the past two years. I visited the school in August 2008. It has consistently shown in recent core facts publications that it is a category B school. There are issues of unsuitability. I do not want to prejudice the position of other schools in Scotland, but Barrhead high school—if supported by the Labour-led coalition that, in the first instance, put Eastwood high school as its top priority—would be in a legitimate position to apply and be considered for subsequent phases of the programme.

We said that we would match the Labour and Liberal Democrat PPP programme, and we did. None of the projects was cancelled: they all went ahead. Construction began on Eyemouth high school in September 2007, and the school opened in March 2009. The schools and the buildings can be inspirational, but I do not think that PPP is the model that we should continue to progress. We have honoured the commitments and spent £40 million each year—

I know that the member was not in Parliament during the previous session, but is he aware that it took Labour five and a half years from announcing its funding mechanism to build the first school? The school in question was Dunbar grammar, and the project was a refurbishment rather than a new build.

Will the member give way?

The two responses are completely consistent. We have worked with local authorities to identify schools that merit a new building. The reference to additionality indicates that we are talking about schools that did not previously have identified funding streams. That is the sense in which added value would be provided. It is clear that we have worked extremely closely with local authorities, which have nominated the schools that they think should benefit first. My two statements are not mutually exclusive. We have been extremely open about the criteria that are being used.

This is an opportune moment for the Parliament to debate school buildings, as the SNP Government passed two important school estate milestones this week. As a result of at least £2 billion of major investment in the school estate over the period 2007 to 2012, we have passed the 200 new or refurbished schools mark in the two and a half years since May 2007.

No, there is more to come. The previous Administration delivered only 205 schools during the entire four years of its term. I can now tell Parliament that, on top of the 200 schools that are identified on page 3 of members' Scottish Parliament information centre briefing as having been built by March 2009, another 36 schools have been built since then, bringing the total to 236.

Absolutely not. There is an issue with the accuracy of the Labour Party's motion. Page 3 of the SPICe briefing indicates that the majority of schools that have been built in the past two years are not PPP projects. The pace of building and refurbishing schools is quicker under this Government than it was under the previous Administration.

This Government's investment has supported the delivery of new and refurbished schools at a rate of 1.2 schools per week over the present four-year session, as compared with the rate of just 0.76 schools per week that was achieved in the previous eight years. From Eyemouth high school in the east to Inverclyde academy in the west and from Papdale primary in the north to Biggar high school in the south, pupils, teachers, parents and communities  the length and breadth of Scotland are benefiting from better schools. We have already lifted more than 100,000 pupils out of schools that were in a poor condition.

I am sorry—Ms Brankin has already taken up some of my time.

I say to Mr Purvis that £2 billion of investment is being put into the school estate between 2007 and 2012. No school project to which the previous Administration committed has been delayed or shelved by this Government, despite the unfunded PPP revenue payments that we have had to fund, to the tune of £40 million in the next financial year alone. I have signed off eight projects involving 49 PPP/non-profit-distributing schools, including Armadale academy, and have secured funding for them. On top of that, last week I announced the first 14 secondary schools that will benefit from the new and additional £1.25 billion school building programme, which we are taking forward in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and individual local authorities. More Labour-led councils are benefiting than councils led by any other political party.

Local authorities continue to receive robust levels of capital investment. Between 2008 and 2010, £2 billion will be provided. The member is right to identify the problem of the historical backlog that exists in Aberdeenshire. Indeed, Aberdeenshire Council was the only local authority that benefited from two schools in last week's announcement. Labour may not have welcomed the new secondary schools that will be provided from Wick to Ellon, Garnock to Dalbeattie, Mearns to Brechin, Harris to Eastwood, James Gillespie's to Auchmuty, Clyde Valley to Ayr and Lasswade to Dumbarton, but pupils, staff, parents and communities have, as have the Conservatives. As  a consequence, 12,500 more pupils who are educated in schools that are in poor or unsustainable condition will be lifted out of that situation. One reason why Labour was voted out in 2007 is that people wanted to see an end to the one-party state and the semi-feudal, Labour fiefdom approach to government. They no longer wanted a party that claimed schools as Labour schools. They are not Labour schools; they are not Liberal Democrat or even SNP schools, either—they are Scotland's schools, which have been paid for by the taxpayers of Scotland. The SFT will deliver real benefits for our school building programme, as my colleague John Swinney will explain when he closes the debate. It is clear that the private finance initiative approach that was used in the past has not delivered best value for the taxpayer. Excessive profits have been made on investments, with the result that large windfall gains have been made at the taxpayer's expense. The SFT expects to make savings of at least 3 per cent over the span of the programme, which would equate to a sum of around the cost of an extra new secondary school or about five or six new primaries. Labour prefers models of excess profits; I make no apology for preferring extra schools. Last week's announcement represents only a quarter of the new schools that will be built as part of the additional £1.25 billion programme. With COSLA, we established a school estate strategy, which Audit Scotland criticised the previous Government for not delivering. The SFT will deliver new schools. Between 2007 and March 2009, 200 schools were funded and built. The present total is 236. At least £2 billion is being invested in the school estate between 2007 and 2012.

An additional £1.25 billion will be provided for 55 new schools. Since 2007, more than 100,000 pupils have been lifted out of schools in poor condition. We will spend an average of £700 million a year on schools over the lifetime of the Parliament. That compares with the £585 million per year that the previous Administration spent over the previous seven financial years. In every community and every corner of Scotland, schools are being built and funded by this Government. That is a record of which I am proud. Labour may not choose to see them, but pupils, parents and communities do.  I move amendment S3M-4988.3, to leave out from "with concern" to end and insert: "that the Scottish Government inherited a school estate where around 260,000 pupils were in schools classified as being in poor or bad condition; welcomes the fact that this figure has fallen by 100,000 since May 2007 due to the £2 billion of investment in the school estate supported by the Scottish Government; recognises that in excess of 250 schools will be built during this parliamentary term compared with just 205 during the four years of the previous administration and that the Scottish Government will exceed its pledge to match the previous administration's plans brick for brick; commends the Scottish Government and local authorities for the increased pace of school project completions with the rate of delivery up from 0.76 schools per week over the eight years of the previous administration to an anticipated 1.2 per week over the period from May 2007 to April 2011 and further commends the additional investment over and above the schools that will be delivered through the capital budget allocations of each local authority, which will see an additional £1.25 billion deliver a further 55 new or refurbished school buildings across Scotland, and further welcomes the fact that the Scottish Futures Trust will play a central role in coordinating, facilitating and managing the new school building programme."

I was delighted to open Armadale academy and will tell Rhona Brankin why. Before May 2007, the Labour Party—and Mary Mulligan in particular—told the people of West Lothian that, were an SNP Government to be elected, that school would not be built. Well, the school was built. I signed off the proposal in August 2007 and I opened it. We said that we would match the previous Administration's schools "brick for brick", and we have done.

Does the member recognise that resources are already being put into student support, including £38 million for part-time students? Does he recognise that the additional availability of ILA 200 and ILA 500 means that far  more training places can be available for students who need financial support?

I have been impressed by Motherwell College's child care provision, but that might accentuate the difficulty and emphasise why we need to have a review. There are pros and cons to having a centralised entitlement scheme compared with a flexible, localised scheme, which is what Karen Whitefield is arguing for.

The member is being a bit disingenuous. I have written to her to explain the guidance that I gave to the funding council, which was for young people in areas of greatest need. That is quite explicit and is a matter of record. The member must acknowledge that. That is the guidance that I gave the funding council.

The member made an important point about people facing redundancy. The £7 million that is available for partnership action for continuing employment is available to all colleges, urban or rural.

Earlier I mentioned the accelerated capital spending that we have been able to invest in colleges to help the construction industry, in particular. Does the member agree that it would be very helpful if capital spending could be accelerated into 2010-11 from the following year, to help us continue that investment? I am sure that investment in colleges would benefit from that.

I am due to meet the UK Secretary of State for Work and Pensions in the next month or two. I invite the member to write to me with her concerns and I will be more than happy to raise them then.

The member says that the pressures are no different. I acknowledge that, which is why the 17 per cent increase in funding is available to all colleges. However, does the member recognise that, as Claire Baker said, we must be acutely aware of the scale of the pressures in, for example, Lanarkshire?

Does the member recognise that the uptake of the offer that we have made far surpasses that of the Northern Ireland scheme, which Labour promoted to us during the debates on this year's budget? Our scheme has been successful. What we cannot do is guarantee jobs. One of the successes of modern apprenticeships in Scotland is that they have a quality control requirement for employment. We can support the funding of that. I think that £2,000 for taking on an apprentice is a very good offer and I urge all members to help to promote the scheme, because it will benefit employees and individuals.

We all know the challenges of the turbulent economic position that we face. Sadly, redundancies have created significant difficulties in many people's lives. We see the effects on families, communities and businesses throughout Scotland. Therefore, I welcome the opportunity to lead this debate on how colleges are supporting our efforts to promote economic recovery. The debate allows us to highlight how, in locations the length and breadth of the country, colleges are making a difference to individual lives, helping people to develop new skills and building for the upturn. Individuals and businesses look to colleges to meet skills needs and help communities to adapt to change. Through their provision, colleges are inevitably working with clients and organisations that have been affected in different ways by the economic downturn. It was apparent from the earliest days of the recession that there were some core characteristics that the Government and its partners would need to exhibit as we tackled this unprecedented challenge. Among those were resilience, flexibility and responsiveness. Scotland's colleges have risen to that challenge. To that end, the development of the key sectors that are identified in "The Government Economic Strategy" is fundamental to economic success. Earlier this year, I updated Parliament on the progress that we have made in fulfilling the vision of a smarter nation that is set out in "Skills for Scotland: A Lifelong Skills Strategy". Our colleges play a part in that, too. In June, we launched innovate with an apprentice, a two-for-one scheme to provide life sciences technicians for private sector companies, which is now being delivered by Adam Smith College, Forth Valley College and Dundee College. Building on the findings of the tourism task force, we have also funded the Alliance of Sector Skills Councils to work with colleges to develop an employers resource pack on how to find out about and access training opportunities. I acknowledge that the Lib Dems want to debate the updated lifelong skills strategy. Earlier today, I visited West Lothian College and saw for myself the difference that the staff are making to the local community. I met a group of  school leavers who are undertaking a basic construction course, which the college is confident will enhance their employability prospects. I was also delighted to see—as all members will have seen—the new publication from Scotland's Colleges entitled "Skills for a Successful Scotland". All members should have had a copy posted to them directly by Scotland's Colleges. There are some terrific stories in it, highlighting what local colleges are delivering to drive the economy forward. There are further examples. Stevenson College Edinburgh, Edinburgh's Telford College and Jewel and Esk College are working closely with the City of Edinburgh Council on a package of measures to react to the recession. As part of the capital city partnership, the colleges, along with local employers, are developing a flexible vocational programme for young people. On completion, successful youngsters will be guaranteed a place at an Edinburgh college commencing in August 2010.

As the member knows, colleges are autonomous institutions, so it would not be appropriate for me to interfere with the management of any individual college. We all know that there are limited resources to deploy. That has never been truer than it is today. It is therefore incumbent on us all to ensure that those resources are used to best effect, and are particularly focused on front-line delivery—we have to ensure that the resources benefit the students. We have a strong story to tell about how we and partners in government have done just that. For example, in January, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council allocated £7 million to support colleges participating in our partnership for continuing employment—PACE—initiative to support those facing redundancy. That has produced results. For example, South Lanarkshire College was able to help to support over half of the employees who were made redundant at Freescale Semiconductor, and Barony College was able to deliver a rural retaining course, which was exclusively targeted at the employees of rural micro, small and medium-sized enterprises. We also need to be mindful of the position of young people. The college story is not limited to  supporting those who have lost their jobs as the result of recession. It is now more important than ever to manage the transition from school to college, and Scotland's colleges have continued to support those individuals who need extra help. Indeed, in the face of that growing adversity, my passion about providing more choices and chances for young people in need grows ever stronger. The Government is determined to avoid having a lost generation of young Scots, so I very much welcome the commitment of our colleges to supporting this agenda. Young people who need more choices and more chances often disengage because the right provision is not available or they do not have the qualifications to progress. Our challenge, therefore, is to help them to progress and achieve the skills that they need for life and work.

Indeed. Some of the applications that we are seeing are coming from older women. Only this morning, I met a woman who, 18 years after leaving school, is now engaged in an electrical engineering course, precisely because, having been made redundant, she decided to do something that she has always wanted to do, which is important. In "Curriculum for Excellence: Building the Curriculum 3: A Framework for Learning and Teaching", through an explicit and unequivocal set of entitlements, we have established an opportunity that will provide positive outcomes for young people. The 16-plus learning choices policy demands a partnership approach involving colleges, local authorities and schools, Skills Development Scotland and other partners. It will ensure that learning, support and tracking operate seamlessly so that every young person is offered a suitable place in learning well before they reach their school leaving date at any transition point during the senior phase. In that regard, I acknowledge the point that Claire Baker makes in her amendment about the importance of Christmas leavers, and point out that the 16-plus learning choices policy will give us an opportunity to address some of the issues that might arise this year. That approach is fundamental to our objective of improving outcomes for young people, and our schools, private training providers, the third sector and colleges must all help to raise aspirations to that end. Of course, all of that activity requires financial support to make it happen. Since coming to office,  the Government has built a genuine partnership with Scotland's colleges. It is a partnership that is important to us and it is one that we have backed with investment. Over the period from 2007-08 to 2010-11, the Government plans to invest more than £2.6 billion in the college sector, which is a 17 per cent increase on what was made available under the previous Administration. I assure the Conservatives that that 17 per cent increase will benefit rural colleges, in recognition of their particular needs. By continuing to engage closely with colleges before we take policy and spending decisions, we have been able to accelerate £8.5 million in capital spending for colleges from 2010-11 into last year and this year to ensure that capital projects remain on track. Without that help, the redevelopment of Coatbridge College would have been delayed by up to a year and Reid Kerr College might not have had an opportunity to create an academy of creative arts. Further, only this morning, I saw the capital being used to provide young people, such as those whom Claire Baker's amendment is designed to address, with the opportunity to learn employability skills. During recent months, I have visited a number of colleges to see for myself the difference that that substantial Government investment has made. The brand new, purpose-built facilities at Anniesland, Dumfries and Galloway and Langside colleges create an atmosphere that is conducive to work and to learning. We have also allocated £28.1 million of United Kingdom budget consequentials to Scotland's colleges to support the young people's agenda that I have just described. Nearly £20 million of that funding has been made available this year and the balance will come on stream next year. That is not all. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth set out in his statement on the draft budget our plans for further investment in the college sector, which continues to play a crucial role in upskilling adults and young people as we prepare for the upturn. Our draft budget provides for a £45 million increase on 2009-10, which will help to ensure that those individuals who are worst hit by the changing economy will be able to develop new skills. I assure the Liberal Democrats and Labour that we will review higher and further education child care support, following on from the £4.7 million increase for higher education child care and the £8.6 million for further education child care in this academic year.

That is an important point. Although we respect the autonomous nature of individual colleges, it is critical that we work strategically, for example by planning for workforce issues across Edinburgh and the Lothians, or—as we have identified with the colleges—by working as a sector to examine some of the key economic sectors that we need to support and develop. We want to be strategic enough nationally and locally, while also being responsive. Colleges know their own communities, so we have to give them some flexibility, but that must be in the context of our Government's economic recovery strategy. The colleges have shown that they can work collectively as a unit to influence the Government and other players in economic development. The immediate measures that we are taking through our economic recovery plan are providing help through the downturn for people and businesses to grow. All colleges in Scotland are continuing to pull in the same direction to support that. However, we cannot be complacent and must continue to expect our colleges to deliver for our key sectors, for businesses in Scotland and for individuals who are affected by redundancy. It is important that our colleges respond to the changing needs of businesses. That need will become more acute as businesses reassess their future plans in order to compete in the global economic climate. Colleges will need to continue to be quick to respond and to adjust their offerings, which will require more innovation in how they develop and deliver future courses. That will ensure that our communities have the skills that they need to participate fully in Scotland's economy. I look forward to hearing members' speeches and to Parliament recognising the role that Scotland's colleges are playing in building for economic recovery. I move, That the Parliament recognises that Scotland's colleges are central to the Scottish Government's plans for tackling the recession and preparing for economic recovery; agrees that through the provision of flexible, locally relevant skills and training they are helping individuals and employers build for recovery; welcomes the fact that, as a result and working in partnership with other agencies, colleges are helping the communities that they serve to adapt to changed economic circumstances; notes the particular support that colleges provide to young people, and notes the continued financial support that the sector receives from the Scottish Government.

The member is aware from my letter of 25 August to him that the Scottish Government is supporting a number of initiatives that make science more accessible to the public in Kilmarnock and Loudon. Extra funding of £78,000 over three years is being used to subsidise the transport costs of 15,000 people in schools and community groups across Ayrshire making a visit to the Glasgow Science Centre. The member is also aware from the letter that I wrote to him that although no applications were received for science engagement grants from organisations headquartered in Ayrshire, several projects will be accessible to schools, community groups and the wider public in Kilmarnock and Loudon. I urge the member to encourage his constituents to take advantage of those opportunities to access science activities.

I certainly welcome any initiatives that promote Scotland's excellent science research base. The local initiative in Kilmarnock is to be welcomed, as is bringing  together different organisations to participate. I know that Ayrshire has a proud history of innovation, which was reflected in the recent Ayrshire innovators homecoming exhibition at the Dick Institute. The exhibition highlighted the achievements of John Boyd Dunlop and Sir Alexander Fleming among many others. I will be interested in the outcome of that local summit and ask the member to keep me informed so that we can learn lessons for elsewhere in Scotland.

The employment of teachers is a matter for local authorities. The Scottish Government is providing local government with a record level of funding—£23 billion—for the period 2008 to 2010. We are taking forward the 12 recommendations of the teacher employment working group, which reported last October, and we have also taken steps to rebalance teacher supply and demand by reducing by 500 places the proposed intake for initial teacher education courses this year.

Not all teachers will be able to achieve employment status from day one of the school year. On East Ayrshire Council in particular, the information that was given to ministers during our visit there during the summer is that, in 2009-10, the council is making available resources to return primary teacher numbers to 2007 levels—that is, another 24 full-time equivalents—in order to reduce class sizes. On top of that, it has a teacher refresh programme to create 66 vacancies above natural turnover. The issue of South Ayrshire Council's supply lists is a matter for the council. I would expect it and other local authorities to agree and comply  with the recommendations of the teacher employment working group. In establishing that group, we moved swiftly to pull together the relevant groups such as the unions, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and local authorities to ensure that we improve the system that we inherited and better match supply and demand.

I last met the City of Edinburgh Council on 26 May 2009 as part of a series of meetings with all local authorities to discuss matters relating to education. My officials regularly have discussions with local authorities on a range of issues that are relevant to my portfolio.

The City of Edinburgh Council, like all the other councils in Scotland, is part and parcel of our new relationship with local government as evidenced by the concordat with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. Within that, there is a drive throughout the country to reduce class sizes. As the First Minister said earlier today, class sizes are at record lows. School closures are quite clearly a matter for the City of Edinburgh Council, and I point out that the chamber recently supported and voted for the principles of the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill, which seeks to ensure that local authorities retain the power to close schools. I also believe that, from 1997 to 2007, there was a 19 per cent fall in the school rolls in Edinburgh. How that situation is managed is up to the council.

I appreciate that Gavin Brown, Malcolm Chisholm and, I am sure, other members want to express their views about what should happen to schools in their constituency. However, I hope that Mr Chisholm will reflect on the fact that because of my relationship with local government I cannot interfere with individual school closures and most certainly not in the proposals that have been set out. The points that have been raised can be—and, indeed, are being—well made by parents and others who are either pursuing reductions in class sizes or defending their local schools. However, as I say, I cannot take up individual cases. The alternative would be to centralise education and put it completely under the Government's control. If we respect the local authorities' ability to take such decisions, we must give them the space and the time to do so. Given the responsibility that has been put on the City of Edinburgh Council, it should be making efforts to reduce class sizes. As I understand it, it wants to concentrate on areas of deprivation where, as we know, having smaller class sizes gives schools the space and time to raise standards of literacy and numeracy in those who will benefit most.

We have agreed with local government that it will make year-on-year progress to reduce class sizes and, as councils have acknowledged, we have provided funding to maintain teacher numbers at 2007 levels. During this time of recession, the numbers of retiring teachers quite clearly do not match the numbers of teachers who are coming through the teacher training system. That is why, in response to Cathy Jamieson, I made it clear that we have taken steps to reduce the numbers coming through teacher training colleges. On the question whether we will legislate, I point out to Rhona Brankin that, at First Minister's question time, the First Minister said that we are actively considering legislation—it might take the form of regulations or even primary legislation. In any case, we are also considering measures to ensure that we defend the previous Administration's aim of reducing class sizes to 25, which, I should point out, was neither legislated for nor achieved.

Skills Development Scotland has issued contracts covering the additional places and, as a result, the additional apprenticeship opportunities are now available.

The strength of the modern apprenticeship scheme in Scotland is that it has employed status, which means that, although we provide funding and resources to support the skills and training aspects of the apprenticeships, the employers must offer jobs. At present, that is challenging, particularly in some sectors. The member is right to identify that many organisations and training providers face challenges and that they need to retain capacity for when the engineering, manufacturing and other markets pick up. I am happy to agree to the member's request to have officials meet those organisations. I hope that he has received a reply to the well-made points in the letter that he sent me.

Yes. Eligible students who are undertaking courses of further education can apply to their institution's further education child care funds for assistance with the costs of child care with registered providers. The  funds are additional to fee waivers and any bursary support. Each student can apply for up to £3,500. The funds are administered on a discretionary basis by the institutions, as they are best placed to assess and discuss personal and local needs. The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council investment in further education bursaries, child care and discretionary funding was increased by £2.7 million in the academic year 2008-09 to £69.9 million, which was an increase of 3.8 per cent. In the academic year 2009-10, the figure has risen to a record £79 million, which represents a further 9.3 per cent increase.

Colleges were supportive of the Government's swift moves to address some of the pressures in year. I point out to Mary Scanlon that Inverness College did not request any additional allocation of funding to support child care during the past year, although many other colleges did so and had allocations provided. However, she makes a good point about stability and planning for people in further education, particularly older women with children. The issue of independent students with caring responsibilities is a key one to address. Following our consultation response and when preparing our proposals to Parliament, I will be able to discuss with all parties in the chamber what child care support we might want to provide in future. Mary Scanlon's view and all representations made to us as part of the consultation will be taken on board and considered as part of our response.

As the member might be aware, there are pros and cons to having a decentralised or centralised system of support for child care. As we have seen at Motherwell College, quite frequently a localised response can provide a better service for many parents. The member's implied question is, how do we prevent the situation that arose during this year from recurring? The issue is whether we responded quickly during the year when we needed to. The former acting chief executive of the Association of Scotland's Colleges said at the time: "The sector and the SFC worked together to identify resource requirements and re-allocated funds to address those needs ... This entire process was concluded in a 3 week period—a superb example of how in Scotland we can achieve so much when we pull together." The member says that we need a responsive system and that monitoring must be acute—the monitoring was indeed acute. As the Association of Scotland's Colleges' response indicated, we managed to respond within three weeks and £10 million of additional resource was put into the system to support child care. That is an example of where the Scottish Government can and did respond to support the child care needs of students throughout Scotland this year.

I thank Jeremy Purvis for lodging his motion and initiating this evening's debate. I share his admiration for Girlguiding and I am delighted that its centenary launch is happening here at the Scottish Parliament. I extend my welcome, too, to the guides and volunteers who are here today. I hope that our visitors can tell from the warmth of all the speeches the genuine sense of celebration that exists in the Parliament, which reflects the high esteem in which Girlguiding is held. As a former brownie, girl guide and ranger guide, it gives me particular pleasure to respond on behalf of the Government. This is an opportunity that I could never have imagined when I was a girl guide in  Ayr and I am genuinely honoured to play a part in today's centenary launch. It is clear that the guiding movement views its centenary not only as a celebration but as an opportunity to offer some new and unforgettable experiences. The plans are impressive, from guides climbing Munros to the brownies taking over a train to Perth—I am not sure whether they are driving it—for their carnival express; from rainbows' princess parties to the firing of the Edinburgh castle gun on new year's day. Every guide in Scotland will have her own special memories of this centenary year. I was intrigued to hear about the four new centenary badges that fit together to make a Scottish saltire, with the themes of adventure, community action, creativity and heritage. It is a long way from when I did my housekeeper's brownie badge in England during the three-day week, when the examiner asked me to demonstrate ironing and hoovering without any electricity. I also recall doing my public service at St Leonard's special school and working with children with disabilities in permanent care, and the sense of duty, responsibility and pride that I had when I involved myself with those young people. It was a rewarding and life-shaping experience. Now, as Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, I can see clearly how the challenges that the current badges represent and the skills that are involved in achieving each one make a real contribution to the learning and development of young people in the present generation. I see this evening's debate not just as a celebration but an opportunity to consider what guiding can offer in the context of education and youth work policy. We are committed to expanding the range of partners that are delivering an enhanced learning experience through the curriculum for excellence. For young people to be successful learners, confident individuals, effective contributors and responsible citizens, they need support across their life experience and opportunities that take them out of their comfort zone. The time is right for guiding and other youth work organisations to be integral partners in delivering the curriculum for excellence programme. It is fully in line with their aspirations and it will certainly benefit from the challenges and development opportunities that are on offer to young people, but it will also be enhanced by the youth sector's special understanding of young people's motivation and aspirations. In April, I launched "Valuing Young People: Principles and connections to support young people achieve their potential"—a short publication with a set of common principles and connections  for partners that work together to support young people. Those principles are rooted in best practice and reflect the approaches of guiding and other effective youth work practice. We see the value of collaborative working in successful school and youth work partnerships. Learning and Teaching Scotland's recent report, "Bridging the Gap", shows how teachers and youth workers can work together to inspire and engage with young people throughout the country. Every young person takes a different route to fulfilling their own potential, and for many being a guide will be a part of that wider learning achievement. I know that that is dependent upon the time and commitment of local volunteers, and I pay tribute to all the Girlguiding leaders who work with girls in our communities. Their role as mentors, role models and enablers is critical in supporting so many girls and helping them to learn new skills and develop confidence. I also thank Girlguiding Scotland's chief executive, Sally Pitches, who has made an insightful and sustained contribution to the development of youth work policy in recent years. With her colleagues in the other uniformed organisations and YouthLink Scotland, she has generously shared her experience and helped to shape how we in Government support the voluntary youth work sector. For example, "Amazing Things—a guide to the youth awards in Scotland", which was produced as part of the national youth work strategy volunteering action plan, includes the Queen's guide award as a case study and model of good practice. Guiding also makes a distinct contribution to the national youth voice that we rely on to shape policies that matter to young people. The movement itself is ably represented in the Scottish Youth Parliament by its own MSYPs, Fiona Beaton and Kirsty Paterson-Hunter, who use the skills that they have developed through guiding to champion priorities on the national stage with eloquence and passion. Girlguiding's potential to enhance girls' lives and prepare them for adult life is as relevant now as at any time over the past 100 years. Guiding has moved with the times, offering challenges that its founders would never have dreamed possible. Indeed, the 7 th Linlithgow brownies to whom I spoke on Saturday as they were fundraising at their stall at a summer fair for Donaldson's School's sensory garden are testament to that. Girlguiding Scotland can be assured that the Scottish Parliament recognises and appreciates its contribution to Scottish life over the past 100 years. We wish it well with the challenges of its centenary year and look forward to working with it to support girls in Scotland in experiencing the  challenges, fun and benefits of guiding for many years to come. On behalf of the Scottish Government, I, too, salute Girlguiding Scotland.  Meeting closed at 17:41.

Unlike in England, students in Scotland do not have to pay tuition fees. As a result, English students have to pay an additional £3,000 each year, and leave with greater debt than Scottish students, despite generally studying for a year less. Student loan debt figures demonstrate that: in 2009, the average student debt figure for Scotland was £5,487, compared with £10,287 in England. Our consultation on the paper "Supporting a Smarter Scotland" closed on 30 April 2009. The paper outlined a number of options on how student support could be improved by utilising the £30 million that has been made available through the spending review for higher education student support in 2010-11. It also provided an opportunity for all interested parties to set out priorities. We  are analysing and costing the various options that have been proposed and will make an announcement shortly.

The question was specifically about Scottish students studying in England, and there are specific reasons why we must ensure that such students are treated at the same level as English students studying in England. That is because of the proportion of European Union applications; if we were to treat those students preferentially, we would have to offer the same preferential treatment to Polish, French or German students studying at an English university. As I said, we are looking at improving student support from 2010-11 onwards. I have had constructive discussions with a number of members across different parties. I hope to come forward with a proposal to support students that will command members' approval and support.

We tackled the issue of student debt by ensuring that we reduced the amount of loan debt that was caused by the graduate endowment fee. The improvement of graduates' income by £2,300 is to be welcomed. However, I recognise that there are issues during a recession for student support as students go through university. Indeed, as the member knows, we are tackling that issue. She also knows that one of the key areas of concern is the position of independent students, who are often older and often have child care responsibilities and costs, which must also be addressed.

We are engaging with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, councils and the Scottish Futures Trust on the £1.25 billion school building programme that will follow on from the current £2 billion of school investment that is being supported by the Government. In identifying the first tranche of secondary schools that will benefit, I am taking into account the distribution of needs throughout Scotland; the best available information about schools' condition and unsuitability to deliver the curriculum for excellence; additionality; and authorities' plans and priorities and readiness to proceed.

Having heard my explanation of the criteria, the member might have changed her question. I point out that it took the previous Administration until 25 June 2002—three years into its term in office—before it announced its programme, and that it took it five and a half years to deliver the first refurbished school, which was Dunbar grammar school. I am delighted that, under the SFT programme, a primary school will be delivered in 2011, on top of the 250 schools that will be supported and built under the present Administration.

As I outlined, part of the discussions will be with individual councils on what they consider to be appropriate schools in their areas, and on their plans and readiness to proceed. Many councils have already done that work. We are engaging not only with COSLA and the Scottish Futures Trust but with individual councils such as Highland Council.

The Scottish Government is able to invest in schools because we prioritised capital investment in local authorities. In this year alone, we are accelerating £75 million of capital to support construction workers and to ensure that schools are built. The £2 billion of investment in our schools is a result of the Government's spending priorities to ensure that we have schools that are fit for Scotland's children.

I am pleased to have had the opportunity to debate the principles of the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill. I thank all those members who have spoken in what has been a thoughtful and largely constructive debate, which has built on the general consensus that already existed around the bill. The debate has been informed and shaped not just by what we have heard today, but by the work that has been done by many people over the past 10 years. I am glad that Cathy Peattie is in the chamber. Her report of almost 10 years ago for the Education, Culture and Sport Committee not only helped to clarify the agenda at the time but has informed us as we have progressed. Professor Neil Kay was involved in the case that she investigated. Murdo Fraser has played an important role. We must ensure that he is sent a copy of the Official Report . Lucy Elizabeth will probably be one of the best toasted babies in Scotland today. Reference has also been made to the work of Sandy Longmuir and his colleagues in the rural schools  network. I hope that the experience of developing the bill shows that, despite coming from very different and sometimes polarised positions, people can work together to come up with a constructive solution and make progress. I have certainly been informed by my experience of Midlothian school closures five years ago, which turned my mind to the need to ensure that we had a better process. I hope that we are seeing the results of a debate that has been informed by many people over many years.

I am delighted to welcome any new school, 250 of which will be built and funded during the lifetime of this Government, and I am delighted to welcome that school in particular. Hugh O'Donnell made an important point. The bill probably touches more of our constituencies and more of our constituents' interests than many other pieces of legislation that we consider in the Parliament. Today's debate has been informed by the experiences of many members—including Aileen Campbell, George Foulkes, Anne McLaughlin, Bob Doris and Elaine Smith—in dealing with issues related to school closures that have affected their constituents. School closures are rarely, if ever, happy experiences for people. Members' passion shows the bill's importance. Members have indicated their clear support for the principles of the bill, and I welcome that. I recognise that there are a few points of detail that have attracted different views, and I look forward to discussing the detail at stage 2. We will, of course, be willing to consider constructive amendments and, as I signalled earlier, the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee's report suggests that we are largely of the same view on much of the bill. Looking forward to stage 2, it might be helpful if I were to clarify our thinking on the main issues that were raised in the stage 1 report. The report asked the Government to consider extending the time that authorities have to notify ministers of a closure decision. The fact that the bill allows councils one day to do so reflects the reality that such decisions tend to become public knowledge almost immediately after they are taken. However, as I indicated in my opening speech, now that I have studied the stage 1 report, I am considering lodging an amendment on that point. The committee raised a concern about a lack of clarity as regards the role of HMIE, which I would like to address. Currently, HMIE is only asked for a report on the 16 or so cases that are referred to ministers each year, which are not limited to  closures but can include changes to the location of schools or their catchment areas. Under the bill, HMIE would be required to produce a written assessment of the educational aspects of all school consultation proposals, which would be based on the inspector's professional assessment of the council's proposal paper, including the educational benefits statement and the issues that were raised during the consultation, either at the public meeting or in written responses. The HMIE report would form part of the council's consideration of the proposal when it made its decision. HMIE has confirmed that it has the resources and experience to do that, which should mitigate the need for me as minister to receive further advice during any call-in, as I will already have received an initial report from HMIE. The second issue that was raised in the committee's conclusions relates to the three additional factors that the bill requires councils to consider prior to consulting on the closure of a rural school. I have already signalled that I think that there is a strong rationale for setting out specific safeguards for rural schools, the loss of which can have a disproportionately significant and adverse effect on the whole community. Alongside that is the need to establish a robust and comprehensive consultation framework for all school consultations, whether in urban or rural areas, and that is clearly set out in the bill. The report expresses concern about the lack of clarity around the grounds for ministerial call-in and asks the Government to give the matter further consideration. As I said in my evidence, a decision to call in a case would focus on the process that the council had followed and whether it had taken proper account of a material consideration. I understand the concerns that have been expressed about what might constitute a material consideration, but as I made clear to the committee, I want to avoid constraining the grounds on which a case can be called in by providing a tick-box list. I note the committee's practical and helpful suggestion that what constitutes a material consideration could be clarified in guidance. I hope that the committee will deal with that matter at stage 2, and I am happy to explore the idea of including the issue in guidance. We intend to produce guidance on the educational benefits statement, the proposal paper's content, the methods of consultation with children and young people—in which regard we will engage with the children's commissioner in particular—notification practices, the timing of public meetings and the call-in criteria for a material consideration. Bob Doris raised an important point about councils having entrenched views. The point of the  bill is to ensure that we have dialogue and responsiveness in consultations. He also raised the issue of pre-consultation guidance. However, Aileen Campbell mentioned the issue of rumours spreading when there is no proper consultation and a lack of information. The danger of a pre-consultation is that it would take place in a context in which there would not necessarily be robust information, which means that the danger of rumours spreading might be exacerbated. Ken Macintosh raised Consumer Focus Scotland's suggestion that we should have a 12-week timescale. We have already moved from 28 days to six weeks, which is a 50 per cent increase, on top of the period for the preparation of the consultation report. I accept the committee's advice that we should make sure that we consider such proposals. In its stage 1 report, the committee said: "The Committee believes, on balance, that the proposed six-week consultation period proposed in the Bill is sufficiently long, given the further periods for consideration built in to the overall process." There is an issue about prolonging the experience of school closure, which has also been raised. Elizabeth Smith and Claire Baker raised the important issue of accurate information. Those points were particularly well made. In relation to the proposal paper, it is vital that we ensure that, in any dispute that comes back to the issue of consultation being about a dialogue and responsiveness, any inaccuracies will be addressed as part of the process, as opposed to becoming what was described earlier as a year-long sore. Ken Macintosh and Elizabeth Smith also referred to financial arrangements. They might appreciate that I cannot second-guess any review of grant-aided expenditure. However, I emphasise that this Government has repeatedly shown that we are a Government for all of Scotland, and we have repeatedly delivered support for rural Scotland. Indeed, when we give special attention to rural Scotland, we are criticised for discriminating in favour of rural Scotland. It is an important point, however, and, as I said in evidence to the committee, I will ensure that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth is aware of those concerns. This debate has been about agreement to the principles of the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill, and has been ably informed by people's experiences. As I said to Malcolm Chisholm, the consultations that are currently under way can be informed by the transition arrangements that are set out in schedule 3 to the bill, which are designed to ensure that people and councils understand where they stand in relation to on-going consultations.  I thank those who have contributed to the debate today and I also thank the committee for its careful, thorough and constructive consideration of the bill at stage 1. The Scottish Government is committed to improving the standard of all school consultations—urban and rural—in partnership with local government. Additionally, we are committed to protecting our fragile rural and remote communities. Schools are often at the heart of such communities and, if closed, cannot easily be replaced by other public buildings. I emphasise again the economic value of jobs in rural communities and the importance of many schools in ensuring that there is support for the children of people who work in those jobs. I believe that our proposals will lead to coherent, fair and transparent consultations that will command the trust and confidence of the public. As MSPs, we all know the heartache that can be part and parcel of any school closure consultation. If we can bring to Parliament a bill that will relieve that pressure and pain and ensure that we have a robust, accessible and comprehensive system, I think that we will be serving our constituents well. I ask members to support the motion and agree to the general principles of the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill.

I would be happy to respond to any correspondence from the member regarding the case that she is talking about, although it is clearly an issue for the local council. I am not sure whether she is aware that I used the example of transport earlier in the debate. According to the proposed measures in the bill, if there are concerns about transportation for urban schools, they can be addressed in three separate steps. One involves HMIE and the question of educational benefit. Clearly, that aspect must be demonstrated in the inspectorate's report. There is also the role of the council in the proposal paper to consider. Furthermore, the council must directly respond, in the consultation report that it will have to produce under the bill, to the concerns of parents about transportation. I can give the member some reassurance that the proposals in the bill would address such issues directly for urban schools.

Claire Baker has highlighted a very important element of improving the system. Under the proposed process, any questioning of information will have to be addressed in the council's consultation report, which means that people will not have to wait a year to get final agreement. I know the particular case that she referred to; in fact, it informed the best practice that we are putting into legislation, and the council concerned realised that it should have paid more attention to the matter at an earlier stage. Perhaps that might have happened under the proposed extended dispute resolution processes.

The member made an interesting argument about calling it an educational analysis statement as opposed to an educational benefit statement. That cuts to the heart of the issue: there must be a proactive and positive statement of educational benefit. If the statement was just an educational analysis, all that it would provide would be pros and cons. We want to make councils work harder to demonstrate what the benefits would be. My counterargument is that, if we rolled back to having simply an educational analysis statement, that would pull back the position of parents who were trying to protect their schools.

That is an important part of the debate. Even under the current system, the transport issues that are associated with school closures are subject to scrutiny. As minister, I have had to consider cases in which one of the transport issues has been to do with underpasses in large towns. With any school closure, such issues will always be considered as part of HMIE's educational benefits statement. The difference with rural communities is that we are talking not about safety over a distance of only 1 or 2 miles, but over large distances. That is where the environmental factor comes in, given that a rural school closure would result in pupils having to travel long distances.

This is an important point. The committee convener stated that rural schools require special consideration. Does Ken Macintosh agree with that? If so, what should those special considerations be?

Will the member give way?

To clarify, there was not consensus on the consultation, but quite a polarised response. However, the compromise and new creative solution of ministerial call-in that we have come up with has had consensus approval.

I express my gratitude to Karen Whitefield and the other members of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee for their careful, thorough and constructive scrutiny of the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill and for preparing the stage 1 report. I also thank the many groups and individuals who provided evidence to the committee, as well as those who contributed to the earlier Scottish Government consultation. Throughout the consultation and drafting processes, we have worked hard to build a consensus with all those who are interested in school closures, and I am encouraged by the breadth of support for the bill. I am particularly encouraged by the fact that councils, which will be responsible for applying the new procedures, have been broadly supportive of the bill, as have the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland. Many others have also supplied their support, including Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education, the Scottish rural schools network, the Moray forum, the teaching unions, Scotland's Commissioner for Children and Young People, Children in Scotland, the Scottish Youth Parliament and Consumer Focus Scotland. The Government came to power with a clear commitment to create a legislative presumption against the closure of rural schools, in recognition of the specific challenges that Scotland's rural communities can face and of the role of many rural schools in providing the focal point for a whole community. A similar position was put forward by the Conservatives and was the subject of a member's bill proposal by Murdo Fraser. In addition, we are committed to improving the process for all school consultations. The current regulations date back to 1981 and have been amended several times, reflecting a very different era. Today, the public expects a more robust, thorough, fair and open consultation process.

Yes, I acknowledge that commitment. I am delighted that we now have record lows in class sizes and record lows in pupil-teacher ratios. Indeed, on my visits throughout the country, along with Keith Brown and Adam Ingram, I have seen and heard local authorities' commitment to make progress on that concordat commitment, as it is now. To achieve a legislative presumption, the bill aims to make a decision to close a rural school one of last resort—that is, a decision that can be made only once full consideration has been given to the full facts, including alternatives to closure, the impact of closure on the community and the effect of increased travel on pupils and staff as well as on the environment.

As the member will understand, the consultation to which he referred is a matter for the City of Edinburgh Council. He will note on page 19 of the bill and in schedule 3 the transitional arrangements for consultations that are in progress. Indeed, a number of local authorities have indicated that, as of now, they want to follow the best practice that is identified in the bill. Furthermore, bearing in mind the transitional arrangements and wanting to ensure that their decision making is carried out with due process, some local authorities are saying that they want to cover and embrace the new proposals in the bill. The bill requires councils to explain in their proposal paper how they undertook their consideration of whether to propose a closure. It will therefore be set out clearly at the start of the consultation period. In order to improve the consultation process that is required for all changes to schools, we decided to extend the bill to put in place a comprehensive consultation framework that will apply to all schools. By setting out the new requirements in legislation, we have underlined the importance to us as a Government of improving all consultations as well as providing clarity on how they should be carried out.  The main changes to the process are as follows: increasing the minimum statutory consultation period; extending the list of statutory consultees; introducing a transparent mechanism for dealing with allegations of inaccuracy in council proposal papers; setting out a formal role for HMIE in every consultation; and allowing additional time to enable a community to respond to a council's report before the final decision is taken. I recognise that there is good practice, but it is not universal. By way of the bill, we aim to build on existing good practice and create a robust, modern framework that will bring all consultations up to the standard of the best.

Indeed, yes. I refer the member to the bill. One proposal is for ministerial call-in: if a consultation process is not carried out properly, parents can refer the decision to ministerial call-in. As I have just outlined to Margo MacDonald, in order to support such improvement the bill removes the automatic referral of certain council decisions to ministers—I refer to referrals that can be made on the rather arbitrary grounds of occupancy or distance. The responses to the Government consultation showed clear consensus on the need for change, but views were polarised on what should replace referrals. Further consultation with all those with an interest helped us to identify an acceptable way forward: replacing ministerial referrals with a new power for ministers to call in certain decisions. The bill restricts call-in to closure decisions and only when there appear to be serious flaws in the consultation or decision-making processes. The intention is to enable local decisions to be made by those who are locally accountable and locally elected while providing a balanced and consistent check on the most contentious decisions, which are—as we all know—closures. The Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee deliberated carefully on the evidence that was submitted to it. I thank its members for their helpful and thoughtful stage 1 report. I am pleased that the committee expressed broad support for the aims of the bill and that it recognised the need for decision-making processes to be as widely understood and—importantly—as transparent as possible. That is a key aim of the bill. Let me turn to the report's conclusions and recommendations. The committee supports our intention to introduce statutory guidance on the contents of the educational benefits statement and  has recommended that the guidance is extended to cover the whole proposal paper. I recognise the value of that suggestion. In extending the guidance, we will address the committee recommendation to encourage councils to include other factors when relevant, such as the condition of a building. We will also consider how best to provide guidance to councils on how the cost implications of proposals should be illustrated in a proposal paper in a way that is both proportionate and easily understood. The committee also suggests that we give further thought to the practical issue of maximising engagement with consultees, and it supports the suggestion that I made in my evidence that we engage with the children's commissioner on consultation with pupils. I am happy to give an undertaking that we will take that forward and reflect it in our guidance. The committee asks the Government to note concerns in evidence about notification of the consultations, particularly the use of pupil post. I have noted those concerns and will consider how to address that point in guidance. Some wry smiles there—as a mother of three, I have some sympathy with that issue. Finally, the committee asks the Government to consider extending the time that councils have to notify it of closure decisions. I am willing to do so. I will respond in my closing remarks to the more contentious points raised in the report and in the course of the debate, but at this point I want to address the fundamental issue of rural schools. I note the committee's recommendation that the Scottish Government should give further consideration to extending to all schools the three additional rural factors set out in the bill. There are two important aspects to that: what we propose for rural school closure consultations—and why—and what we propose for all school consultations. It is important to recognise the different experiences of our rural communities. The closure of a rural school can mean that children have to travel many miles to an alternative school—in particularly remote rural areas, that can often mean travelling to another village. In turn, that can impact adversely on the viability of whole communities, as families with children are drawn to villages with schools. As I said in my evidence to the committee, at the launch of the bill in Dalwhinnie I was struck by the fact that nearly all of the pupils' parents worked on local estates. The gamekeepers there told me that, without the school, those estates would struggle to recruit. I know that such a situation is replicated throughout many parts of rural Scotland—there are many fragile rural areas in Scotland where the continued existence of the  village school is closely intertwined with the continued viability of the local economy. The Government recognises the importance of preserving and promoting a rural way of life. If the bill's rural provisions were to be extended to all schools, that would be to disregard the fragility of many rural communities and the proportionately greater impact that rural school closures can have on job opportunities, the local economy and the community.

It is important to recognise the strength of the improvements on consultation for all schools, including semi-rural schools with transport issues. The definition of rural schools follows the national classification as it currently stands. First, when transport is an issue, there is a case for HMIE to put that in its statement. Secondly, the local authority will need to address it in its proposal paper. There is even a third safeguard for all schools, which is that, if transport is an issue raised in the consultation, the council will have to respond in the consultation report. The fact that the safeguards that apply to rural schools are not extended to urban schools does not diminish the protection for urban schools. We recognise that decisions on urban schools are just as keenly felt within communities, which is why the bill sets out a clear and robust framework for all school consultations—rural and urban. All statutory consultations on changes to schools will be subject to a rigorous, robust and transparent process set out in law. The bill aims to ensure that all school consultations are open, transparent and fair; that all those with an interest have the opportunity to contribute to a meaningful consultation; and, most important, that we create a system that commands the trust of pupils, parents and staff. The bill recognises the need to preserve and support the unique and special nature of rural Scotland by ensuring that no rural school closure can be proposed until full consideration of all possible alternatives, the resulting impact on the community, and the resulting impact of changes to travel has taken place. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill.

We introduced the Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill to Parliament on 2 March and the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee published its stage 1 report last week. The bill will update and strengthen the consultation practices that local authorities apply to all proposals for major changes to schools, including closures.

The decision about South primary is clearly one for the local authority. As a minister, I have no involvement in that issue. A number of closures are currently the topic of media attention, not least the many schools that are being closed in Glasgow, which is an issue for Glasgow City Council. The publication of the bill shows the Government's determination to improve the consultation process and take on board the heartache and despair that many parents feel at school closures. Difficult decisions may still need to be made, but they will be made with full and good consultation to ensure that parents' views are heard properly.

Councils will remain responsible for taking democratic decisions on school closures. The Government will improve the legislation to ensure that consultations are full and fair.

The Government is supporting local authorities in their responsibility to replace school buildings. Yesterday, I announced a new national programme of additional Government support for the building of new schools across Scotland. In addition to the £2 billion that is already being provided for school buildings, we will provide up to two thirds funding support for a £1.25 billion school building programme. Our £800 million is in addition to the record funding that is already set out in the local government settlement. The 55 schools that will be built will be in addition to the 250 schools that we and our local government partners are already committed to delivering by 2011. The 35,000 pupils who will benefit will be in addition to the 100,000 who will benefit from those 250 schools. I expect that all local authorities will share in the benefits of the new funding. We will work with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the Scottish Futures Trust to identify which will benefit first. Decisions on investment priorities and commissioning of Glasgow schools—from the £2 billion of capital funds that are already being provided to authorities, from Glasgow's continued share of capital funding that is provided through local government allocations or from the newly announced funding—will remain matters for Glasgow City Council.

It will be possible to start building the first primary school in 2010. Glasgow can already proceed with building new schools. I understand that the capital support that it will receive from the Government in the period 2008 to 2010 is £400 million. Although £228 million is ring fenced, mostly for housing, and a further £18 million is allocated to flood prevention schemes, £158 million is available in those two years to Glasgow City Council for investment in infrastructure, according to its priorities. It is up to the council to invest that money in schools in the east end, if it so chooses. If Margaret Curran has concerns about the ability of Glasgow City Council to make such decisions, I will be more than happy to make representations to it on her behalf.

I have had the opportunity to meet a number of parents from the Glasgow schools to which Anne McLaughlin refers, and they expressed to me their concerns about the issue that she has highlighted. The First Minister agreed previously in the chamber to meet parents from the schools that it is proposed will be closed. There are concerns about the issues that the member raises, but we must respect the ability of councils to take decisions, whether we like them or not. Glasgow City Council has made its decisions and must take responsibility for them. I sincerely hope that it will support parents on health and safety and transport issues. The member is right to raise such concerns but, as she knows, they are a responsibility of Glasgow City Council.

Ken Macintosh may be aware that we have already ensured an acceleration of capital from 2010-11, which has been done to help during the present economic situation. Money has been brought forward to 2009-10 and is benefiting a number of schools. Indeed, the Isobel Mair school in East Renfrewshire has benefited.  The acceleration of capital will give Glasgow City Council the opportunity to bring forward any plans that it may have. Obviously, if the council wants to take part in the scheme that we announced yesterday, it can propose plans. Other local authorities are already making representations and have already spoken to the Scottish Futures Trust, and the door is open for Glasgow City Council to make representations.

We published the report from the apprenticeship summit on 5 June, and I have already implemented some of the recommendations contained in the report. On 10 June, I announced ScotAction, which is an integrated skills package combining new and improved measures that offer skills assistance—including wage subsidies in some cases—to help individuals and businesses through this recession. The first phase of ScotAction was the adopt an apprentice scheme that I announced last week. That scheme gives employers up to £2,000 to take on a redundant apprentice and let them continue their training. Earlier this week, I announced that we would double the number of hospitality apprenticeships by funding 300 adult apprenticeships in that sector. That is in addition to funding 200 all-age apprenticeships in professional cookery that were announced in April. Only this morning, I announced 1,250 apprenticeships for health and social care and will make further announcements in the next few days.

I thank John Park for his question—it is just a pity that Labour did not manage to support the budget the first time around, when funding was available for apprenticeships. However, we got there in the end, and I am very keen about the support that we have received from Labour for the programme. In a number of areas, very constructive recommendations and advice have come from Labour, and from John Park in particular. John Park raises an important point about management and leadership, and we will certainly consider the situation with regard to modern apprenticeships. An issue that came out of the apprenticeship summit—it has increasingly been a theme with sector skills councils and others—was the importance of embedding skills utilisation and capacity in management and leadership, not just in a stand-alone qualification, but across all the different sectors. To get ourselves through the recession and into recovery, we will have to mobilise the skills and abilities of everybody in every sector. We will therefore be considering a review of the content of all qualifications, to ensure that the capacity for management and leadership, and for skills utilisation, is embedded in all of them.

I will certainly ask the minister to reply as promptly as he can to the correspondence. A key focus of our attention—and of representations that we have received—is the need for us to ensure that any support and subsidy is directed towards maintaining skills in  the economy. At this time, that is especially important in construction. The ability to take on an apprentice and attract the £2,000 subsidy can make a key difference. Indeed, the employer that I met who had signed up the first redundant apprentice under the scheme last week was grateful for it. MSPs across the parties have a responsibility to publicise the availability of the support to their constituents and local businesses in order to help to ensure that redundant apprentices, particularly young people and those who have been made redundant in their third and fourth years, can complete their apprenticeships. The £2,000 one-off payment can help them to do that.

The most recent statistics on drop-out rates among full-time first-degree students were released by the Higher Education Statistics Agency on 4 June 2009. Although there is still more to be done, we welcome the fact that the figures show an improvement in completion rates over the past five years, with the rate of students not continuing their studies reducing from 10.7 per cent to 9 per cent.

I understand that a number of institutions, including the Glasgow School of Art, Edinburgh College of Art and the University of Abertay Dundee have, in benchmarking, better rates than others, so obviously lessons can be learned. It is important to reflect that some of the figures are affected by the fact that, although colleges deliver a large part of higher education provision in Scotland, their provision of first-degree-level studies is comparatively low. However, I acknowledge that there is a big issue and that the approach must be not only about recruitment, but about retention and support for students once they are in—particularly in their first year. That is one reason why I have written to the spokespeople of other parties on their proposals for a £7,000 support package for students, which Pauline McNeill mentioned. There are issues about the calculations, so I have asked for clarification of how the figures were calculated, with a view to a meeting later in the summer to discuss whether we can make progress on anything in the proposals.

Last year we pledged that we would announce the next part of our school building programme to take forward major new capital investment in schools through the Scottish Futures Trust. I can make that announcement today. It is the right of every pupil to be educated in a good-quality school that is fit for purpose. I can report that this Government is providing funding that has already helped to lift 50,000 pupils out of poor-quality buildings and that council school building programmes are on track to lift another 50,000 out of poor-quality school buildings by 2011. [ Applause. ] With our local government partners we are addressing the legacy of underinvestment during the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s, when schools were being replaced at an unsustainably low rate. The previous Administration addressed the situation by supporting the new build or refurbishment of around 320 schools in the first eight years of devolution. The current Administration is providing financial support for 250 new or refurbished schools in the current four-year session. [ Applause. ] Today, I can announce our next steps towards improving school buildings. In addition to the capital funding that goes to local authorities to support school buildings, the next phase in our drive to improve Scotland's school buildings will be a new, £1.25 billion national programme to build new schools across Scotland, delivered in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and local authorities through the Scottish Futures Trust. [ Applause. ]

The new school building programme will be managed and supported by the SFT, with work beginning as early as next year.  In addition to the record funding already set out in the local government settlement, the Scottish Government will provide almost two thirds of the overall funding support, or £800 million, towards this £1.25 billion school building programme. Government funding will initially be provided as direct capital grants, but comparable revenue funding to support off-balance-sheet schemes to the same value will be an option where appropriate. We said that we would match the previous Administration's school building programme brick for brick and we are doing that—and more. Under its partnership agreement, the previous Administration promised to renew 100 schools between the end of 2006 and 2009. Not only have we matched those commitments, but we have already exceeded them. Councils have completed well over 150 school rebuilding or refurbishment projects since May 2007. With this Scottish National Party Government supporting £2 billion of capital investment in schools alone, at least 250 new or refurbished schools will be delivered by 2011. Now we will go even further. Our new £1.25 billion school building programme will support authorities in building around 55 new schools—approximately half of which will be secondaries and half primaries. That will see up to 35,000 pupils benefiting from being educated in brand new, state-of-the-art classrooms. Let me be clear: this new building programme will be in addition to the capital allocation that will be made to councils as part of the normal annual budgetary process, with those new resources adding to the maintenance of local authorities' share of the overall capital budget. That is what COSLA and the councils have been asking for: additional funding to support the school building programme. That is what we are responding to and delivering. All told, the investment will also boost economic activity by continuing to support tens of thousands of construction jobs across the country, helping families and communities and contributing to economic recovery. The school building programme will be taken forward in partnership with COSLA and councils. The concordat already commits the Government and COSLA to doing what is required to enhance learning experiences for children and young people by improving the fabric of schools and nurseries. In partnership with COSLA, we accepted all the recommendations of Audit Scotland's March 2008 report, "Improving the school estate". We have also worked closely with the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland, the Society of  Local Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers and the Scottish Futures Trust, on a new school estate strategy. On our taking office in 2007, there were around 260,000 pupils in poor classroom accommodation—category C or D schools. By 2011, that figure should be down to around 100,000. I pay tribute to the focus of councils and to their investment decisions that will help to achieve that. With today's announcement, the figure will then drop by another third to around 65,000. When we publish the new school estate strategy jointly with COSLA in September, we will be setting out a long-term ambition to wipe out poor school accommodation altogether. Since May 2007, this Government has signed off eight local authority public-private partnership/non-profit-distributing projects involving 49 schools and we have substantially increased the overall capital resources available to authorities. Funding the full programme of 30 such projects means that this Government is having to find around £60 million more per annum than was included in the funding baselines inherited from the previous Administration. We honoured those payments to ensure that all the schools in the pipeline went ahead. Such behaviour is the hallmark of the Government. We said that we would match the previous Administration's commitments brick for brick and we have done so. We have gone further. In total, local authority capital funding will amount to £2 billion over the two-year period from 2008 to 2010. In 2008-09, that represents £82 million, which is 9.5 per cent more than in 2007-08, and the 2009-10 figure is £99 million, which is 10.5 per cent higher than that in 2008-09. I am pleased that schools and communities throughout the country are already benefiting from accelerated capital investment in education of about £75 million. That investment was brought forward as the result of an agreement with COSLA that councils could accelerate capital expenditure from 2010-11 to this year. For example, South Lanarkshire Council has advanced the building of the new Udston primary, which will open a whole year earlier; North Lanarkshire Council has accelerated the construction of three schools and a nursery; and East Renfrewshire Council will commence the replacement of Isobel Mair school early. Today, we set out the Government's long-term commitment to the school building programme. The new £1.25 billion school building programme will be similar in scale and impact to the Government's other major capital projects—the Forth replacement crossing and the new Southern general hospital in Glasgow. As with those projects, we are making a clear and unambiguous  statement about our future intent: our absolute long-term commitment to work with our local government partners in the interests of all those who benefit from good-quality schools—particularly children, young people and communities. A new secondary school can cost anything from £20 million to more than £40 million. That represents the single biggest capital investment that some councils ever make. I am mindful of the number of primary schools that are needed but, as their cost is roughly a quarter of that of secondary schools, they present rather less of an affordability challenge for councils. The bulk—almost 90 per cent—of our new funding will therefore be focused on supporting the construction costs of new secondary schools. We will provide two thirds of the costs of new secondary schools and authorities will require to fund one third. We will support the primary school element of the programme on a 50:50 basis, so authorities will be able to fund two primaries at the cost of just one. The new funding will bring the costs to authorities of replacing the secondary schools that most urgently need to be replaced down to more manageable proportions. It will also help them to accelerate further their primary school replacement programmes. I am conscious that the needs of secondary schools that require urgent replacement—from Lasswade high school in the Lothians to Wick high school in the north, Dumbarton academy in the west and others in between—have been raised often in Parliament. After discussions with COSLA and the SFT, I will be in a position to announce in September which authorities will benefit from the first tranche of secondary schools and to announce by the end of the year those that will benefit from the first tranche of primary schools. Councils will of course decide which schools to replace, but our intention is that councils with the most urgent needs—on the basis of the regularly-collected national statistics—should benefit first. We expect the first phase to be funded through direct capital investment, to allow construction to start on the buildings that most require attention as soon as possible. Through the SFT, different funding models—including the non-profit-distributing model—will be an option for later phases. We are asking the Scottish Futures Trust to provide advice on that. We and the SFT will also discuss funding options with COSLA and the authorities.

One key feature of maximising value from the programme will be encouraging the fullest co-operation between all the partners: COSLA, the councils, the SFT and the Scottish Government. Angus Council, East Renfrewshire Council and Midlothian Council are in the vanguard of that, as they have come together to share best practice and to design a common approach to the school building programme with the SFT. That proves how we can deliver more value from the investment. I thank those three local authorities for participating with such commitment in the development of the model that we are taking forward. Their work will underpin the first announcements that we will make in September. We have made it clear that we have set up the Scottish Futures Trust to maximise value for money from infrastructure investment and to act as a focal point for developing and applying good practice in procuring public infrastructure. The SFT will, therefore, play a central role in co-ordinating, facilitating and managing the new school building programme, working alongside COSLA and councils, whose detailed local knowledge and expertise will be crucial to achieving successful outcomes. We will look to the SFT to develop, recommend and implement approaches that will secure a better school building programme across Scotland and better value for money than could be achieved by each authority working separately. That is precisely what the SFT was set up to do. Under the Government's Scottish Futures Trust, we will work with COSLA and local authorities to ensure that every pound spent delivers as much public benefit as possible in Scotland as a whole. Instead of each local authority having to reinvent the wheel—instead of duplicating design and other costs—the SFT will enable us to deliver more for less. Because it is involved, we will deliver more schools for taxpayers' money. The Government has already supported local authorities in delivering more than 150 school building projects. By 2011, the figure will stand at 250. Now we are going further. The new school building programme, with the significant input of Government funding that I have announced, will come on stream next year. The first bricks could be laid in more new schools in communities up and down the land. All of that will be over and above the capital investment that will arm councils with the funding that they need to take forward their own school building programmes. Working with COSLA and local authorities, we can deliver better school accommodation the length and breadth of Scotland and take the next steps towards ensuring that Scotland's children are taught in quality classrooms, providing a 21 st century environment in which improved learning  and teaching, through the curriculum for excellence, can equip them not just to survive but to thrive in 21 st century society.

I do not think that a £1.25 billion school building programme is "woefully thin". I do  not think that a £2 billion investment in school building—under the current Administration—is "woefully thin". I have in front of me a letter about West Lothian schools from Mary Mulligan that was sent out to voters during the 2007 election campaign. She said: "The SNP have committed to scrapping plans for the new Armadale Academy and all future investment in West Lothian's school buildings." I was indeed at St Kentigern's academy this morning, and I saw the refurbishment there—that was not scrapped. I also note the go-ahead by the local council, in January and March 2008, for £59 million of investment in schools in West Lothian. Furthermore, Armadale academy is being built by an SNP council in West Lothian, supported by funding from an SNP Scottish Administration. Dare I say, perhaps the interests of the pupils of Lasswade would be best served if the constituency member approached the local authority to take part in this wonderful opportunity to take forward a £1.25 billion school building programme.

I remind the member that the current £2 billion-worth of investment is not just achieving a better working and learning environment for our young people, but supporting the construction industry. It is important to reflect that, even according to today's figures for the year to March 2009, employment in the construction industry in Scotland rose by 1.4 per cent. Clearly, the construction industry is under some pressure,  particularly in private house building, so not only investment in schools, but the Government's investment of £2 billion to local government over the period from 2008 to 2010 alone is providing support for capital infrastructure. It has been vital to keep that investment going, and that is why I refer to the accelerated investment, with £75 million brought forward to support construction jobs. The SFT most certainly will provide better value for money. Judging from the references that have been made, some of the provisions that were made by previous Administrations were woeful. Labour is now in a minority of one that thinks that PPP and the private finance initiative deliver best value for money. In fact, we need only consider the fiasco in England to see the reality of PFI. Far from the risk being transferred from the public sector to the private sector, the Treasury is having to bail out PFI schemes to the tune of £2 billion this year alone. The involvement of the SFT in managing and facilitating the programme, and bringing together different local authorities, will provide better value for money. That will ensure that the lessons are learned across the country. Today, we should be celebrating the opportunity for young people to work in the 21 st century schools that they deserve. The Administration has made progress; today, we are announcing our next steps.

We must reflect on Audit Scotland's report, "Improving the school estate", which was published in March 2008. We accepted all the recommendations in the report. It was clear that Audit Scotland thought that we must take a long-term, strategic view of school building projects in Scotland. As I said, the Government is supporting local authorities with £2 billion of capital investment. £1 billion is coming through support from national schemes and an additional £1 billion will come through the capital programme, which is supported by the Government. The £100 million from the schools fund has been put into local Government settlement. On top of that, we had to find another £60 million a year, to make up a shortfall on bills that the previous Administration had not paid. We have taken our responsibilities seriously. Not only have we marshalled projects that were in the pipeline during the previous Administration, and not only have we ensured that there are sufficient resources to build 250 schools during the current Administration, but we have ensured that we have plans for the future, so that there is a pipeline of school projects, to secure the jobs that Murdo Fraser talked about. We have kept up the momentum. We are still building schools. On timeframes, it is proposed that councils that have the most urgent needs will be dealt with first. We expect the first primary school to be open by 2011 and the first secondary school to be open by 2013.

We will include in the programme authorities that have been identified by the national assessment as being in most need. In particular, the categories—members will be familiar with the categories of schools—will help to direct our answers. Local authorities that have been in the vanguard of considering how the SFT can add value might want to ensure that they are included in the programme. It is important to remember that the SFT is already supporting a number of local authority school building programmes.

We respect local government. It will be for councils themselves to determine which schools will be in the programme, but we will decide which local authorities will be in the first tranche. With respect, I say to Ken Macintosh that pupils and parents do not care about the timescales for elections; they want new schools to be built. [ Interruption. ]

The investment that we are providing to local government is already producing new schools. I mentioned Isobel Mair school in East Renfrewshire; the building for that has been brought forward from 2010-11 because we have managed to accelerate capital. We do not micromanage local government, so local authorities will determine which schools go forward for the programme. We have provided the funding for that programme to progress. Perhaps, instead of focusing his attention on the Government, Ken Macintosh could approach East Renfrewshire Council to find out its timescale for deciding what schools, if any, it wants to propose  to take part in the £1.25 billion school building programme.

Christina McKelvie raises an important point about the design of schools. We will work with Architecture and Design Scotland, the Carbon Trust and others to ensure not only that the designs are appropriate for modern-day learning in a 21 st century environment but that they are energy efficient, which is essential to ensure that they contribute to the climate change challenges that lie ahead. It is appropriate and important to involve the pupils themselves in the design to ensure that we get quality results. I have visited and, indeed, opened a number of schools that have been started since this Administration came to power. The architecture that could be delivered by listening to the pupils and teachers in those schools delivers results. I expect the SFT to draw on that talent, experience and expertise.

The initial funding will be by direct capital. We will examine other not-for-profit processes in future to get value out of the system, but direct capital investment is the quickest way to ensure that we get the investment that we need. I heard Andy Kerr say sorry. I am not sure whether that was the first time that I have heard him say that or whether it will be the last time that I hear it, but he might want to say sorry to the  taxpayers for Hairmyres PFI hospital. Evidence to the Finance Committee revealed that an investment of only £8.4 million by financiers is projected to provide a return of £145 million. We do not have to look far to see the flaws of the PFI model. Perhaps the taxpayers of Scotland would prefer not to go shopping with Mr Kerr any more but to look to this Government to implement responsible and prudent financial arrangements for school building programmes.

Elizabeth Smith raises an important point. I talked about the category C or D schools about which we have concerns. There have been concerns about the surveys and pieces of research that have been undertaken to establish those categories. Indeed, local authorities have re-examined many of them over the past two years. I do not particularly want to name any schools because I do not want to prejudge what the councils themselves will determine once we have determined which authorities have the secondary and primary schools that are most in need. However, there is currently only one category D secondary school in Scotland—Lasswade high school centre. I have visited that school, so I realise the need that exists there. I hope that Midlothian Council will have the opportunity to make an application in that case, but I do not want to prejudge a matter that is for the council. I hope that I have given the member some idea of how we will ensure that the schools that are most in need and that have an impact on the greatest number of children—some 35,000 in total—can benefit from the programme.

The funding will start from 2010-11 and continue to 2017-18. The first schools to be built will be primary schools in 2011, and secondary schools will be built in 2013. That is on top of the 250 schools that will be built by 2011. Yes, we have been in discussion with COSLA. I point out that, funnily enough, the £800 million that we propose to invest in the schools building programme equates to the £800 million in cuts that the Lib Dems proposed for the Scottish budget. Therefore, perhaps local authorities will have less difficulty in finding the £450 million to support the programme, given that they are finding £1 billion in the current local government settlement. Margaret Smith might want to reflect on the situation over the piece: 320 schools were built in the first eight years of the previous Administration; 250 schools will be built over the first four years of this Administration and, going forward, an additional number of schools will be built to replace the worst school buildings that need the most attention. That is the provision that we are making through our £1.25 billion school building programme.

Quite clearly, capital investment for local authorities is already supporting such capital projects. As I said when asked earlier about the schools fund, the local government settlement includes provision to ensure that the £2 billion of capital infrastructure for 2008 to 2010 helps to support any capital investment that is required to support class size reduction. That money will certainly support local authorities. In planning for the primary estate, which accounts for 50 per cent of the schools affected, schools will be designed with a view to ensuring that the classrooms can facilitate smaller class sizes, particularly in the early years.

I remind the member that closure decisions are for local authorities. If she is astounded that any council would move pupils out of one category to conditions that are worse than those in the previous school, she should perhaps reflect on whether that shows the priority—or lack of priority—that Glasgow City Council places on its education budget. Why is it that in neighbouring authority areas such as North Lanarkshire and South Lanarkshire we have large-scale investment in schools that is funded and supported by this Government, not—as Andy Kerr claims—through PPP? Given that that is the case, why does Glasgow City Council say that it has only £5 million available for school building projects? At the end of the day, politics is about priorities. This SNP Government is supporting schools and school education. If the member wants to pursue the lack of priority that Labour-run Glasgow City Council attaches to education, she is in the wrong chamber.

I can confirm that the money that I have announced will be additional to the local government settlement. It is important to repeat that this Government has set out three major capital infrastructure projects, which represent a strategic investment in our future: the Forth replacement crossing, the Glasgow Southern general hospital and the school estate  programme. In doing so, it has provided a vision and a strategy, which the Audit Scotland report that was published in March last year called for. Local authorities across the country might want to reflect maturely not only on the use of money that has already been provided but on the proposals and promises that have been made about taking funding forward.

My understanding is that West Dunbartonshire Council has recently had meetings with local parents about where the new Dumbarton academy will be sited. I also understand that the council has had initial discussions with the SFT. I am not in a position to make decisions for the council, but I have every confidence that it will make the right decisions for pupils in its area. If the member wants to trade numbers on delivery in the school estate, I can tell her that the rates of progress show that 0.76 schools a week were delivered in the first eight years of devolution, whereas 1.2 schools a week have been delivered during the present four years of devolution. [ Interruption. ]

Can Opposition members not acknowledge that it is about time that we stopped trading statistics on school buildings on a ping-pong basis, year in, year out? We must start to treat the improvement of our school estate as a major infrastructure project for this country. As stewards of this Parliament's funding, we have a responsibility to ensure that we make not just decisions for this year or the year after but strategic decisions. I have made a major infrastructure announcement, and I hope that members will treat it as such.

I can confirm that our initial proposals are for direct capital funding, but over the piece we will be able to take forward other methods of funding, including the non-profit-distributing method in particular. Issues such as what is off balance sheet can be developed as we move forward. The member will be aware that the advice and guidance from the Treasury on how major infrastructure programmes could be dealt with, given the change to international financial reporting standards accounting by the end of March, came through only on 28 April, which is very late indeed. However, there is no delay in any proposal, which is why we can confirm that we will support the first tranche of schools using a direct capital funding method.

I am delighted that City of Edinburgh Council is taking forward its proposals for Portobello school. If the member describes £1.25 billion as cuts, she and I must live in parallel universes. If we are talking about priorities for Edinburgh, perhaps Sarah Boyack and other members might reflect on the fact that the £500 million spent on tram works would have built those schools. Politics is about choices, and we are putting our commitment to education first.

It is important that we reflect on how we are managing to reduce in particular the number of secondary pupils in poor accommodation—I know that the member has an interest in that in his constituency. Fifty new schools, half of which will be secondaries, is a major improvement. The member will know the experience of Aberdeenshire Council—perhaps  there have been long years of neglect. Many local authorities have refurbished all their secondaries. I visited St Kentigern's academy, which will be part of West Lothian's completion of all of its secondaries. Some of the responsibility lies with the progress—or lack of it—by Aberdeenshire Council in recent years. Again, that comes down to political choices. We are providing the opportunity. A number of schools in Aberdeenshire need support, and I would anticipate—although I cannot predict—that some of those schools will be part of the first tranche.

I would invite Glasgow City Council to engage with the Government, COSLA and SFT to identify whether any of the council's proposals are going forward. I repeat that the previous Administration delivered 0.76 schools a week; under this Administration, it is 1.2 schools a week. Perhaps Margaret Curran is not aware that we are currently in a recession. Public finances from the Westminster Government look extremely worrying for all concerned. In the days when Margaret Curran was a minister, the allocation under devolution far exceeded anything that we have now or might anticipate in future. The fact that the Government is prepared to put on the table investment for the future in those difficult circumstances shows the importance that we give to education. In such tight financial circumstances, I would have thought that members of all parties would welcome today's announcement.

I said that the schools estate strategy would be published in September; at the moment, it is nearing its final draft. It is not unreasonable for local government partners to want to identify the financial support that we are prepared to provide for taking the strategy forward. Had the member read the Audit Scotland report, she would know that that is exactly what the report recommended—and we have accepted all 19 of its recommendations. Perhaps the member can accept that today's announcement of £1.25 billion for the school building programme is good news for Scotland.

National qualifications are one of three key strands of work in implementing the curriculum for excellence. The other areas are curriculum guidance, which has now been published, and assessment policy, which will be published in the summer. This package of measures will enable our education system to provide improved learning and teaching for our children and young people. After decades of piecemeal reform and separate initiatives, we now have comprehensive reform from age three to age 18. Our children and young people will now benefit from a more rounded education from the early years through to sixth year, with a greater emphasis on developing skills for learning, life and work; a more sustained focus on developing literacy and numeracy skills and an active, healthy lifestyle; and more motivating and challenging learning that promotes breadth and depth of knowledge and understanding to last a lifetime, not just for the next test. Over the past few weeks, thousands of our young people and adult learners have been sitting exams for the current suite of national qualifications. I am sure that Parliament will join me in wishing all the candidates success. We need to ensure that future qualifications reflect and support the curriculum for excellence. Our proposals for the next generation of national qualifications will retain the strengths of the current arrangements while addressing some long-standing issues. In particular, we will reduce overassessment, so that there is more time for quality learning and teaching; we will give more professional autonomy to teachers to raise standards of learning and teaching; and we will reduce the current complexity in the qualifications system to make it more streamlined and understandable for parents and employers and to ensure that qualifications relate directly to the world-leading Scottish credit and qualifications framework. Following the public consultation, the curriculum for excellence management board has provided its advice on the best way forward for qualifications. The management board's membership includes  representatives from local authorities, the main teaching unions, Scotland's Colleges, the General Teaching Council for Scotland, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education, the Scottish Qualifications Authority, Learning and Teaching Scotland and Skills Development Scotland. The management board brings together knowledge and experience from across Scotland's education system. Its members know what works well and what needs to be improved, and I am very grateful to them for their work. I wish to announce my decisions on three main issues: first, the review of national qualifications at access, higher and advanced higher levels; secondly, the introduction of national 4 and national 5, the new qualifications that will replace the present standard grade and intermediate qualifications; and thirdly, the development of national literacy and national numeracy awards. First, on the review of national qualifications, the consultation has shown that access, higher and advanced higher qualifications are key strengths of our existing system. They will be retained, and we will build upon them by updating them to reflect the values, purposes and principles of the curriculum for excellence. Secondly, on the new qualifications to replace standard grade and intermediate qualifications at levels 4 and 5 on the Scottish credit and qualifications framework, national 4 and national 5 will be designed to support learning through the revised curriculum and increase the focus on skills development. They will be available in the suite of individual subject areas—for example, people will be able to gain national history 4 or national maths 5 qualifications. The new qualifications will be unit-based to ensure consistency with other national qualifications. National 4 courses will be assessed by teaching staff, primarily through a course assessment, and will be quality assured by the SQA. The qualification will not be graded, and will therefore free up more time for learning and teaching. National 5 courses will be a combination of course assessment assessed by teaching staff and quality assured by the SQA, and an exam or other external assessment by the SQA. The national 5 qualification will be graded to help learners to progress to higher qualifications, other areas of learning and employment. National 4 and national 5 will be designed to be delivered flexibly. Study for the new qualifications will generally begin in secondary 4, with flexibility to take greater account of prior learning than has been the case in the past. Pupils should be able to take up to eight subjects in fourth year, as is currently the case. There will also be an  opportunity for schools to provide for the most able pupils to bypass national 4 and national 5 and begin studying for some highers in S4. National 4, national 5 and revised access, higher and advanced higher qualifications will be available from term 2013-14 onwards. That will ensure that the pupils who experience the new curriculum in secondary school from their first year onwards can progress smoothly on to a revised set of qualifications. Those pupils are currently preparing to leave primary 6. The new national literacy and numeracy awards will be available to young people from third year onwards. It is expected that young people will be presented for the qualifications at some point before they leave school. That will give pupils the chance to achieve the qualifications when they are ready and it will give schools greater flexibility in their planning. The awards are intended to recognise the attributes that will be needed for later study or employment. The content of the qualifications will be based on the experiences and outcomes for literacy and numeracy in the curriculum for excellence. It is clear that Scotland faces a pressing need to improve literacy and numeracy skills among the wider adult population. That is why we want to encourage uptake of the new qualifications by adult learners. The national literacy and numeracy awards will be based on a portfolio of work that is drawn from across the revised curriculum or other aspects of learning, life and work. That will benefit individuals and Scotland's economy in general. Initially, the qualifications will involve external marking by the SQA. The intention is to reduce the amount of external marking that is required when national standards have been widely shared, understood and verified. The national literacy and numeracy awards will be achievable at SCQF levels 3, 4 and 5 and will profile an individual's skills rather than grade them. The recognition of the new qualifications in the SCQF will help to promote their value to employers and others. We intend to make national literacy and numeracy awards available from 2012-13. That will ensure that the first pupils to experience learning and teaching through the revised curriculum—those who are currently coming to the end of primary 6—will have the opportunity to achieve the new qualifications from S3 onwards. The SQA will work with partners to agree the precise timing and details of implementation. The literacy and numeracy qualifications are part of our series of actions to improve literacy and numeracy skills. For example, for the first time, we have given all teaching staff professional responsibility for promoting literacy and numeracy skills at every stage of education. The early years  framework makes it clear that we are committed to tackling barriers to achievement through early intervention, and smaller class sizes in the formative years will help teaching staff to embed literacy and numeracy skills. Later in the summer, we will publish details of the third strand of the curriculum for excellence, on assessment, which will be informed by the advice of the curriculum for excellence management board. We will publish a policy statement that sets out the key elements of our proposals to support assessment in the curriculum for excellence. It will specify national standards and state what learners are expected to achieve as they progress through the curriculum. We will also publish an assessment framework that gives more detailed advice. It will include guidance on an external moderation process to support teachers in making their judgments, and it will ensure that breadth and depth of learning are assessed consistently against the national standards. There will also be a refocused Scottish survey of achievement to assess literacy and numeracy. The SQA and its partners will ensure that the new and revised qualifications have rigorous assessment and quality assurance systems that are supported by continuous professional development. My announcement today sets out a clear direction for our qualifications system. Of course, the precise details of the new arrangements will follow. I am pleased that the curriculum for excellence management board and the SQA will continue to work together to focus on practical implementation and consider how best to meet learners' needs. We are giving teachers more professional autonomy in order to raise standards of learning and teaching. At the same time, we are reducing the complexity of the qualifications system to make it more streamlined and understandable for parents and employers. The next generation of national qualifications will raise standards, improve learning for pupils and reflect curriculum reform. Most important, the qualifications will equip Scotland's young people and adult learners with the skills for learning, life and work, and the knowledge and understanding, that they will need to rise to the challenges of 21 st century society.

I would expect the future of national qualifications for this country to be treated with more respect and not to be used by any party as the subject of a party-political broadcast. It was important for members to listen to the statement that I have just made, which covered the qualifications period from S3 onwards. The question was about the policy for assessing literacy and numeracy, which formed part of the curriculum for excellence guidelines that were published in April. I said quite clearly in my statement that that will be part of the detailed assessment policy that will be published over the summer. In response to some of the questions that I think the member asked, I say that the national literacy and numeracy awards at levels 3, 4 and 5 will be externally assessed. If she thinks that external assessment by the SQA, which is carried out, by and large, by teachers who work in the field, is somehow wishy-washy or not worthy of respect, she is letting down the teaching profession, members of which are playing an increasing role in SQA marking. I cannot emphasise enough that, for the first time, the new curriculum for excellence allows literacy and numeracy to be the responsibility of each and every teacher. The focus on literacy and numeracy is a key aspect of the curriculum for excellence experiences and outcomes, a copy of which I would be more than happy to send to the member, if she has not already read them. It is essential that we get a grip on the issue. If the member wants to reflect on the achievements of children in primary 7, she would do well to  remember that, for the first five years of their education, those children were not educated under this Administration. I appeal to all members to take seriously our responsibility to think about how we plan national qualifications not just for this parliamentary session, but for the next parliamentary session and beyond. Given that we are talking about creating a qualifications system for the future, the discussion should not be reduced to party-political backbiting.

There were a number of questions there. It is clear that external assessment means external assessment by the SQA. That was clear from my statement.  There were initial concerns among members of the teaching profession that internal assessment would lead to overburdening in a variety of qualifications. For example, national 4 will be internally assessed. People want confidence, and we have seen from consultation that the national literacy and numeracy awards have been warmly welcomed by parents, pupils and business. The external verification assessment that the SQA can provide will give people confidence. Once we have attained the necessary standards and abilities, I would like us to move towards internal assessment. However, that will not happen immediately. Having a variety of SCQF levels at standard and intermediate grade has created a complex system, but having a national 4 and a national 5 will certainly simplify things. Tomorrow, I will visit Forth Valley College, which single-handedly will be supporting more than 60 baccalaureate projects in science. Elizabeth Smith will know from earlier comments that we are considering expanding the baccalaureate into the arts and social sciences, such is the interest. We are retaining highers and advanced highers. I also make clear to members that more pupils than before are taking highers and advanced highers in a range of subjects. There is more choice and more availability, and we are in a strong position. Our responsibility is to ensure that that strong position is maintained in future.

I will try to address those questions. We promised that we would set out the qualifications framework before the end of this school term, before the summer holidays, but students have been sitting exams, so it was important not to make announcements while they were doing so. However, we will clearly return to the issue, as Margaret Smith has suggested. The views that came out of the consultation were polarised. We have tried to take on board not only the comments from the teaching profession but the comments from people in the wider community and from young people, particularly on national literacy and numeracy awards. As far as grading is concerned, the teaching profession produced some strong arguments for having no gradings at all at national 4 and national 5. I have taken the view that it is important that grades are provided, particularly for national 5, as that will help progression and will help employers to understand the qualifications. It will also help colleges and universities to identify the different levels that people have achieved. Having steered a route through this, we have determined that national 4 will be ungraded but that national 5 will be graded.

I return to a point that Margaret Smith made. A dialogue currently takes place between pupils, parents and schools about the different levels and courses that pupils will take. Yes, it will be possible to take national 4 and national 5 in combination. For example, a pupil may want to take history at national 4 but maths at national 5. Ensuring that we have a qualifications system that is responsive to the needs of  individuals is an important part of the whole direction in which we are heading with the curriculum for excellence.

A lot of the operational issues around timetabling and common classes that Ken Macintosh is talking about will be addressed in the discussions with teachers and schools to ensure that individual schools are able to respond to the particular needs of their pupils. A big theme in not only the curriculum for excellence but our lifelong learning skills strategy is the ability to progress from one level to another. Part of that will be about ensuring that pupils have the opportunity to study at the level at which they want to study while still being able to take things forward. I cannot determine the timetabling in any particular school. The important thing is to ensure that there is the possibility of progression. The measures build on the S1 to S3 experience in the curriculum for excellence, so the breadth and depth that will be achieved in S1, S2 and S3 should prepare pupils well going forward into the qualifications. The problem with the current situation is that somehow everything is put to one side after S1 and S2 because everything has to be fixated on the content of the qualification examination over a two-year period, which means that we are losing the continuity between S1, S2, S3 and the qualifications. The new system should build on levels 3 and 4 of the curriculum for excellence to ensure that the breadth and depth can be carried on as the pupil progresses into qualifications. Time and time again in Parliament, we have heard that the qualifications should serve the curriculum, not the other way round. That is something that Peter Peacock said with which I agree.

To help progression, there will be external verification by the SQA of the assessment procedures for the qualifications system, which will give the robustness that Murdo Fraser rightly suggests that employers need. The assessment framework proposals that will be released in the summer will identify how we can ensure that we give pupils, parents and employers confidence that the assessment that takes place in schools meets national standards and has the robustness that we all require.

I have only just announced the framework of the whole system, so I am afraid that I cannot give details of the marking guidelines yet. The member is right to identify that the new qualifications are important for adult learners. If we are to maximise the skills and potential of the workforce as we move forward into recovery, it is essential that we recognise people's achievements in literacy and numeracy in the workplace. We want to ensure that that is supported. I feel strongly about workplace learning. I met the Scottish Trades Union Congress lifelong learning members this week to discuss how we can take it forward. The recent announcement that we have extended the eligibility criteria for the individual learning account 200 to cover people who earn up to £22,000 rather than £18,000 means that half of the workforce throughout Scottish is now eligible to receive funding support for training. We have a great opportunity to work with trade union learners and colleges to ensure that there are opportunities in the workplace, and that the qualifications become part and parcel of Scotland's lifelong learning strategy.

Maths and English will continue to be taught as separate subjects by specialist  teachers. With regard to literacy skills, for example, the study of English will develop deeper understanding of the complexities of language through the study of literature. With regard to maths, the study of algebra will help to build on numeracy skills. That will, if anything, enhance the teaching of English and maths, bearing in mind the fact that literacy and numeracy will become part of the early development support—certainly at primary level—and will continue through the curriculum as the responsibility of every teacher at secondary level.

Today's statement is about qualifications from S3 onwards, but the member's questions are about literacy in the early years. Our proposals include the early intervention strategy, which runs from pre-birth to eight as part of the early years framework and ensures that literacy and numeracy skills can be embedded, aided by smaller class sizes. There is a focus throughout the curriculum for excellence on literacy and numeracy. The emphasis on experiences and outcomes from age three to 18 will, for the first time, embed and exemplify the ways in which literacy and numeracy can be developed and supported, which is to be welcomed. It is clear, however, that my statement today is about the qualifications framework and how we take it forward throughout Scotland.

It is clear that the introduction of any new qualifications system, and the transition, must be carefully managed. The new and revised qualifications will be introduced from 2013 onwards: the revised national access courses and national 4 and national 5 will be introduced in 2013-14; new highers will be introduced in 2014-  15; and advanced highers will be introduced in 2015-16. We will work carefully on and take the SQA's advice in the planning and presentation of those awards. Lessons have been learned from the introduction of previous qualifications systems, and they will be taken on board to ensure that there is smooth progress in implementing the new qualifications system.

Margo MacDonald's point is well made. For example, I took O grades; other people have taken other Scottish certificates, standard grades and so on. In communicating these matters, we must remember that points of reference are different for different generations. Obviously I cannot present it in a parliamentary statement, but we have produced a table that shows the progression in the Scottish credit qualifications framework from access level through the national, higher and advanced higher grades to the higher national certificate, the higher national diploma and on to degree level. That simple table will help to explain what it all means in old money—if I can use that expression—while setting the reference points for the parents and pupils who are currently in the system. As for having a full debate on the issue, that is a matter for the Parliamentary Bureau. However, we would welcome the opportunity to discuss this complex area of curriculum reform. This is, after all, the biggest change for a generation and, as some of the issues that I have had to explain in this statement show, it can be quite technical. Indeed, the forthcoming assessment framework could well engender a whole day's debate.

Yes. More than 150 school rebuilding or refurbishment projects have already been completed since May 2007. That exceeds by some margin the previous Administration's committed schools programme, which, under the partnership agreement for a better Scotland, was to renew 100 more schools by 2009, following on from what had been delivered up to the end of 2006. We anticipate that 250 schools will have been completed by 2011. Since May 2007, 50,000 pupils have benefited from moving into new, state-of-the-art classrooms, and further investment will lift another 50,000 pupils out of crumbling classrooms in the lifetime of this Parliament. Next Wednesday, I will make a statement to Parliament about the next part of our school building programme, which will involve working with local authorities to take forward capital investment through the Scottish Futures Trust, as we said that we would. I trust that that will be warmly welcomed across the Parliament.

I think that the statement that I make next Wednesday will be welcomed. The member is very good at complaining but not very good at congratulating this Government on its £2 billion-worth of investment in schools, which will support tens of thousands of jobs in the construction industry and, more importantly, will give youngsters the opportunity to learn in well-built schools, thereby improving their learning experience. I look forward to the member's questions next Wednesday. Perhaps he will join us in congratulating the Scottish Futures Trust and COSLA on working with the Government to provide the school estate projects and the school estate strategy that will take us forward in future years.

Quite clearly, decisions about which schools are progressed are for local authorities to take, but we should welcome Fife Council's planned £126 million investment in  schools, just as we should welcome the investment in schools by South Lanarkshire Council of £850 million and North Lanarkshire Council of £180 million, and Aberdeenshire Council's planned investment of £130 million.

The £2 billion-worth of capital investment that is being provided to local authorities to support capital projects is very much part of this Government's budget. I distinctly remember that Labour rejected it when the Government put forward its first budget.

I am pleased to hear that Fife Council has greatly enhanced the school building programme of its predecessor thanks to the support that this Government has provided. I cannot pre-empt any statements or decisions that any council might make following my statement to Parliament next week, but I think that the prospects for the school building programme in Fife and, indeed, across Scotland will be greatly enhanced by the support that is given by this Government and the Scottish Futures Trust.

Among other changes, eligibility for both ILA 200 and ILA 500 has been extended to people earning less than £22,000, which means that an additional 250,000  people and nearly half the workforce are now eligible. ILA 500 can now, for the first time, be used for part-time postgraduate study. Those and other changes will offer more flexibility for learners who want to upskill or retrain.

I am very aware of the situation in West Lothian and the concerns that the member raises. One specific change that will be helpful is the fact that, for the first time, people who are still in work—including those who are facing redundancy—will be able to use ILA 200 to retrain. We are engaging with West Lothian Council to address some of the other concerns that the member mentioned, particularly those for young people. The 16+ learning choices model, which we recently launched, will provide support in that regard, as will recognition of the issues around the funding of West Lothian College. I know that the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council is actively engaged with those issues.

I had a useful meeting with the Scottish colleges only yesterday. I welcome the comments of Chris Travis, the new chief executive of Scotland's Colleges, on the 2009-10 allocation for colleges, which he said was very welcome, particularly during a recession. It is important that we support our colleges, which have been good at reacting to and supporting initiatives during the recession and in planning for recovery. Cabinet colleagues will discuss how we can best use the budget consequentials. However, given that we face £500 million of cuts in 2010-11, it will be extremely difficult to ensure that all public services can be geared as the member and I would want in order to ensure that we can support students who are looking to retrain.

The Schools (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill will update and strengthen the consultation practices that local authorities apply to all proposals for major changes to their schools. It will safeguard Scotland's rural schools by ensuring that local authorities have special regard to specific factors before deciding to consult formally on rural school closures. Those provisions are particularly pertinent for island communities, most of whose schools would be classified for the purposes of the bill as rural.

Yes, I do. An important requirement under the bill is the provision of an educational benefits statement, which reiterates that educational decisions should be at the heart of any proposal. The special provision for rural schools recognises that, by and large, they are at the heart of their communities' economies. Indeed, when we launched the bill in Dalwhinnie primary school, I was particularly struck by the fact that many of the local estates required a school in the community so that local workers could be recruited.

I recognise that a number of people have pursued the issue of rural school closures. I have been involved for five years, and it was referred to in the SNP manifesto. I recognise the contribution of Murdo Fraser, who has worked on the matter more recently. I also recognise Jamie McGrigor's point about the value of local education provision in the Western Isles. Indeed, the strengths and abilities of rural schools, including both their academic and wider achievements, have been reflected in a number of reports from Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education.

I met COSLA's spokesperson on education, children and young people on 30 April. We discussed a range of relevant issues, which focused on our shared agenda of improving outcomes for all Scotland's children and young people. I also met Councillor Pat Watters of COSLA on Thursday 14 May at the Cabinet sub-committee on resilience.

I am more than happy to send the member a copy of the national guidance on parental rights and the legal provisions. From her question, I think that she will be aware that local authorities have some latitude in interpreting individual policies. For example, I know that some local authorities look at planning matters over not just one year but several years when they are deciding on intake. If she has particular cases in which such policies have been a reason for refusing placing requests, I will be more than happy to ask my officials to look into the matter in the context of the current legal framework. In response to her initial question on whether we have had discussions about placing requests, I recognise that there have been problems in areas such as East Lothian and East Renfrewshire in particular, so such requests have been an active area of discussion with local government. Yes, local authorities sometimes want us to impose less regulation, but they are keen to have more regulation in some areas, including on placing requests. I cannot give a definitive answer as to where those discussions will take us, but we are actively looking at the issue.

Local authorities already have a range of funding mechanisms open to them to enable them to make  best use of the record levels of capital funding that this Government is making available. We are supporting £2 billion-worth of school construction and many thousands of jobs. Some £1 billion is being invested in private finance initiative and non-profit-distributing model projects that we have signed off or which are in the pipeline, and the infrastructure investment plan shows that authorities plan to invest a further £1 billion over the current five-year period. We have already indicated our intention to announce later this year the next part of our schools investment programme. That will involve working with local authorities to take forward capital investment through the Scottish Futures Trust.

I would be more than happy to make a statement, with the agreement of the Parliamentary Bureau, when we can make those details available to Parliament. With the member's support, that is something that we intend to do. I look forward to sharing that news with him.

In our examination of wage subsidy schemes, including the Welsh example, we are discussing the idea with business partners and the STUC. It is important that we reflect on what they say.

I thank John Park for bringing the debate to the Parliament. Since last summer, the Government's number 1 priority has been to focus its resources to support individuals and businesses suffering the consequences of the recession. That remains our priority. Nearly 8,000 more people will start apprenticeships this year thanks to the additional £16 million that was announced in February, which  was supported throughout the Parliament. Up to 75,000 Scots will benefit from support through 79 projects that receive European social fund support from the £25 million that we announced in April. Last year, a record 35,000 people—up 37 per cent on the previous year—used individual learning accounts to support work-related training. The changes that we made to ILAs last month mean that more people than ever can now access those funds. On Gavin Brown's points about young people, through the new policy for 16-plus learning choices, by December 2010 we will offer a place in learning post-16 to every young person in Scotland who wants it, which will help 60,000 young people each year. Within that, we will focus on improving the way that we support our most vulnerable young people, and we will invest £16 million over the next two years to develop activity agreements with them. Our economic recovery effort is all about supporting people, communities and businesses. What matters most to us is how the numbers that I have just mentioned translate into real, practical help for individuals. Duncan McNeil and others reflected on that in their speeches. I will give a couple of real-life examples. Alex from the south side of Glasgow was made redundant last December after working for 25 years at Woolworths. He used ILA funding to train for and pass his passenger service vehicle licence theory test, and he is now working as a bus driver with FirstGroup. After being made redundant in his 50s, David from Alexandria got tailored advice, training and support from PACE, which led to him securing work in the social care sector. Students at colleges such as John Wheatley College, Elmwood College and Perth College are benefiting from £20 million of extra infrastructure improvements from the acceleration of capital spending.

When I mentioned Duncan McNeil, I was referring to his reflections on how the recession impacts on individuals and the importance of dealing with individuals. His points  are on issues around the response to individual companies. We have to approach the recession by working together. Attacking individuals, whether ministers or other MSPs, will not be welcomed by our constituents and it will not get the results that we want. We know that more than 1,000 butchers, bakers and ancillary staff in the food manufacturing industry will benefit from training as a result of two ESF projects and that 5,000 people will now have access to basic training through the Scottish Trades Union Congress-led ESF project, which builds on the £4 million investment that we are making in union learning. I hope that Parliament agrees that the actions that we are taking will make a real difference, but we know that we have to do more. We will continue to use the resources within our powers to bolster that effort. On the Liberal Democrats' amendment, we have heeded the calls of the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats to cut back spending on public jobs and quango costs. The Skills Development Scotland operating budget will reduce as a result of a voluntary severance scheme, although training budgets are not being cut and front-line services are being enhanced. Chris Travis, in reflecting on the 2009-10 college allocations, said: "The increase in funding for colleges is encouraging and takes into account the need to provide increased financial support for colleges and students, particularly in these challenging economic times."

We can trade figures, but a 2.4 per cent real increase over the spending review shows our commitment. I move on to examining the pros and cons of wage subsidies. We are examining a number of proposals and the experience of ProAct in Wales. It would be wrong to prejudge whether measures such as wage subsidies are suited to the specific experience of the Scottish economy now or in the future. We are also looking at the Northern Ireland redundancy apprenticeship model, although there are slight concerns about low uptake. We want to look at the successes and the problems that those and other schemes in Europe face. There are big challenges. Jeremy Purvis identified the need to support college places. In our assessment of wage subsidies for individuals and sectors or to deal with mass redundancies, as  in Wales, we have to identify whether resources are best placed there or in colleges. Those are exactly the points that we have to consider. We have also adapted the eligibility of training programmes to support better those in need. That means that training for work—a vocational training programme to enable people to develop job-specific skills—is now available to unemployed people after three months, compared with the previous threshold of six months. It is also available immediately to people on notice of redundancy. That means that people in work can receive training while they are working their redundancy notice, in order that they can move from work to work. That is one of the best solutions that we can provide. I have already announced 1,000 apprenticeships for the Glasgow Commonwealth ambitions, 50 for the creative industries and 100 for home energy and efficiency. John Park mentioned the apprenticeships summit, at which 150 employers joined us. Only yesterday, key industry sector organisations met the Minister for Schools and Skills to develop that thinking further. When the report from the summit is published, which will happen shortly, I will outline further details on how we are building a strong skills base to enable Scotland to survive the recession and to thrive when the recovery comes. The Government will also produce an updated economic recovery programme within the next few weeks. I thank John Park for lodging the motion. If Parliament agrees to the Government amendment, we can proceed in a united way in acknowledging John Park's proposals.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

Is the member aware that the higher education spend has increased in real terms by 2.9 per cent over the current spending review period? Is he aware that, for Skills Development Scotland, the training budgets are up and the administration and back-room costs are down?

I know that the member has taken a keen interest in this area. I can tell him that we will be making announcements shortly about further aspects of the apprenticeship scheme proposals. Does he recognise that the statistics for those not completing their training are similar to those for previous years? Does he accept that our big challenge is to ensure that those who can be placed in other employment are supported? Will he support us when we bring forward proposals in that regard in the next few weeks?

Rhona Brankin mentioned Government debt. There is a 30 per cent charge to the Government for every £1,000 that is loaned. From where does she think the cost of servicing the Government loan should come?

Elizabeth Smith makes a serious point about the need for value for money in public finance. A genuine problem with student loans is that servicing the loan involves a cost to the public purse of a third of the value of the loan. Does she recognise that an over-reliance on the loans system involves inherent problems for the public finances?

Is the Labour Party committed to reintroducing the graduate endowment fee?

I make it clear that servicing student debt does not cost £2 billion.

rose—

That change to means testing was fully supported by the NUS. Only 45 students contacted the universities on that point because of hardship and, with the allocation of increased hardship funds, the difficulties for the small minority that has been affected have been addressed. Indeed, that has been reported to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee.

I do not know whether Murdo Fraser is aware that, in 2009-10, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council will provide an additional £6.7 million to help colleges respond to the demand for child care from further education students. Murdo Fraser is right to identify that issue, but there has already been some movement on it.

The Government has introduced a number of policies to address student hardship. We have abolished the graduate endowment fee, benefiting more than 50,000 graduates and students by saving them around £2,300 each. We have introduced a £38 million package of grants for part-time learners, benefiting up to 20,000 students a year. We are providing £16 million a year to institutions to alleviate student hardship. Because of the combination of those actions, for the first time since devolution the average student loan debt fell in 2007. In 2008, it stood at £5,354, compared with £9,580 south of the border. In the four years from 2003 to 2007, the previous Administration made improvements to higher education student support totalling £22  million. I repeat: £22 million. In the two years that we have been in government, we have already provided double that amount—more than £44 million—to make specific improvements to higher education student support. Based on their track record, seeing the Labour Party and the Lib Dems competing with each other to be the students' friends, with duplicate motions in the space of weeks, is a bit like watching two bald men squabbling over a comb. In addition to the £44 million that I have mentioned—double the £22 million that the previous Administration set aside—we have set aside £30 million to implement the results of the consultation.

I make clear that the previous Administration spent £22 million on student support, whereas we have spent £44 million on student support. I will explain to Claire Baker some of the steps that we are taking to tackle student hardship, in particular. On top of all the provision that I have just talked about, we now propose to set the interest rates for student loans at 0 per cent or lower.

That will ensure that student loan borrowers will not see an increase in the value of their debt. Indeed, some of them will see a decrease. Many MSPs have written to us on that point.

I am more than happy to write to the member about the issue. We think that it is correct that when the inflation figures are as low as they are, if a level of 0 per cent is required, we will pay it, to ensure that students and graduates pay less or see their debt value decrease. If graduates have to pay less or if their loan debt is reduced, it should we welcomed across the chamber. We have increased student discretionary funds from the £14 million that we inherited from the previous Administration to just over £16 million this year, of which £4.7 million is specifically for higher education child care funds. That is a rise of 14.6 per cent. Higher education discretionary funds are intended to assist students who are in financial difficulty and at risk of not completing their course.  They are not—and never were, under the previous Administration—intended to be anything other than a contribution from Government to help institutions to meet genuine cases of hardship. In addition to the higher education discretionary funds, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council is providing an additional £6.7 million—a 9.3 per cent increase—to help colleges respond to the increased demand for further education student support in the current climate. I think that a 9.3 per cent increase is to be welcomed. Scotland is in a recession, and we are facing unprecedented cuts in our budgets. Westminster is taking £500 million out of the Scottish budget in 2010-11. We expect continued pressures over the next few years, which will shape the context of all future spending decisions across every portfolio. Extremely difficult decisions will have to be made.

I have already taken an intervention from the member. I acknowledge that recessions also have an impact on students. However, I assure the Parliament that student support and tackling student hardship will remain a high priority for the Government. "Supporting a Smarter Scotland: A consultation on supporting learners in higher education" closed only three weeks ago. I had hoped that the Opposition parties would give us due time to analyse properly all the responses that we have received before demanding that we make a decision. Those parties might consider the terms of our amendment, which reflect the exact wording that the three other parties used barely three weeks ago. That gives some indication of our acknowledgement of their position. The options that were set out in our consultation represented our thoughts on the best way to proceed. The consultation asked: "Are there any other initiatives or ideas that you believe we should explore further?" That is a clear statement that we are open to and happy to consider different ideas and that we will work with others to investigate the potential implications. That includes co-operation with the other parties in the Parliament. I hope that that addresses Claire Baker's questions. The motion reflects the views and opinions of Labour, Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives in the Parliament, as expressed in a similar motion on 12 March. In our amendment, the Government clearly acknowledges and recognises those views of Parliament. I hear the message loud and clear and acknowledge it: the Opposition parties oppose and will oppose replacing loans with grants, and  they want the Government to boost income levels for students by increasing debt levels. I call on Labour, the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats to work together to deliver specific and fully costed proposals to tackle student hardship. Within the context of the recession, which affects students as well as the economy, and reflecting the difficult financial situation that has been forced upon us, the Government agrees that we need to work together to come up with solutions to tackle hardship, and we will do so. I move amendment S3M-4188.2, to leave out from first "calls" to end and insert: "notes the proposals from Scottish Labour, the Scottish Conservatives and the Scottish Liberal Democrats contained in their responses to the Supporting a Smarter Scotland consultation; notes motion S3M-3675 as amended whereby the Parliament called on the Scottish Government to tackle student hardship, and calls on the Scottish Government to work with all political parties to deliver specific proposals to tackle student hardship, particularly during this time of recession."

As a Government, we are committed to the principle of free access to higher education. Last week, I announced that we were extending tuition fee support for students at Scottish universities who take part in recognised overseas exchange programmes from the 2009-10 academic year. Previously, such support was available only to students who took part in the European Erasmus exchange programme. The extension of support will benefit some 300 students a year, helping to tackle some of the  financial barriers to students' participation in exchange programmes in countries such as Australia, Canada, China, New Zealand and the United States.

I thank the member for his question. I remind him that we probably benefit more from international students coming to study here than from our students travelling abroad. That is why we announced the extension of tuition fee support for our students. As part of my visit to China, I embarked on the creation of a joint research programme involving Scottish and Chinese universities, which will include an exchange of PhD students with the aim of awarding joint PhDs. Two-way traffic is definitely on the menu of our support for students, which involves both supporting Scottish students who travel abroad and, importantly, welcoming the many students who come here to study.

One of the things that we have done is provide support for a European officer for the National Union of Students for the first time, to ensure that, if there are barriers, they are identified and overcome. One of the reasons why we introduced the £300,000 package to help with tuition fees is that, increasingly, students from poorer backgrounds could not afford the £1,000-plus fees that were being charged by some universities in America and other places. The measure has already started to support the students that the member identified.

An announcement on the future of the Scottish Qualifications Authority's offices in Dalkeith will be made once consideration of the options has been completed. I know that the member has a keen constituency interest in a decision being made sooner rather than later, as I do, but she will acknowledge that the decision must deliver the best possible balance between value for money and the effective delivery of services to the public of Scotland at a time of increasing economic and public sector pressures. Resolving that has taken longer than expected.

Far be it from me to comment on the scaremongering of Rhona Brankin. The matter is serious and the correct decision is needed. I will not compromise continuing negotiations by making the response that was described in her question. The right decision will be made for the SQA's future and—more important—for the service that it delivers to the pupils of Scotland.

Which of the statistics does Murdo Fraser believe?

The Government is committed to promoting positive and peaceful learning environments in our schools. The starting point for learning is a positive ethos and a climate of respect and trust, based on values that are shared by all the school community, including parents. All members of staff should contribute through open, positive and supportive relationships in which children and young people feel that they are listened to, and staff should model behaviour that promotes effective learning and wellbeing within the school community. I am pleased that members from all parties have emphasised the fact that the majority of pupils are well behaved—the pupils who are in the public gallery will recognise that message. However, a minority of pupils are not well behaved. Any  violence against school staff or other pupils is absolutely unacceptable, so when children or young people are involved in offending behaviour, we need to work in partnership with other agencies, including criminal justice agencies, where necessary. The Government is committed to working with local authorities to support schools to introduce the most effective approaches to promoting positive behaviour. We have formalised the discipline stakeholder group, which comprises the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland, the General Teaching Council for Scotland, HMIE and all the teaching unions. It is now a permanent Scottish advisory group on behaviour in schools for national and local government, and co-chaired with COSLA. Through a sub-group of that new advisory group, we will develop and promote guidance and best practice on improving relationships and promoting positive behaviour. We will continue to be supported by the positive behaviour team, which is funded with £500,000 to work with local authorities and others to promote positive behaviour policies. Maureen Watt identified that many of those policies are making significant progress, including work on restorative practices, solution-oriented approaches, curriculum programmes in social, emotional and behavioural skills—which Johann Lamont touched on—and nurture groups. I say to Karen Whitefield that we have organised and run three national training events on nurture groups and that HMIE is currently evaluating that approach, which will help in the sharing of best practice. Tackling poor behaviour is not only about punishment. Restorative practices, for example, are about working with peers, staff and other agencies to make children and young people face up to their responsibilities and the consequences of their actions. We will also continue to fund the pupil inclusion network Scotland—which networks voluntary and independent agencies that work with disengaged youngsters—so that policies and good practice can be shared across provision for children and young people wherever they are educated. I look forward to the findings of our national evaluation of campus-based police officers in schools. It is under way, is due to report in the autumn this year and will inform local decision making.

The evaluation of the role of campus police officers that will report in the autumn might be helpful in progressing the positive actions that are being taken throughout  the country and might inform the situation to which Johann Lamont refers. I also look forward to seeing what the survey on behaviour in Scottish schools later this year tells us about low-level indiscipline and more serious indiscipline and violence, as well as the wide range of approaches that schools and local authorities employ and the training and support that staff receive. We are developing guidance on school exclusions—Hugh O'Donnell will be particularly interested in this point—which will be published for consultation this year. It will provide an opportunity to address how we work with children and young people who persistently misbehave in class. Staged interventions of joint assessment and planning for children with behavioural needs are well embedded, but we need to develop and innovate continually to ensure that all children and young people are included in, and engaged with, the new curriculum. Local authorities can and do devolve powers to headteachers to exclude. In practice, temporary exclusions, which account for 99 per cent of all exclusions, are devolved to headteachers. Where a headteacher wants to remove a pupil from the register, local authorities retain that power in practice because they are responsible for the continuing education of the child or young person. I congratulate schools and local authorities on their concerted efforts to reduce exclusions significantly—not as a target-driven process, as it was in the first half of the devolution decade—through early intervention and preventive work. Schools are developing strong behaviour policy codes for pupils and staff. I do not underestimate the drip-drip effect of low-level indiscipline or the problem of more serious negative behaviour. I value the input of the Scottish advisory group on behaviour in schools and I look forward to working with it as the research findings come through. Ken Cunningham, general secretary of School Leaders Scotland, stated in The Herald on Tuesday 27 January 2009 that "the government, schools and the teaching unions have worked together to come up with a range of strategies to reduce exclusions and that has shifted the focus towards doing the best for all young people—those who are disruptive and those whose education is being disrupted. That has led to the introduction of a range of behavioural strategies dealing with the underlying problems being faced by a disruptive child—and we have also looked at making the curriculum more interesting and more flexible to give pupils a wider range of options, such as going to college. Taken together, these strategies have had an impact on the number of exclusions as these new figures show." I agree with that sentiment and I support the SNP amendment.

One of my concerns when I came into post was the variability of the figures. They can be relied on to an extent, but does Hugh O'Donnell realise that there is a contradiction between saying that the surveys are inaccurate and the Conservatives' call for us to produce them more regularly even if, as he says, they are not robust?

One benefit of being in power is that it allows us to identify a great deal of variation between local authorities. The lack of robustness in the annual statistics was not helpful, as I think Liz Smith suggested. Does Ken Macintosh agree that it is important that we get accurate and consistent information, which is exactly what the current survey is doing?

The Government is fully committed to improving Scottish education. Excellence in education is central to the ambitions that we have for Scotland and its people. Scotland has succeeded and prospered and has historically made its mark on the world precisely because of the quality of our education. We have been at the leading edge of educational innovation in the world since 1696. Of late, under the previous Administration, Scotland has fallen behind the front-runners in education performance internationally, and into the following pack. That point was highlighted most markedly in the trends in international mathematics and science study survey that was carried out in April 2007. Between 2003 and 2007, performance in secondary 2 science declined. The Government is determined that we should regain our place at the forefront of change and improvement. Our education science summit will take place on Tuesday, and we will  tackle the decline in performance that took place under the watch of the Liberal Democrats and the Labour Party. The vehicle that will propel us to the front of the field again is the curriculum for excellence—the programme of transformational change that will drive up standards by freeing the professionalism of teachers to support our children and young people. Given how important that agenda is to Scotland's future, the failure of the Liberal Democrats to present constructive education policies in the debate is disappointing. To address some of the points that have been made, I will focus on the action that the Government has taken on teachers. Despite the fact that we provided funding to maintain teacher numbers fully, despite the fact that we provided an extra £9 million in baseline funding to provide 300 additional teachers in 2007—I make that point to Mike Rumbles—and despite the fact that we have provided £4 million to fund 100 teachers to support the curriculum for excellence this year, the Liberal Democrats still want to attack the Government.

We provide the funding—we are not the employers.

No. Margaret Smith may want to consider raising her concerns with Jenny Dawe in Edinburgh, Kate Dean in Aberdeen and Eileen McCartin in Renfrewshire—all Liberal Democrat leaders—and asking them why they have not used the resources with which they have been provided to maintain teacher numbers. They are the Liberal Democrat leaders—granted, in administration with the SNP—of three of the four local authorities that are responsible for more than 50 per cent of the drop that is recorded in the teacher census.

Thank you, Presiding Officer.  I would like to address some of the points that have been made in the debate. The number of people in teacher training is back at 2007 levels. This year 3,662 students will be trained in four-year and one-year courses. That figure is higher than the average number of teachers who were trained each year under the previous Administration, which was only 3,144.

I ask the member to wait for one second. The figure is down by only 4 per cent. Teacher training will take place at levels that are comparable with those of 2007. If Mike Rumbles is patient, I will give him the opportunity to intervene.

If Mike Rumbles had been listening, he would have heard me make the point that in August 2007 we provided £9 million in extra baseline funding for 300 additional teachers. Do I take responsibility for putting extra funding into education to increase teacher numbers? I do indeed. More primary and secondary teachers are in employment now than in any year of the previous Administration except 2006. Even with the reduction in teacher numbers, we are still making progress. We have the lowest class sizes in primary 1 to P7, the lowest pupil to teacher ratios and record-level funding for pupils. There has been a real-terms increase, despite the tight settlement from Westminster. Murdo Fraser provided us with a reality check. The £500 million of public sector cuts that may extend into the future are a serious agenda, which is why quality in education must be the focus. I am conscious of time and want to address the Conservative amendment. Elizabeth Smith talked about issues related to assessment. Work on assessment generally, and on literacy and numeracy in particular, continues. I have already stated publicly that the assessment framework plans will be announced this summer. The means for ensuring that primary school children are properly assessed and tested in literacy and numeracy before they leave primary 7 will be part of that framework. As the member knows, the  Government is not in favour of external tests in this area, but we need a robust assessment system that is nationally benchmarked.

I will. I am happy to accept the Conservative amendment on the basis that I have outlined. The Liberal Democrats want us to revert to a centralist form of administration. We think that local authorities, including those that are led by Liberal Democrats, can and will achieve. We will continue to discuss with them how we can roll out the curriculum for excellence to improve our education system.

I know that the member is astute in researching her figures. Is she aware that there has been an increase in spend per pupil in Renfrewshire under the most recent council budget?

Presiding Officer, I know that the debate is meant to be on the motion, but if we are addressing school buildings, I ask the member whether she is aware that the previous Administration left an unpaid bill of £60 million a year for public-private partnership projects. Is she also aware that Glasgow City Council has available to it £300 million in capital over the next two years, but that for some reason it has made the political decision to spend only £5 million on school buildings?

Is the member aware that the post-probationers who are currently seeking jobs started their training under the workforce planning that was devised, implemented and decided on by the Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration?

With regard to the first freedom of information request to which the member refers, does she realise that there has been a net increase of 33 in the availability of highers and of 114 in the availability of advanced highers? That completely negates some of the comments that were made at the time of the request.

Does the member acknowledge that we now have the lowest class sizes since devolution and, indeed,  the lowest pupil teacher ratio, despite a reduction in teachers? That is progress. The member implied that there had been no reductions in class sizes but there have been.

The level of initial teacher training intakes will be roughly the same as it was in 2007. The reduction on the initial target for this year is a drop of only 4 per cent. That will amount to 157 teachers, which—funnily enough—is less than the number by which the Labour-run Glasgow City Council reduced teacher numbers in only one year.

We have taken a number of steps to extend the teaching of Chinese culture, history and language over the past year, including launching eight Confucius classrooms in Scotland and several national qualifications in Chinese languages, increasing the number of teachers of Chinese, and funding 51 young people to undertake a study visit to China this summer.

I congratulate the member and Angus Council on leading the way in many ways on relationships with China and particular areas of the country. I want language teaching to be encouraged in colleges and universities. Qualifications in languages for work purposes, which will include units on Cantonese and Mandarin, are among the interesting new qualifications that are coming on board. I think that those qualifications will readily lend themselves to a college or university situation. I completely agree with Andrew Welsh. Having returned from my visit to China, I realise the importance of ensuring that we can communicate with one of the oldest cultures and societies in the world and one of the biggest growing markets in  the world. The economic and educational links certainly bode well for Scotland in the future.

The classes that I saw in China—certainly in Shanghai—were slightly larger than those in Scotland. However, there is an important message for Scotland. When I was in Hong Kong, it was clear to me that people there had just embarked on educational reforms that are very similar to the curriculum for excellence reforms. They were concerned that the previous rote learning in large classes, which was done in a chalk-and-talk way, was no longer fit for purpose. We have agreed to collaborate closely with the Hong Kong Government in particular. They are several years ahead of us, but it is clear that there are lessons that we can learn from them. Individuals learning to learn is becoming increasingly important. It should be remembered that Hong Kong performs strongly in the international tables, particularly in science and maths. There is a lot to learn both ways about education and schools in China.

Universities are taking a range of steps to improve their graduates' career prospects. In the letter of guidance that I issued to the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council last November, I asked the council to develop entrepreneurial capacity and employability among graduates. Through initiatives such as learning to work, the council is helping to support universities in their work to improve their graduates' employability.

Yes. I visited the University of Aberdeen at the end of March to hear at first hand about the exciting work that it is doing in the reform of its curriculum to enhance the Aberdeen learning experience. The reforms will mean that the university's graduates are better informed, more rounded and more intellectually flexible. A key focus for the university is the employability of students, but the focus is also on developing graduate attributes such as academic excellence, critical thinking, effective communication, openness to learning and personal development and active citizenship, all of which reflect some of the capacities in the curriculum for excellence. The focus in the university's new curriculum reflects initiatives from around the world. Indeed, when I met the universities of Aberdeen and Hong Kong, I heard how some of the developments there reflect  some of the same types of curriculum reform. It is a very interesting development and can only help to improve the employability and economic circumstances of graduates contributing to the north-east of Scotland.

Clearly, dieticians and their placements are a matter for those students, Robert Gordon University, the other universities and the national health service. As cabinet secretary, I am frequently asked to intervene in individual university courses at the same time as being accused of interfering with academic freedom. I cannot do both of those things. By law, I am deliberately prevented from interfering in particular courses and particular universities. However, I recognise the frustration that many such students might feel. I know that North East Scotland MSPs such as Nigel Don have been proactive in contacting the NHS and the university to try to find a resolution that meets the students' needs. There is clear concern about the situation, but I hope that Claire Baker reflects on the limit of what I can do as cabinet secretary.

Universities and higher education are receiving a bigger share of the total Scottish block than under the previous Administration. However, the member is right to identify graduates' desire to stay on and do a postgraduate course. Only this week, I launched a change to individual learning account provision to allow students more flexibility when making applications to use the £500 ILA to help to fund postgraduate places that are not otherwise funded. That provision in Scotland is unique—we are the only  part of the United Kingdom that provides fee remission or fee payment for postgraduate students in particular areas. I am keen that recently graduated students or those in sectors such as finance or other areas who want to go back into learning can use the part-time ILA to help to fund their application. I launched those changes at the Open University only this week and they were well received by some of those who will graduate this year and want to continue their studies after graduation.

Under the terms of the concordat, local government has agreed to make year-on-year progress in reducing the number of pupils in P1 to P3 classes to a maximum of 18. The concordat recognises that the rate of progress will vary due to local circumstances.

I urge the member to contact his local authority, North Lanarkshire Council, to address those issues. The fact that it is run by the Labour Party might make it easier for him to make those contacts. I would have thought that after eight years of being a member of the Parliament, all responsible MSPs would know who runs their local authority education department and it is important that Michael McMahon knows that too. His point is well made, however, and he has made a representation in the Parliament on behalf of his constituents. It is essential that we recognise the value and importance of investing in our education system and ensuring that we have smaller class sizes to  help to progress better literacy and numeracy and drive up standards. I am pleased that, in North Lanarkshire, progress has been made towards reducing the size of classes in primary 1 to 3. In this session, 96 per cent of primary 1 classes contain 23 children or fewer, compared with 75 per cent in 2007. If the member wants me to comment on IT equipment locations in particular corridors in particular schools, I must tell him that that is outwith my remit.

Clearly, local authorities are responsible for the school estate and school closures and the role of ministers relates purely to process. I think that the suggestion that higher class sizes provide larger and more flexible learning groups is a creative interpretation of the reality. The 80,000 people who petitioned the Parliament to urge that action be taken to deliver smaller class sizes—the second-highest number of signatories to any petition that the Parliament has received—might want to reflect on Councillor Findlay's comments. I think that he might be the same person who said that lower class sizes were irresponsible. He is entitled to his opinion, however. I look forward to my upcoming meeting with Glasgow City Council. Along with my ministerial team, I will meet a number of councils to discuss this and other matters. Although I cannot interfere with the individual decisions on school closures that are being made today, I can certainly advance the case for better-quality education and better investment in education. Perhaps that is something that Glasgow City Council might want to reflect on.

Although employment policy is a reserved matter, the Scottish Government is doing everything in its power to help people to look for employment in Scotland. Since January, we have invested considerable effort in strengthening our national redundancy service: partnership action for continuing employment, or PACE. For example, Skills Development Scotland dedicated 80 staff to work with Jobcentre Plus staff, some of whom will be on site in jobcentres. That is unique in the United Kingdom and represents a step towards the wider integration of employment and skills services, so that people get the most effective help to get back into work.

I very much appreciate the situation in Inverclyde. I have experience of the area and I have visited Port Glasgow jobcentre, where one of the integrated employment and skills pilots is taking place. It is essential that we all pull together to seek resolution. It is right to identify the responsibility of the UK Government in relation to the recession. There are issues about what would benefit areas in Scotland where there are shipbuilding and construction skills. In such areas, investment in capital  infrastructure might be better than some of the support that is currently being provided.

I hate to contradict Cathie Craigie, but she should have listened to Tony McNulty, the Minister for Employment, Welfare Reform and London at Westminster, when he agreed that the Scottish Government is doing everything in its power to support employment. The member quoted a figure of £1.3 billion for the previous Executive's investment in schools. This Government is investing £2 billion in schools—

Some 250 schools are currently under construction. On a positive note, I ask the Opposition to acknowledge that this Government brought forward £100 million of capital investment in housing to support the construction industry. Only on Monday, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council outlined which colleges will receive investment, to ensure that the £20 million that has been brought forward for construction can be invested now to provide for construction workers. I will take no lessons from the Labour Party on the matter.

The Minister for Children and Early Years will visit Tarbolton primary school nursery in South Ayrshire on 31 March, during which the leader of South Ayrshire Council will be present. I plan to meet Councillor Steven Purcell from Glasgow City Council soon to discuss education matters. In addition, plans are being developed for the Minister for Schools and Skills to visit a number of local authorities. Those are examples of our frequent meetings with leaders of councils, other councillors, senior officials from local authorities, representatives of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and many others to drive forward our shared commitment to improve educational outcomes for all children and young people.

The Government is investing £2 billion in schools, and 250 schools are under construction. I would be delighted to meet Steven Purcell to discuss some of the concerns that many parents have about schooling in Glasgow. Glasgow City Council is undergoing a process of school closures, but that is a matter for the council, and it would be inappropriate for me, as minister, to comment on that publicly at this moment.

This helpful debate has drawn out a range of useful and, indeed, interesting contributions. One of the more interesting was that  of Jeremy Purvis, who claimed Sir Walter Scott as a former constituent. I had not realised that Jeremy Purvis would cast himself as the Benjamin Button of the Scottish Parliament. There has been no disagreement today on science's contribution to the economy. Indeed, that is a vital part of Scotland's economic recovery plan. Ensuring that we make that a reality is a task not just for our public agencies but for us all, in the sense that we must present a united and clear message on that to the rest of the world. We have all agreed that developing individuals is key to ensuring that we have the skills necessary to meet tomorrow's demands. As well as through formal education, we need to do that, as Wendy Alexander said, by encouraging the public to take an interest in science. Our science campaign is off to a flying start, with many schools already participating in a custard run—to demonstrate that custard is both a liquid and a solid. The education summit in May will be key in helping to ensure that we reverse the trends that have emerged since April 2002, as outlined in the TIMSS report. I advise Malcolm Chisholm that the RSE is involved in the curriculum for excellence, in which it is helping particularly on the chemistry agenda. I also gently remind Hugh O'Donnell that the TIMSS report covers the period 2003 to 2007, during which time his party was, as part of the Government, in charge of education. There has been an upturn in interest in school science subjects, which is an interesting point. I hear the concerns that have been expressed, but I reiterate that, between 2007 and 2008, the number of entrants for higher and advanced higher across the science subjects increased. In addition, there has been a positive reaction to the baccalaureates, whose focus on science will help the economy. I was interested in Hugh O'Donnell's reference to college science, which is an important issue that should be raised as part of this debate. In a very thoughtful and informed speech, Alison McInnes prioritised the issue of involving women in the science agenda. She is quite right to ask why stakeholders did not consider that a priority in their responses to the consultation. In itself, that identifies a deep-seated and deep-rooted problem that must be addressed. I am more than willing to take up that challenge and take on that agenda. We have all agreed that supporting our academic science base and celebrating the scientific advances of our scientists will help to attract new investment and raise Scotland's profile in the world. We will ensure that clear and consistent messages on that are contributed by  giving prominence to the ground-breaking work in which our scientists are engaged. Rhona Brankin highlighted the issue of funding, as did several other members. Rhona Brankin wanted more money for universities, local government and science, but I do not remember Labour proposing anything in that direction in the recent budget negotiations. I acknowledge that an important point has been made about the possibility that the cap on fees in England will be lifted, but I remind the Parliament that, for that to happen, the Treasury would need to meet the costs upfront and bankroll that. At a time of tight public spending, that has become less possible than it might have been in the past. I want to quote David Eastwood, who is the chief executive of the Higher Education Funding Council for England—he is about to be replaced by Alan Langlands. In November 2008, David Eastwood urged universities in England to dampen their expectations. Speaking at the council's annual general meeting in London, he said: "Institutions would be foolish to plan on the assumption that there will be an early rise in the fee cap. I think it's inconceivable that the cap will rise significantly before 2013." Perhaps Wendy Alexander and others are more informed about what the Westminster Government wants to do, but the point that Mr Eastwood made is important, and we must consider it in addressing the points that members raised in the debate. On scientific research, Ian McKee made the important point that 20 per cent of the UK's pharmaceutical research takes place in Scotland. He eloquently extolled the contribution of the science base in the Lothians. Particularly against the backdrop of the current world economic situation, we all agree that we need more than ever to encourage business innovation and increase the demand for science. I say to Claire Baker in particular that the horizon fund is already being used for knowledge exchange. That is particularly important for companies as they seek just to survive the current difficulties, but we must also keep our eye on the horizon. The voucher scheme that we introduced recently will help companies that have perhaps decided not to take projects forward to think again.

I am sure that the member is aware that the Scottish funding council makes allocations to individual institutions. The existing pot of resources for the current spending review period will be allocated as part of that process in the next few months. The member will see the direction that is taken as the horizon fund is implemented for individual institutions. However, I reiterate that it is already being used for knowledge exchange, and the voucher system is an example of that. We recognise the international aspects of what we have to do. Hugh O'Donnell raised the issue of scientists and the importance of their international perspective. Ian McKee was absolutely right to stress Scotland's integration not just with the rest of the UK science base, but with the European science base, the European framework, and indeed the global science base. In ensuring that Scotland's science profile is better appreciated throughout the world, we need to ensure that it is integrated with our international strategy, and the Government is doing that.

I am conscious of the time. I am afraid that I need to move on. The Saltire prize will be a beacon for activity around our international profile in the coming years. On connections, the Scottish Science Advisory Committee is helping us to ensure that we have further collaborations. That initiative is a model of what can be achieved through collaborations. Research pooling has been extremely successful. We can see that in economics and other areas in which we have perhaps not performed well previously. In such areas, we are seeing excellent results across the board from the RAE. In "Science for Scotland", we have set out the path that we will take. We will publish reports on progress as we proceed. There is much to look forward to, and there are many challenges. The vision in the framework sets out a national mission for science in Scotland. We have seen other economies achieve remarkable growth as science nations by harnessing a common will to regard science as the future, and that is where we, too, should try to be. I invite members to support the framework. Many people in the science community in Scotland will be watching and listening to our debate, and I hope that members will show them support by supporting the motion.

By whom, and when, has the devolution of research funding been argued for?

Does the member acknowledge that constant assessment might mean that many pupils want to know what they need to pass tests, as opposed to wanting the opportunity to explore and discover? Pupils might want to know something for certain, to pass a test—that might be easier than learning that things are uncertain as part of a life of learning.

The member might be interested to know that Professor Jack Jackson inspired me, as he was my biology teacher at school, and that he has provided great advice on the science education summit that we will hold in May, when some of those views can perhaps be developed.

The science sector requested that the overarching framework should be succinct. As the member will see from the references, the website and everything that underpins the framework, there are lengthy, extensive and detailed developments of all aspects of the summary framework.

Does the member acknowledge that The Sunday Times reported the situation in Govan high school incorrectly? She gave some figures, but does she also accept that, at least from 2007 to 2008, the number of applications for science highers and advanced highers has increased rather than decreased?

The member may want to revisit her comments, bearing in mind what Sir Alan Langlands has said subsequently. Does she accept that the universities' share of the Scottish budget under this Government is higher than it was under previous Administrations?

Will the member take an intervention?

Scotland has a tremendous scientific past that we can rightly be proud of and celebrate. However, the excellence of our scientific present is something that we should be more aware of, and that we should shout about. Our current scientific achievement is remarkable for a nation of our size. We are first in the world for the number of research citations in relation to our gross domestic product. Our market share of science funding in the United Kingdom grew faster—to 14.2 per cent, which was up nearly 2.5 per cent—than the market share in any other part of the UK last year. In the recent UK research assessment exercise, more than half the assessed research in Scotland was rated as being either internationally excellent or world-leading. Furthermore, we are increasingly successful in attracting a wealth of new international talent, largely as a result of our investment in research pooling. We also have some world-class infrastructure. For instance, the high-end computing terascale resource—HECTOR—at the University of Edinburgh is the UK's largest computer and is among the largest in the world. In addition, we heard only today of a breakthrough by Edinburgh and Manchester scientists that will bring superfast quantum computers a step closer. We have recently seen new international investment in science-based businesses. For instance, last month, Schering-Plough Ltd announced a $30 million investment in drug discovery at its Newhouse facility. In many areas of science, we are among the world leaders in terms of quality—in life sciences, energy and computational science to name just three. The recent announcement by Professor Sir Ian Wilmut on stem cell research, which offers the prospect of using non-embryonic stem cell lines, is another fantastic example of our contribution to world science. In January, the energy research partnership, a consortium of Scottish universities, won £20 million of funding from the UK's Energy Technologies Institute for research into wave and wind power technologies. There is already much that we can build on, but we cannot afford to stand still. Yesterday's developing nations are becoming today's knowledge economy nations, so we must  be ambitious for Scotland. We must be ready for the economic upturn when it comes, and "Science for Scotland" sets out how we can do that. A debate on the science framework is also very timely. The global economic position has worsened, so we must consider even more urgently how science can contribute to economic recovery, as is being recognised by many countries. In January, we set out our economic recovery plan, which includes support for several investments in the science base, such as increased investment in the Edinburgh BioQuarter. The science framework supports the economic recovery plan and will help Scotland to get into better economic shape so that it is ready to take advantage of better times. In this debate, we have an opportunity for the whole Parliament to send out a clear statement of its support for science. I know that many people in Scotland will be listening to how Parliament discusses the issues today. The science framework sets out a clear and ambitious vision of where we think Scotland should be. It states: "Our vision is of a nation of world-class scientific achievement, a magnet for talent and for investment, a powerhouse of technology innovation and enterprise, increasing sustainable economic growth." We need to set our sights high, and that vision is not a castle in the sky, but something that Scotland is already a long way towards achieving. I acknowledge the work of the previous Executive, whose science strategy, which was published in 2001, ensured that science was given a higher profile, and laid good foundations for the current science framework. The science community will be looking to see how politicians use the debate and will note how Labour members want to use it as a constitutional political football. "Science for Scotland" is a common reference point for the science base. It sets out a common vision and enables our public agencies to pull together. I will comment briefly on the plans in "Science for Scotland", which appear under five main headings, and the progress that we are making on them. Under the first heading—"Developing Individuals"—the framework recognises that we need a good supply of trained individuals that matches the demands of the economy if growth is not to be held back. Given that science-related sectors are projected to grow more than others are over the next 10 years, parents and teachers need to consider promoting science-related careers. We also need to challenge commonly held perceptions about such careers, which is why I launched a new campaign—do something creative, do science—that will run for three months. Today I  met pupils of Lenzie academy, who won a UK science challenge competition by designing a superaccurate ping-pong ball firer. On the Conservative amendment, members might wish to know that entries for higher and advanced higher science subjects increased across the board in 2008. Reports that Govan high school has abandoned all science subjects are simply inaccurate: the school is offering higher chemistry this year and plans to offer higher physics in 2009-10. We had some disappointing news on school science in the recent trends in international mathematics and science study—TIMSS—which showed a worrying weakening in our performance against international benchmarks for the period 2003 to 2007. Therefore, we will take no lectures on science education from Labour—the party that presided over the period when Scotland was overtaken by others. To tackle those challenges in school education, I will convene a summit on science education chaired by Sir Andrew Cubie in May to discuss how we can improve our performance. The Liberal Democrats' amendment makes a point that has been consistently pushed by them. I acknowledge that, as in many walks of life, debate on the importance of science tends to focus on traditional measures of success, existing references and rigid power structures. I agree with the amendment that such measures do not always work for women. After Margaret Smith raised the same point in committee recently, I responded by raising the issues both in person and in writing with the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. I should also point out that we have some great women scientists, who have produced some of the RAE's most exciting results in chemistry. I was lucky enough last year to meet one of the University of Edinburgh's rising stars, Dr Polly Arnold, who is recognised as one of Britain's most creative chemists and who has built a growing reputation for her research into heavy metals. "Scientific Research" is the second heading in the framework. When the UK minister, John Denham, told me at a recent meeting that Scotland receives a disproportionate amount of UK research council allocations, I told him that our share was perfectly in proportion to our talents. I have recently discussed the issue with the chair of Research Councils UK, Professor Ian Diamond, and I will have a meeting with the UK science minister, Lord Drayson. Science research cuts across national and international boundaries, so let me come to Labour's amendment. Despite the importance of science, Labour has tried to hijack the debate to promote a constitutional argument for party means. [ Laughter. ] If Labour acknowledges that  knowledge and research know no boundaries, why on earth should not Scotland be strengthened, either now or through independence, by the rest of the UK science base, as happens in the Nordic Council arrangement? Why stop there? Scotland is strengthened by the European science base, given the £20 million in funding that has been provided for the Energy Technologies Institute. Next month, I will go to China to advance Scotland's interests as part of the global science base. The third heading in the framework is "Economic and Business Demand". Business demand for science is a real challenge because it remains very weak. In Scotland, business expenditure on research and development runs at less than half the UK rate which is, in turn, lower than the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development average. OECD studies confirm that R and D is the optimum driver of economic growth, but in the current economic climate, the pressures on R and D budgets will become even greater. We are determined to do what we can to help businesses with their research and development. The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council has recently launched an innovation voucher scheme, which will help small and medium-sized businesses to draw on the expertise within Scotland's world-class universities. The scheme will offer vouchers of up to £5,000 to meet up to 50 per cent of the cost of any collaboration between a university and an SME. That will contribute to our on-going efforts to secure the future of such business in order to safeguard jobs and contribute to the economic recovery of Scotland's local and national economies.

Absolutely. It is essential that we become proficient at operational science in the short term for economic gain, but we cannot make the big discoveries and progress knowledge and understanding unless we do blue-skies research, so I agree with Robin Harper's comments. We are also looking forward to proposals from Universities Scotland to establish a unified consortium approach for all available intellectual property. That approach should significantly enhance the way in which intellectual property is managed in Scotland's universities and it will help to streamline and accelerate the commercialisation process, which has been of variable quality and effectiveness for too long.

That is a reasonable question and one that I asked when I became a minister, given the work that had been done previously. It was scientists themselves who were keen to have a distinct science strategy. I assure Rhona Brankin that the science strategy and the forthcoming innovation strategy will sit together and will be harnessed as far as delivery is concerned. The fourth element of the framework deals with international connections. The broader international strategies that we are drawing up for key economies regard science as a key element that helps to forge links between countries. We are making progress on that and are increasing our funding for international scholarships through the British Council. That relates specifically to businesses. I am delighted to tell Parliament that the international triple helix conference has been attracted to Glasgow in June, and I have been asked to represent Scotland. That will give us an opportunity to explain triple helix concepts—[ Laughter. ]

I need to move on. [ Laughter. ] The conference will also give us an opportunity to promote Scottish science on the world stage. The final theme of the framework is about playing to our strengths and connectivity. Research pooling has been extremely effective. Any country that is serious about science wants a serious science framework. We have one. In a time of recession, what the world outside Parliament wants is a constructive and co-operative consensus on science in Scotland. We have the opportunity to create that in today's debate. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the publication of the Scottish Government's strategic framework for science, Science for Scotland , on 27 November 2008; agrees with its vision for Scotland as a nation of world-class scientific achievement, a magnet for talent and for investment and a powerhouse of technology, innovation, enterprise and increasing sustainable economic growth; supports the strong message that Science for Scotland sends out to Scotland and the world about this vision; agrees that maintaining a strong science base in Scotland is vital because it will underpin economic growth, help improve public services, enhance quality of life and help solve the world's most pressing problems; notes the detailed ambitions and commitments made around the five themes  of Science for Scotland about developing individuals, scientific research, economic and business demand, international profile and connections in Scotland and government; further notes that Science for Scotland calls to action many bodies and sectors of the economy and asks them to work with the Scottish Government to help progress the aspirations of Science for Scotland , and asks the Scottish Government to monitor and report to the Parliament on the progress being made.

Kilmarnock College received more than £125,000 in higher education discretionary funds in 2008-09, of which £68,918 was specifically allocated for its higher education child care funds. It also received more than £2.1 million in main allocation for further education student support funds in 2008-09, of which £194,000 was specifically for its further education child care funds. The college then received almost £231,000 in additional further education discretionary funds from the November in-year redistribution process, which represented 4.2 per cent of the total amount of funds that the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council reallocated. Of those funds that were reallocated to the college, £115,466 was specifically for its further education child care fund.

I am pleased to hear that child care has been provided for all eligible students. I know that there were some concerns earlier in the year. The current system, which we inherited from the previous Executive, is based on information that is two years old. That is why it is important to have in-year redistribution. I am pleased that that happened at Kilmarnock College to help to support child care places. I have raised the issue of changes to lone parent benefits with the Department for Work and Pensions and sought assurances that lone parents will not be sanctioned under the new system.

Child care funding for lone parents in higher education in Scotland is more generous than it is in England. Scottish students are in the positive position of having funding of more than £4,000 in comparison with funding in England of £3,500. Universities are independent, autonomous institutions, as are colleges. They make their own provision for child care and receive supportive funding from the Government. As I said in my answer to the first question, the in-year redistribution is very important. In the returns that we received from universities, many did not request additional funds to support child care. A number of further education colleges also did not request further funds. For those that made a request, the Scottish funding council not only provided funds but responded promptly to the pressures that many students are facing as a result of the economic recession. Perhaps at some point the Labour Party will take some responsibility for that.

I am not sure that the member heard the debate this morning, but if she reads the consultation paper "Supporting a Smarter Scotland", she will see that options 1a, 1b and 3 all cover proposals on targeting resources with which she might find some sympathy. We in the Government will have to take the decisions, but we will listen to the views of everybody who responds to the consultation. I urge Parliament to refrain from passing judgment until consultees have a chance to respond. The closing date for the consultation is 30 April.

Officials from the Scottish Government regularly meet officials from Glasgow City Council on a range of issues related to the provision of education in the city. Recently, there have been meetings regarding the implementation of 16+ learning choices, enterprise in education and support for Glasgow's schools of ambition. I had the pleasure of visiting Govan high school, Castlemilk high school and St Paul's high school this week. An official from Glasgow City Council took part in two of those visits.

Yes. It would not be unreasonable for the public to expect the council to do so, particularly in view of its response to our consultation paper last year on the proposal to extend the list of those who should be consulted, in which it said: "GCC agree that children and young people should be consulted. However, younger children would need to be supported and clear guidance would be required to ensure it is the views of the children that are reflected." The council did not comment either way on the proposal to extend the list to include teachers and other staff.

This year alone, Glasgow City Council has received £196 million in capital funding. It is up to the council to choose whether to use that for refurbishment and capital spend on schools. Other local authorities are doing so. Those who are protesting today might rightly ask why Glasgow City Council is not spending it on schools. The funding that the Government is providing for 1,000 of the apprenticeships that Steven Purcell wants to provide in Glasgow will free up £6 million over the next few years that would otherwise have been used for those apprenticeships. Perhaps Mr Purcell will want to invest that money in schools.

That issue has been raised a number of times and Anne McLaughlin is right to raise it again. The Government is providing record levels of funding for local government but is conscious of the pressures that local authorities face. The 2008 teacher census, which will provide the number of teachers in each local authority, will  be published in the next few weeks, and will reflect the numbers that are employed by Glasgow City Council. There are clearly challenges in Glasgow, and I encourage everybody involved to help to support the council in delivering additional support for learning for children with English as a second language. That is one of the reasons why we provided funding for the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to assist with family learning for speakers of other languages who are learning English.

I have already announced that Glasgow will be offered funding over three years for an additional 1,000 new modern apprenticeship places worth £6 million, and I recently announced 50 new modern apprenticeships in Scotland's creative industries in 2009-10. Those early decisions are in direct response to the additional skills needs for Glasgow as set out in the early Commonwealth games planning and the evidence in the recent creative blueprint for Scotland. In addition, I intend to use the apprenticeship summit to explore with employers how the modern apprenticeship programme and its development can best support employment opportunities in Scotland as part of our economic recovery planning and beyond. I have started discussions with major employers on approaches to deliver the 73 per cent increase in new starts for 2009-10. I have already met Jim McColl of Clyde Blowers and I plan to meet others such as Scottish and Southern Energy.

It is important that, in public procurement, all agencies of Government and, indeed, local government use whatever measures they can to benefit the public and the common good. Particularly at this time, all those who receive taxpayers' money must use and invest it responsibly to ensure that we maintain skills in areas such as construction so that, when we come through the recession, the jobs and skills are in place to take the country forward.

Edinburgh Napier University did not make more requests for funding. Funding was not allocated as it did not ask for it.

Does the member acknowledge that students and various unions involved in higher education gave evidence to the task force?

I do not doubt that there is increased demand, but I would like the member to acknowledge that increased resources are going in. Does she acknowledge that the colleges congratulated the funding council on moving quickly to help address some of the problems that she is talking about?

Has the member had a chance to read the consultation document? Which of the options for expanding the young students bursary—1a or 1b—would he support if he wanted to support the poorest students?

On means testing, is Claire Baker aware of the letter that I wrote to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee in which I outlined the fact that only 45 students had applied for hardship funds because of the change to means testing, and that their requests had been met?

The Government believes that access to higher education should be based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. During the parliamentary process to abolish the unfair graduate endowment fee, we agreed that we would consult on the minimum income guarantee. We are doing that through our consultation on supporting learners in higher education, which runs until 30 April 2009. The consultation paper "Supporting a Smarter Scotland: A consultation on supporting learners in higher education" focuses on the mainstream support that is available for students who undertake full-time undergraduate study in higher education at college or university. It seeks views on replacing the current system of student loans with a fair and affordable system of means-tested grants and other means of student support. I feel very strongly that it is disrespectful to ignore the views of the many people who have already responded, or who are still to respond, to  the consultation. The Liberal Democrats asked for a consultation in the first place in an amendment to the motion to pass the Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill. They got one, but now they want to ignore and bypass it.

No. I warn the Liberal Democrats that, if the Labour amendment is agreed to, they will have made a tactical blunder that would allow the Parliament to reject the minimum income guarantee, because targeted support for the poorest students is contradictory to a guaranteed minimum income for all.

The Labour Party has confirmed in its amendment that it does not support the minimum income guarantee but wants targeted support for the poorest students. I know what is in the consultation paper, which makes the minimum income guarantee clear. If Claire Baker had listened to Margaret Smith, she would know that she said that the initial increase would not be to the full minimum income guarantee of £7,000. The paper sets out a number of options to improve student support by using the £30 million that has been made available with a view to either increasing the amount of support or reducing levels of debt on graduation. We believe that the suggestion from the Association of Scotland's Colleges is worth further consideration, so we have included it in the consultation paper. It could be argued that that option may become increasingly attractive as the recession gathers pace. The Liberal Democrats' motion has the effect of dismissing the college option completely out of hand. The Liberal Democrats are not giving college students a fair hearing, which flies in the face of Hugh O'Donnell's previous statements in which he asserted that his party supports college students who face hardship. Is it the case that the Liberal Democrats do not really want to hear college students' views?

On the basis that the Liberal Democrats have yet to outline the content and  costing of their policy, I do not think that Margaret Smith's answer gives college students any confidence whatsoever. The financial restrictions facing us are real. We have had the tightest spending settlement since devolution. We had to meet the unpaid bills of £60 million a year for the previous Government's promises on public-private partnership school buildings and—yes—we had to make hard choices. Despite all those real and difficult pressures, we have still managed to find £30 million that will make a real difference for students in the future. In comparison with the lack of action in the previous eight years, in less than two years in this session of Parliament, we have already made a number of real improvements for students. We abolished the graduate endowment fee, which is benefiting up to 50,000 students and graduates, saving them £2,300 each. We have removed the burden of debt: two thirds of students who were due to pay £2,300 for the fee did not pay it back directly but simply added it to their student loan. Student debt doubled in Scotland between 1999 and 2005, but under the SNP Government, it fell in 2007, for the first time since devolution. We have replaced loans with grants, with a £38 million package for part-time learners in higher education, benefiting up to 20,000 students a year. We have increased the threshold for students with disabilities and are providing institutions with £16 million a year to alleviate student hardship, which is a rise of 14.6 per cent on 2006-07 levels. Although demand for hardship support is increasing, so have the resources to fund it, and requests for top-up funds for hardship went down this year, in comparison with last year. Only three out of the 11 universities that Labour surveyed have asked for more funds, and only one out of the four universities that The Scotsman quoted this week has asked for funds. The Labour Party amendment does not support a minimum income guarantee. It notes the NUS position, but rejects it in favour of a policy request: that the Government look at supporting the poorest students. Has Claire Baker read the consultation? Options 1a, 1b and 3 all set out the case for supporting the poorest students. She should do her homework, but that is not Labour's strong point.

No, thank you. The Westminster Government miscalculated its grant policy by £200 million and now has to claw back £100 million from students and universities, threatening courses and student numbers.  I return to the Liberal Democrats. They asked for a consultation and they got one. They should have the patience to listen to the consultation.

I am closing. The debate is premature. I respect the Liberal Democrats' right to argue the case for a minimum income guarantee of £7,000. However, in moving the Government's amendment, I ask the Parliament to respect the many people, from students in colleges and universities to parents and others, who have the right to respond to the consultation on student support and to be heard, without being pre-judged by the vote at decision time. I move amendment S3M-3675.3, to leave out from "believes" to end and insert: "notes the Scottish Government's consultation on student support, Supporting a Smarter Scotland, which closes on 30 April 2009, and the proposals it outlines, including a minimum income guarantee; further notes that under the previous administration student debt doubled between 1999 and 2006; welcomes the falls in average student debt achieved as a result of the enhanced support on offer from the Scottish Government; further welcomes the restoration of the principle of free education with the abolition of the graduate endowment fee; commends the Scottish Government on the introduction of a £38 million package of grants for part-time learners, replacing loans with grants for up to 20,000 students per year; congratulates the Scottish Government on the 14.6% increase in student hardships funds over the last two years; further welcomes the additional support that has been made available for students with disabilities, and calls on the Scottish Government to respond positively to the outcome of the consultation."

Will the member give way?

What would be the Liberal Democrats' policy for the minimum income guarantee? How much could be loans? Could it be £6,000 out of £7,000? More important, how much would it cost and how would they pay for it?

The Scottish Government considers Scots to be an important part of Scotland's distinctive linguistic and cultural heritage. The audit of current provision provides baseline data and is the basis for consideration of the provision of and planning for the Scots language in public life across Scotland. The curriculum for excellence experiences and outcomes encourage appropriate emphasis on Scotland's literature and the languages of Scotland. The curriculum for excellence offers teachers the flexibility to respond innovatively to the needs and interests of their pupils.

Learning and Teaching Scotland already provides examples of good practice and materials that can be used to address the shortages and the demand that Bill Wilson has identified. In the year of homecoming, I have already seen excellent practice in the Scots language. Dunning primary school, which is in the Perth and Kinross Council area, has an excellent homecoming project, and Scots language provision is part and parcel of that experience.

When I launched the skills strategy in 2007, I set out three major areas in which the Government wanted to effect change: a focus on individual development, a response to the needs of the economy and the demands of employers, and the creation of cohesive structures. Significant progress has been made in all three areas during the past 18 months. The updated skills strategy, which provides more detail, is now available online, and its web address was circulated to all MSPs this morning. It is important to note that the updated skills strategy sits alongside the Government's economic recovery plan in providing support to individuals and businesses in response to the economic downturn and in ensuring that we as a nation are best placed to take advantage of the upturn when it comes. For individuals, we have set about implementing a programme of systematic reforms to the ways in which learning is promoted, delivered and funded. For the youngest Scots, we have launched an early years framework that recognises the need for every child to have the best start in life. The framework has been developed and launched in full partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. For our young people, we are pushing forward implementation of the curriculum for excellence and focusing on better learning and teaching for individual pupils. Our new model for guaranteeing that all young people have an appropriate offer of post-16 learning is the 16+ learning choices programme, through which we will provide young people for whom school is not the right setting with a set of tailored and positive options, the aim of which is to guarantee that all young people have the opportunity to access employment or training as an alternative to compulsory schooling until the age of 18. We believe that staying in learning is the best way to ensure long-term employability. For people with literacy and numeracy needs, we are conducting the first major survey of literacy and numeracy in Scotland since 1996. The result will be vastly improved baseline information that will ensure that our future policies better suit individual needs.  The Scottish Government has also worked hard to improve how learning is funded. For example, the individual learning account offer has been refocused so that it is more relevant to learners in the workforce: for the first time, it can be used for workplace learning. We have also opened up higher education to a broader range of learners through ILA 500, under which grants replace loans for part-time students. The fact that 15,000 applications have already been made shows that we are meeting a clear demand from individuals. Overall, we have about 40,000 people in training. The majority are undertaking modern apprenticeships, but the figure also includes those who are training under the skillseekers, get ready for work and training for work programmes. We intend to have 50,000 people in training by 2011. Our second area of focus is the need to effect change to ensure that Scotland's skills policies can respond to the needs of employers and the economy. Within the changed economic climate, that is now even more important. Listening to employers and acting on their advice has been a top priority for the Government during the past 18 months. I have met the chief executives of all 25 sector skills councils to identify what employers need, what the councils can offer, and how the Government can respond. As a result, the colleges and the sector skills councils have for the first time signed up to a collaboration agreement, which will ensure that the parties continue to have a close working relationship as they deliver for employers and the wider economy. Since 2007, I have engaged with hundreds of employers of all sizes to establish how best we can work together to meet Scotland's skills needs. I have established the skills utilisation leadership group, which aims to make better use of Scotland's skills in order drive up productivity and growth. The group comprises employers—Microsoft, First Scotrail and BT—along with Skills Development Scotland, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, the Scottish Trades Union Congress and the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations. It is a unique partnership. All that activity with employers has resulted in a strong evidence base on which to build our policies. Employers understand that we are a Government that listens and acts. We listened to the tourism sector, and so are now funding a study into the possibility of creating a centre of excellence in hospitality and tourism. We listened to the food and drink sector, and are funding the development of a business case for a Scottish hub of the National Skills Academy for Food and Drink Manufacturing, and we have introduced adult modern apprenticeships in professional cookery.  We listened to the financial sector, and have helped to fund the establishment of an industry-led financial services skills gateway. We listened to the creative industries, and I am pleased to announce that, within the increased number of apprenticeship places for 2009 and as part of the Government's aim to develop new high-value sectors in the economy, 50 apprenticeship places will be set aside specifically for the creative industries sector in the coming year. That is in addition to the extra £5.8 million investment in Skillset's screen and media academies in Scotland, which was announced earlier this month and which will help to boost our country's position as a world leader in the creative industries. We will continue to work closely with employers to ensure that we supply what they need. That is the purpose of the apprenticeship summit that will be held in spring, which will give us the opportunity for a frank discussion about the skills interventions and support that employers really want. We have also been listening to employees. We have forged a strong relationship with the STUC as the communiqué on skills, which the First Minister and the STUC signed last year, demonstrates. We need to promote development and innovation in cohesive structures: that is what we have done. At United Kingdom level, we play a central role in the UK Commission for Employment and Skills, and I have made sure that the commission recognises the importance of better use of skills in the workplace to improve productivity. Major progress has been made by our partners in relation to the calls to action that were made in "Skills for Scotland: A Lifelong Skills Strategy". I am pleased that they have all addressed those challenges with enthusiasm and imagination. We have, for example, established a new set of relationships between the Government, the funding council and the universities. In particular, activity that is supported through the funding council's horizon fund is demonstrating how Government-funded higher education activity will respond better to the needs of students and the economy. Scottish colleges have long had a reputation for responsiveness and flexibility. The way in which colleges such as Reid Kerr College have acted swiftly to ensure that redundant apprentices have access to alternative relevant training has been welcomed across the board, as has the £7 million that the funding council has set aside to ensure that training and support is available to redundant workers and for activities relating to partnership action on continuing employment.  The Scottish Qualifications Authority has played a hugely important role in working with the Scottish credit and qualifications framework and the sector skills councils to place an increasing number of Scottish vocational qualifications onto the framework, which will provide progression routes for individuals who choose to take a vocational path. Skills Development Scotland has been established. In my guidance letter to the body, which I placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre this morning, I have made it clear that I expect it to be a catalyst for improved performance and better joint working on skills. It is already working effectively with the funding council and Jobcentre Plus on issues that support the economic recovery plan. To further support the plan, we need to be adaptable and flexible in order to meet the changing skills needs of the current economic climate. We have refreshed the PACE programme by increasing its scope and ensuring that it is well placed to address the rapidly changing needs of the workforce in the coming months. The strategy update, which is now online at the Scottish Government website, focuses on adaptability and flexibility. We know that the ability to be agile and responsive is one of the most important attributes in difficult economic times. The strategy will continue to support that approach and we will focus effort and resources where they are most needed to support individuals and the Scottish economy in these difficult and challenging times of recession.

There were several questions there, but they are important. I will answer as many as possible. The apprenticeship guarantee is probably more developed in Scotland than it is in other parts of the UK. Work on that has been primarily with the construction sector, and particularly through the sector skills council, ConstructionSkills. Effective work has been done on placing individuals. If John Park has a look at our website and follows the connections to our partners' websites, he will find that a great deal of work is happening with employers, particularly those in growth areas such as engineering, in which there may be more opportunities to identify additional apprenticeships. I am more than happy to tell members who are contacted by individual constituents who have been made redundant as apprentices about how to get in touch either with their sector skills council or with SDS, which is working on the guarantee. I recommend that anybody who is looking for an initial point of contact go to the website that was launched as part of the PACE initiative. As part of the budget negotiations, we secured an additional £16 million for apprenticeships, which will be discussed at the apprenticeship summit. Clearly, apprenticeships carry on for several years, so the financial commitment in the budget is for that year, the next year and the financial year after that. It is a three-year commitment for those apprenticeships. However, I  think John Park seeks assurances from the Government that we will maintain the level and start another set of apprenticeships in the next year. We are considering that closely, but I remind him that we are in a time of difficulty and are facing a £500 million cut from Westminster. If he wants more apprenticeships, perhaps he will join us in trying to ensure that public sector funding is protected. The member is right about the importance of employers in the financial services sector engaging with PACE and doing so early. I say to all members who work with employers in their constituencies that the sooner organisations let us know of difficulties, the better. Moving somebody who is in work to other employment is much better than their falling out of employment. The culture and approach is changing in Scotland and employers now feel more comfortable about sharing such issues. Those issues will be dealt with confidentially, but the sooner PACE knows about difficulties the better, so that we can help people to go from work to work. Several employers are acting extremely responsibly and trying to direct that and we have good opportunities to ensure that skilled workers who face redundancy move to other employers. However, we have particular challenges in Scotland because of the number of small and medium-sized enterprises here. PACE is particularly effective at working with large companies, so one of its future challenges will be in supporting SMEs to place their workers, should they be made redundant.

Murdo Fraser made a number of general points, but I will address his specific questions. On the general fund and the horizon fund, the announcement that I made of £5 million for the creative industries was one of the first announcements in respect of the horizon fund. It is about pursuing the economies that will take us through the recession and beyond it, to future economic growth. Our intention is to ensure that funding for universities remains competitive—that means both the general fund and the horizon fund. The allocation of that funding is the role of the funding council. I am due to have the first of the tripartite advisory group meetings with the universities and the funding council to take forward these matters. On vocational training, there are strong relations between colleges and schools just now. Indeed, there is a considerable amount of funding in that area—skills for work courses are continuing and growing. The experience of the 16+ learning choices initiative for those over 16 will be a valuable lesson on how we can include experiences for young people that are not necessarily school based but which give them vocational experience—sometimes in the third sector, too. Our learning of lessons from that can take us forward. Two thirds of councils are already involved in 16+ learning choices and more are joining as the months go by.

On Skills Development Scotland, the restructuring is about ensuring that centralisation is moved to local activity. Front-line services will be protected and there will be no compulsory redundancies. We have already seen an enhancement in that any reorganisation will provide for extra resources on the front line. We have seen 80 SDS workers being moved into working in Jobcentre Plus to provide an integrated employment skills service. With Tony McNulty, I visited one of the first pilots in Greenock. The evidence shows that, for employability, it is essential to drive forward and serve constituents' needs. We have used input from the national economic forum—which Murdo Fraser derided—on what individual sectors need for skills development and utilisation. We will now take that to SMEs. Some larger companies have offered to work with smaller companies. It is probably more important than ever that all companies take the opportunity to use skills effectively to drive up productivity. Now is not the time to reduce training. It is essential that organisations—perhaps with fewer staff—work smarter to achieve more and maintain their competitiveness. There are great opportunities. If I have not answered any of Margaret Smith's questions, I am sure that she can contact me later.

Skills Development Scotland is to launch its corporate plan and much of its material to promote the services in the national training programme, so Christina McKelvie will hear more from Skills Development Scotland about promoting the offers that are available. The fact that 15,000 people have applied for the ILA 500 grant shows that demand exists, which we are meeting. At a time of difficulty, more people might want to undertake part-time university study, so it is fitting that we pursue that. The skills strategy is for lifelong learning. The website allows all the many partners in the process to see where they are. We were criticised for a lack of detail in the skills strategy in September 2007. I hope that members will bear with me, as we have probably overindulged in detail on the website, but it is worth examining for its up-to-date information about what is happening. The website will be a live operation that is continually updated. I urge members who are interested in sectors that relate to their constituencies to visit the website to identify the most up-to-date information. I recall the question from Margaret Smith that I did not answer. The £7 million of PACE money to colleges will be used initially for activity to help apprentices who have been made redundant, but another measure is short-term courses to help people to move into employment quickly. Some members—particularly Labour members—have asked us to consider the European social fund. If companies are operating reduced working hours, opportunities might be used for learning during some hours of the week. That is being considered in other countries of the UK and we can pursue it, too. Many companies might also pursue literacy and numeracy training at this time. Training can be improved in an economic downturn, so that the workforce is upskilled for the future. My colleague Keith Brown will pursue that in the months ahead.

Rhona Brankin has just confirmed that the Labour Party still has a policy of compulsory schooling to age 18. The legislation in England to which she refers will not be available this year, whereas in Scotland 16+ learning choices is available to many youngsters this year and will be available to all youngsters by 2010. Even if one agrees with compulsory schooling to 18, which we do not—people in Scotland think that would be a retrograde step—the English legislation will not be in place for several years to come. It is important for us to act here and now and to face up to the recession. We cannot allow many youngsters to slip through the net, as happened during the recession of the 1980s, in particular. It is important for us to provide opportunities. If there is any age group that this set of Government ministers will support, it is 16 to 19-year-olds; we will ensure that provision is available to them. Members from all parties may question whether compulsory schooling to age 18 is the appropriate way forward. I reject it and think that other members will, too.

Michael Matheson raises an important issue: not all training should be funded by the public sector. In fact, most training in the country is provided and funded by the private sector. It is important that that continues, especially in a difficult economic situation.  At this time, engagement with the private sector is primarily about looking for opportunities for it to support apprentices who have been made redundant. Another issue is workplace learning; the availability of ILAs that can be used in workplaces presents a great opportunity in that area. Outreach work with private sector employers by colleges is to be encouraged and driven forward at this time. We must listen to the different sectors to find out what they need, which means being responsive. The clear message from all employers at the national economic forum was that we must respond differently to each sector. For example, we have launched a modern apprenticeship in life sciences to ensure that we have the technicians who are required to support an industry that will continue to provide wealth generation for this country. Many areas, such as construction, are facing difficulty, but we must remember that there are many successful employers. Our job is to support them through the skills strategy. [ Interruption. ] I say to members who are muttering in the corner that the strategy was supported by a large number of external employer organisations, which recognised that it is the way forward. The strategy provides the flexibility and responsiveness that are important.

As part of the 16+ consultation, we are looking at some of the issues relating to EMAs. Research shows that, by and large, EMAs do not encourage people to stay on at school, although they are effective with certain groups. The consultation recognises that and recommends that we continue to support them. High O'Donnell is absolutely right about bureaucracy. We must be responsive and quick when dealing with skills, especially during a recession. He is also right about the training for work programme. We are actively pursuing the matter, and changes that are proposed for April  will help to shorten the process. There is a difficulty relating to benefits and I have made the point to Tony McNulty that people should not have to wait for six months before they are able to access the programme, but must have access to training even if they have been claiming benefits for only a short time. I have pursued the matter with Westminster, and it is recognised that we have a common goal and interest in the area. I understand that changes to the system may be piloted at an early stage in Glasgow. At a recent meeting with Tony McNulty here in Parliament, I encouraged him to pursue the issue.

The Scottish Government recognises that work placements for secondary school pupils are an important part of the senior phase of learning in the curriculum for excellence. We will consider fully the findings of our recent research on work experience, and we will work with local authorities and other stakeholders to maximise flexibility and choice and to ensure that placements are relevant and meaningful for all young people.

It is appropriate that we update work placements. Vocational learning has to be  improved. Traditionally, there is one block of vocational training in S4, but I think that flexibility to depart from the traditional one-week block would be in order. Suggestions on that will be welcome as we move towards rolling out improvements to work placements for senior pupils in secondary schools.

Scottish Borders Council is more than capable of ensuring that pupils from its secondary schools have relevant placements with employers. The curriculum for excellence provides us with great opportunities for innovative and more flexible delivery. Scottish Borders Council is fully capable of rising to the challenge.

Will the member give way?

indicated agreement  .

I acknowledge Wendy Alexander's continued interest in the pilot, but I need to correct her. It is clear that the research findings from the pilot showed no discernible difference in terms of improving development for vulnerable two-year-olds. What the pilot did was to support and prompt better parenting. It is clear that an area base of vulnerable two-year-olds may not have produced the results that the member may have wished. What we should do, as the research document identifies, is focus on improving parenting, which is exactly what is in the framework.

rose—

If the Labour Party is so convinced of the importance of nursery teachers, why did it amend the school code to allow the removal of nursery teachers? Does the member not recognise that the double-counting of teachers in 2007 does not alter the fact that 200 more nursery teachers are providing support to our children? That is the reality.

I am pleased to open the debate. Alongside "Equally Well: Report of the Ministerial Task Force on Health Equalities" and "Achieving Our Potential: A Framework to tackle poverty and income inequality in Scotland", "The Early Years Framework" represents a new dawn in social policy. There is a wealth of evidence to suggest that children's experiences in their earliest years are key to their future outcomes. Parents' interaction with children in the first years of their lives is critical in developing relationships and in laying the foundations for positive physical and mental health development. The early years are also a period when stark inequalities in cognitive and social development start to emerge. The fact that those often persist into later life has serious consequences not just for individuals but for communities and society as a whole. Many of our most pernicious social problems—violent crime, substance misuse and antisocial behaviour—grow from the seeds of disadvantage that are sown in the early years. In such challenging economic times, some may question whether early years should be a priority. The Government is of course taking immediate action to help individuals through the economic downturn, but we will secure a radical improvement in Scotland's long-term economic prospects and achieve our purpose of sustainable economic growth only if we concentrate on the factors that hold us back: ill health, poverty and wasted potential. All those have their roots in the early years and can be addressed by giving all children the best possible start in life. For that reason, I find it disappointing that the Labour amendment focuses on such a narrow—although not unimportant—issue. Let me address that point straight away so that we can get on with the real business in hand. In the census for 2008, pre-school centres were asked for the first time to report the number of peripatetic teachers, who work across more than one centre, separately from the number of teachers who are employed in their centre only. In 2008, the head count of teachers who are employed in only one centre was approximately the same as the head count of all teachers in 2007. In addition, a head count of  600 was reported for peripatetic teachers, equating to 204 whole-time equivalent staff. By anyone's logic, that means that there must have been an increase in the number of teachers of at least 200 in 2008. I hope that Labour members will now accept that point—which Adam Ingram brought to their attention on 5 December—so that we can move on to the substance of the debate. The substance of the debate is our children and our vision for them. A philosophy of early intervention is at the heart of our vision for a better and a fairer Scotland and at the heart of the early years framework. We must move from treating the symptoms of an unfair society to treating the causes. For too long, Governments have used money as almost the sole mechanism of change. As we move into an era of restricted spending growth, when so much public sector resource will need to be directed towards supporting economic recovery, such a position is no longer sustainable. We already spend £1.5 billion on the early years. We must align those resources to areas that make the most significant contribution to outcomes, and move away from intervening only when there is a crisis in prevention and early intervention. The early years framework was produced through the work of 100 people and 50 organisations, a quarter of which were voluntary. It establishes a new vision for the early years, based on consideration of the whole child in the context of parents, families and communities. It gives us the opportunity to look at how a range of influences can come together to shape positive experiences in the early years. A central message of the new framework is about the importance of parenting. I look forward to hearing the Conservative members' perspective on that. Relationships are key to a child's development and the home learning environment in the early years has a huge influence on educational outcomes. For a variety of reasons, some parents will struggle to provide a nurturing environment and will need support to do that.

Presiding Officer, I am spoilt for choice. I will take Robert Brown.

That is central to the issue of universal access to services, and I know that pilots are on-going. However, it is recognised that having access to the support of health visitors in the early years provides an immediate supportive environment. I hope that the member will find that the early years framework will help to drive forward that approach and recognise the importance of midwives, health visitors and community nursing teams, who support parents during pregnancy and early parenthood and who are known, valued and trusted. We want to build on that by focusing on parenting skills and capacity, and by developing care pathways to ensure that parents with different types and levels of need are given the right kind of support. The long-term aim will be to support parents to build the confidence and skills that will help their children to go on to achieve positive outcomes.

I am more than happy to provide the member with any evidence. Indeed, he will be aware that a preliminary review was also carried out in England, which raised concerns about the middle classes in particular benefiting more than others. I think that the recent review may be more rounded. However, the important point is about support in the early years. A good example of support is provided by East Ayrshire Council, which is working to support parents in its area by means of the Solihull approach, which is a highly practical way of working with parents and supporting them creatively and consistently to work with their child's behaviour issues in particular. I want that sort of structured approach to move into the main stream of post-natal support. Alongside parents' central role, communities can play an important role in supporting children and families, seeing them as key assets and not just as a problem to be tackled. In the strongest communities, there is a great deal of mutual support among parents and families. I want to encourage that informal support as a means of helping parents and developing community cohesion. I also want to ensure that the community planning process takes full account of children and families, with their priorities shaping local action. Play of all kinds is central to how children learn, in terms of both physical health and the  development of social skills, resilience and wellbeing.

If the member does not mind, I would like to move on. I have taken a number of interventions already The framework highlights the example of the Secret Garden outdoor nursery in Fife, which has put adventurous play and active learning at the heart of the experience for children. For some children, access to the adventurous play that enriches childhood is restricted due to a range of barriers such as lack of suitable green spaces and play facilities, as well as wider factors such as parental perceptions of risk. The framework therefore proposes measures to support play infrastructure and a debate on the benefits of play and understanding risk. Our long-term aim is for every child in every community in Scotland to be able to enjoy high-quality play opportunities and to have an understanding of risk and boundaries. Our ambition is for a Scotland in which families and communities are empowered to take responsibility for their lives. Services such as world-class education and health care services and high-quality flexible child care clearly have a role to play in supporting that. The commitments that are set out in the concordat with local government will help to deliver and ensure that there is capacity in the early years. That additional capacity should be used to improve identification and assessment of risks in families, and to make effective interventions in the context of universal services wherever possible, while acknowledging the role of specialist services for those children and families with higher levels of need. The getting it right for every child pathfinder in Highland, which the Parliament has debated in the past, places great emphasis on strengthening the capability of universal services to meet the needs of children and families, and to improve the processes and bring specialist support to children and families where it is needed. It also highlights the crucial role that adult services must play in recognising the impact of parental problems and stresses on outcomes for children, and knowing what to do to help the child as well as the parent. We must build on that learning and put it at the heart of our approach. As a working mother, I am acutely aware of the importance of high-quality, flexible child care. A major issue in the research that we conducted with parents was the way in which pre-school, school and child care services must connect to provide flexible support for parents. Although many such services already exist, we need to expand their  reach among middle and lower-income families, as an important element in making work pay and reducing child poverty. The United Kingdom Government controls the current mechanisms for supporting parents to meet the costs of child care and is driving a set of welfare reforms that is placing higher expectations on parents, particularly lone parents, to engage in work and activities leading towards employment. Although improving employment levels among lone parents can play an important role in reducing child poverty, as it stands, the UK schemes for supporting child care costs are too complex and do not allow real progress to be made. That is an area on which we can have constructive dialogue with our colleagues at Westminster. In order to deliver high-quality services, it is vital that we have a highly skilled and well-trained workforce that is well supported, valued and rewarded. Those elements are very much at the heart of the new workforce developments, such as the new Scottish credit and qualifications framework level 9 qualification in childhood practice. We are under no illusion that there is one single programme or action that will achieve our aims, or that transformational change can happen overnight—hence the 10-year timescale. I firmly believe that the early years must be at the heart of building a more successful Scotland, and that the new framework represents a significant leap forward in how we improve outcomes in and through the early years. I look forward to contributions from all sides to this important debate. I move, That the Parliament recognises that getting the early years right is key to delivering improved outcomes for children and young people and a key opportunity to shape a more successful Scotland; notes the publication of The Early Years Framework and the vision it sets out for giving children the best start in life, including a focus on parenting, early intervention, meeting the needs of children and parents and play; further recognises the challenges in shifting to prevention and early intervention while also supporting children who need help now, and calls on national and local government to work together to address these challenges in partnership during the implementation of the framework.

Yes. The total package of local government funding from 2008 to 2010 is £23 billion. The level of support in 2009-10 represents an increase of 9.9 per cent on the 2007-08 figures and includes capital funding for local government for this year and next of £2 billion, a significant increase over previous years. Obviously, both packages are subject to parliamentary approval. Through the provisional outturn and budget estimate returns, local authorities estimate that their net revenue education budgets for 2008-09 are, on average, 5.5 per cent higher than those that were set for 2007-08. Although those estimates are provisional and need to be treated with some caution, they are reported directly by local authorities and provide evidence of increased spending on education this financial year.

The employment of teachers is, of course, a matter for Renfrewshire Council, but any consideration of the situation must include the outcomes for children. I am pleased to see that, in Renfrewshire Council, the average class size for mathematics and English in secondary 1 and 2 is 20.1 and that only three of the 395 classes go beyond that figure. I am also delighted to hear that Renfrewshire Council will invest £53 million in its school estate. Indeed, one of the schools in line for some of that investment is Wendy Alexander's old school, Park Mains high school.

I am delighted that we are progressing the school building programme. As the First Minister made clear earlier, 150 new schools have been built since May 2007, and a record level of investment in schools—£2 billion—is being made now and over the next few years. I am also delighted to say that the Scottish Futures Trust will support its first school project over the course of the year and that the accompanying funding and revenue stream will be available in the year of that spend.

A 3 per cent efficiency saving in education budgets would have had a serious impact, and the fact that local authorities can not only retain efficiency savings but reinvest them in services such as education is to be welcomed. I am pleased that Marilyne MacLaren, the education convener of the City of Edinburgh Council, has said: "I am very pleased and relieved to be able to announce that the administration will be protecting schools in the  forthcoming budget, and therefore there will be no cuts to direct school funding this year." I do not think that the same reassurance could have been given if the 3 per cent efficiency savings that the previous Administration had proposed and which could not have been recycled had been made.

I am sure that the member will not be backward in coming forward and ensuring that Aberdeenshire Council's case for being at the front of the queue is made. I look forward to the results of the school estate strategy, which is being conducted with our local government partners; I look forward to the Scottish Futures Trust rolling out its programme; and, finally, I look forward to the accompanying revenue stream, which will enable us to continue to build on the brick-for-brick promise that we made and are keeping and to ensure that 250 schools are built in the lifetime of this Parliament.

Ministers no longer have a power of direction over individual colleges. Colleges are independent employers and the salaries that they pay are not a matter for ministers. However, I announced on 11 November at the college and university round-table meeting that I would encourage employers and unions to consider jointly the pros and cons of national collective bargaining for the sector as a whole. All parties are aware that the matter is ultimately for colleges as employers, and an immediate resolution is not expected, but my initiative has been welcomed by college staff unions and the convener of the principals forum of the Association of Scotland's Colleges as an opportunity for informed dialogue.

If Cathie Craigie reflects on my answer to her first question, she will see that I not only support but have initiated such dialogue. It is clear that the benefits and disbenefits must be resolved and discussed. One clear issue is the time and effort that all colleges spend on negotiating and reaching individual settlements, but flexibility has advantages. In Aberdeen, for example, general salary levels are quite high in comparison with the rest of the country so Aberdeen College needs flexibility to recruit the staff that it needs. Fleshing out the pros and cons is important. Some college principals support a national structure, but a significant number oppose it. Useful dialogue will allow us to address the issues, and I have offered to facilitate a session in the spring to bring together all the agencies. I have been pleased by the reaction of principals and unions, which are also finding ways to have such discussions without the Government's interfering. I will make an important point. To help preserve the charitable status of colleges, the previous Administration took away ministers' powers to intervene directly in colleges. I will be at pains to ensure that I do nothing to jeopardise that position. I hope that Cathie Craigie understands the restrictions under which I work. I have tried to be constructive in encouraging discussions.

Under the concordat, local government has agreed to make year-on-year progress to reduce primary 1 to 3 class sizes to a maximum of 18. Sufficient funding has been provided to local government to maintain teacher numbers at 2007 levels which, at a time of falling school rolls, provides headroom to make progress on the joint commitment. Some authorities are making better progress than others.

I understand the member's question, but I hope that he appreciates that I cannot comment on individual schools or on Glasgow City Council's programme, which is the council's responsibility. In Glasgow, 318 teaching posts have been lost. That represents an opportunity lost to Glasgow City Council to cut class sizes by replacing those teachers. It is for the council to manage its resources, but I am aware that Gordon Matheson, the council's executive member for education, said in May 2008 that "Education's budget in Glasgow, in real terms, will be higher next year than it is this year." It is clear that the resources are available to maintain teacher numbers and that the council must manage its estate accordingly. If authorities do not use such a chance to reduce class sizes, that is a missed opportunity. It is regrettable that Glasgow, which has one of the poorest levels of attainment—yes, it has challenges—also has one of the lowest levels of expenditure on education. That is a choice that the council makes.

Malcolm Chisholm should pay close attention to the budget-setting discussions that will take place in the City of Edinburgh Council. It would be extremely surprising if there were reductions in the education budgets, and he should think carefully before making such accusations. Education spend in Edinburgh is a matter for the council. Malcolm Chisholm would be best to engage with the council and, when the budget is set, pay attention to the levels of that spend. I do  not anticipate any reduction in it. Indeed, in my answer to Wendy Alexander, I indicated that, in their provisional outturns, local authorities estimated a 5.5 per cent increase in the current year's budget. We can examine projections for next year as we move forward.

Physical activity, physical education and sport are key elements of the health and wellbeing subject area of the curriculum for excellence. That will require schools to make provision for every young person to participate in those activities during and beyond the school day and is explicitly reflected in guidance to support the new three-to-18 curriculum. Taken together, the experiences and outcomes for physical education, physical activity and sport will underpin a pattern of daily physical activity, which research has shown is most likely to lead to sustained physical activity in adult life.

I am aware of the Health and Sport Committee's evidence session. Every inspection team will ask about progress towards the target of two hours of PE and about wider physical education activities. HMIE was reminded as recently as two weeks ago that that should be the case. In schools where the provision of physical education has been highlighted as an  issue, the inspection team will explore that rigorously, and if it concludes that provision is insufficient or of poor quality, that will feature in the inspection report. Good practice will, of course, also be highlighted. I take on board the points about transparency in the reporting system, and I will pass them on to HMIE for it to reflect on.

I appreciate the member's interest in that general area—physical activity includes outdoor education. The new training and continuous professional development that is provided for existing primary teachers can certainly do that, but we need to ensure that the probationers who are going into education are well grounded in all aspects of physical activity, as that will make a big difference in improving the activity levels of our young people.

My officials are currently considering all the responses to the consultation, and we aim to publish a report on our analysis of the responses next month.

The short answer is yes. The East Dunbartonshire position has been brought to my attention. When it is published, the revised guidance will set out our position on the implementation of any such systems, which is that if an authority decides to use biometric systems in its schools we will expect it to follow the best practice, which will be set out in the guidance, and  to consult parents. I hope that East Dunbartonshire Council will consider fully consulting parents on the use of those technologies in schools, but ultimately it is an issue for the council and the parent council forum to resolve.

The minutes of the Council of Economic Advisers make it clear that the work of the university task force was discussed. Having been present at one of the council's meetings, I know that the council was informed about that work.

I reassure the member that there has been no slowdown in funding and support for schools. In fact, 150 schools have been refurbished and opened since May 2007, and another 100 schools will come during the current session of Parliament.

John Park shares our interest in skills and skills utilisation. In the light of his connections with the STUC, he will be pleased to hear that Grahame Smith led one of the sessions on skills provision at the national economic forum. The member is making reasonable points about how a connection can be further developed.

We welcome the first annual report of the Scottish Council of Economic Advisers. It is an outstanding piece of work and, as is clear from the response that we published last week, we take the recommendations and considerations seriously. The report sets out clear strategic priorities for Scotland's economy. In normal economic conditions, advice of such weight, detail and value would be extremely helpful. In these exceptional times, however, the council's recommendations assume even more gravity in helping us to do all that we can, within the limits of our powers, to deliver for the people of Scotland. Over the past year, we have followed the council's advice on how to achieve our targets for economic growth, productivity, emissions, participation and cohesion. We have listened carefully to the council on planning, infrastructure, education and skills, and our economic statistics. We agree with the council that, had the Scottish Government more levers under our control—such as borrowing powers—we could make an even greater contribution to economic recovery. It remains to be seen whether the announcements that were made by the UK Government on Monday will encourage lending and get rid of the toxic assets in our banking sector. What is clear is that the banking sector and the UK economy generally both face unprecedented circumstances. For many Scots, this is the most difficult economic climate for more than a generation, and few could have forecast the severity of this downturn. However, as early as last summer, this Government developed a six-point economic recovery programme to help to reduce the worst effects of the downturn on individuals and businesses in Scotland. I want to outline the action that we are taking to provide increased support for people who are facing hardship, and I will refer to some of the  specific recommendations and considerations of the council. As the council has recognised, our greatest challenge will be in supporting individuals who face the risk of unemployment, which is why we are enhancing our partnership action for continuing employment initiative. Last week, I announced a range of measures to strengthen PACE, including the dedication of 80 Skills Development Scotland professionals to work alongside staff in Jobcentre Plus in supporting people who are facing redundancy. A national helpline and revamped website will go live next month, and all careers centres across Scotland will be geared up to offer tailored support to individuals. The changes that I announced have been widely welcomed and will underpin further action in the next few weeks. Tomorrow, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council will prioritise resources so that colleges can align their provision with PACE activity and ensure that it better reflects the increased demand for courses. The funding council and Skills Development Scotland are working with ConstructionSkills to ensure that apprentices who are made redundant have the opportunity to complete appropriate and relevant training. When apprentices have accumulated Scottish credit and qualifications framework credits through their training, I expect colleges and other training providers to ensure that that is recognised and counts towards an alternative programme.

I want apprentices to complete their courses. We can perhaps work collectively to ensure that apprentices who are made redundant can continue their apprenticeships in future employment. I understand that 160 apprentices have already been found alternative employment. Issues to do with college funding also arise, as do issues to do with benefits and the UK Government. If apprentices who are made redundant are unable to find alternative employment in which to continue their apprenticeships, we have to ensure that college courses are available and that the apprentices' income does not suffer. I hope that Mr Park will accept that reassurance. In recommendation 9 of its report, the council suggested that Jobcentre Plus powers should be devolved. Clearly, that is an issue for the longer term, but it is a suggestion with which we agree. The council praised the partnership approach to employability that underpins initiatives such as  PACE. It also recommended that we explore opportunities to work more closely with the UK Government and Jobcentre Plus. People in Scotland expect in these demanding times that public organisations and Governments of whatever political colour will pull together for the common good, which is why I met Tony McNulty, the Minister of State for Employment and Welfare Reform. We agreed that people who are out of work will receive an improved employment and skills service, and he will join me at our PACE summit in February to demonstrate our joint commitment to that. I invite the spokespeople of all parties that are represented in the chamber to attend the summit and to work with the Government to intensify our support for those who are facing up to the prospect of unemployment. Skills Development Scotland is working with Jobcentre Plus to create a seamless service to minimise the time for which people who are affected by redundancy are out of work. Next month, we will establish one pilot office in each of the six Jobcentre Plus districts in Scotland, where people who are claiming jobseekers allowance—including those who have recently been made redundant—will be offered skills assessments and careers guidance and will be referred on to suitable skills provision. The council of advisers has asked that we pay particular attention to the vulnerability of young people in the labour market. That is essential, if we are to avoid the creation of a lost generation of young people, such as we witnessed in the 1980s. In November, I launched 16+ learning choices, through which we will provide all our 16 and 17-year-olds with appropriate learning options. That is our alternative to compulsory schooling to the age of 18. Currently, 21 local authorities are implementing 16+ learning choices, and the programme will be rolled out throughout Scotland by the end of next year. At the same time, we have refined individual learning accounts to provide better support for our 16 and 17-year-olds and to support workplace training. Last week, I announced further changes to ILAs to allow people—working and out of work—to participate in an even wider range of learning. I will continue to adapt our funding mechanisms to ensure that they provide the most effective support for individuals. For example, I am considering how ILA funding can support training for people who are about to be made redundant by helping them to move from being in work to being in new work by retraining, with their employer's agreement, during the 90-day redundancy period. We also propose to invest £1.7 billion in our universities and colleges through our budget, which will help the sector to meet increased demand over the months and years ahead. The  £38 million package of measures that we introduced for part-time higher education study last summer will help more people to improve their skills and job prospects during these tough economic times. Scotland is unique in the United Kingdom in providing discretionary, grant-based funding for taught postgraduate study. However, until now, that funding has been available only to those who are on full-time courses, although 70 per cent of Scottish taught postgraduate students study part time. Later this year, I will introduce long-term improvements to those funding arrangements. Ahead of those wider changes, I announced last week that we will launch a number of pilot actions that will, for the first time, extend postgraduate funding to part-time students. The council has recommended that we work closely with employers and has highlighted the importance of skills utilisation. Better use of the skills of Scotland's workforce is essential if we are to achieve sustainable economic growth, which is why the skills utilisation leadership group, which is made up of business and union leaders, is championing, advocating and sharing across sectors best practice in respect of how companies can make better use of the skills of their workforce in order to improve productivity. During the summer, the Government approved a range of projects totalling around £55 million to assist employability and skills development and to build on the success of our skills interventions to help more people in Scotland to get into, and progress through, the workforce. Skills Development Scotland is currently working with sector skills councils, industry bodies and training providers to develop skills interventions that better meet the needs of individuals and employers in Scotland. We must be flexible about how we achieve an additional 15,000 training places by 2011. Some of those will be apprentices, but I know from my discussions with employers that one size does not fit all, so they want more flexible skills interventions that reflect the particular needs of their sectors.

The first projects from the Scottish Futures Trust will commence this year. I advise Duncan McNeil that £2 billion of infrastructure construction work is already taking place in schools alone. As he will know, only last week I was in Greenock to see the development of the James Watt College with part of the construction money that has been brought forward from future years. The 2008-09 money will help to keep jobs—indeed, 4,700 jobs will be supported through our bringing forward construction investments as part of our plans. I will come on to that. Recommendations 2 and 4 of the council's report endorse our approach to key sectors. To achieve our ambition of 50 per cent growth in the tourism sector, we are addressing industry concerns about the relevance of the training provision that is available for the sector. With Scottish Enterprise, we will fund a comprehensive feasibility study to bring to life an ambition of business leaders in the sector to establish an industry-led centre of leadership in hospitality and tourism. We are also providing funding to develop a food and drink skills hub at the University of Abertay Dundee. In addition, we have made funding available to establish a financial services skills gateway to support the strategy for the financial services sector in Scotland. At the heart of the Government's economic recovery programme is a package of accelerated capital spending. We are bringing forward investment from 2010-11 into 2009-10 and—to address Mr McNeil's question—into 2008-09. Of that money, £13 million is being invested in the college sector, some of which is to be used in 2008-09 for construction work, including the development of the James Watt College. The Government has welcomed the UK Government's pre-budget report announcement, which has enabled us to bring forward up to a further £260 million of capital investment. The council has recommended that we increase our overall infrastructure spending, and I am pleased to say that, as we made clear in the budget bill, we plan to push ahead with £230 million of accelerated spending across Scotland in the next year. We plan to ensure that local authorities receive £90 million of that funding, much of which will be focused on new and refurbished schools, which will impact on local businesses. In addition, colleges and universities will benefit from £13 million of improvements, as I just said to Mr McNeil. That money will generate work and support 4,700 jobs in total. Members across the chamber have a duty to work to help those who face immediate difficulties, while ensuring that Scotland emerges from the  downturn stronger and more competitive in the global marketplace. I move, That the Parliament notes the recommendations made in the First Annual Report of the Scottish Council of Economic Advisers: December 2008 and the Scottish Government's response to those recommendations in the context of its action to help businesses and households, support jobs and investment and ensure Scotland is well positioned to take advantage of any recovery.

Yes. Under the terms of the concordat, local government has agreed to make year-on-year progress on reducing the maximum number of pupils in P1 to P3 classes to 18.

I remind the member that local authorities are responsible for education in their area. If she had been paying attention, she would have noted that Fife Council has announced further capital spend for new schools in Fife. Over the 2008-09 session, 27 schools have been given additional teachers to cut class sizes. There are challenges in areas such as Fife, Perth and Kinross and West Lothian, which have growing populations. However, although Fife has areas where the population is growing, it has managed to add to the teacher workforce in order to cut class sizes. I think that she should welcome that.

Murdo Fraser knows full well that the agreement with local government is that it will work to provide year-on-year progress on cutting class sizes to 18. It is a tribute to some local authorities that they have made early progress on that. As he will be aware, some local authorities will want to focus their attention on areas of deprivation, while others will want to take down the class sizes in all their schools. I am delighted that Fife, as was referred to in my previous answer, is making significant progress on cutting class sizes. I look forward to hearing news of that nature from across Scotland.

Helping all young people into education, employment and training is a top priority for the Government and we have a specific indicator to that effect in the national performance framework. To support delivery, I recently launched 16+ learning choices, which will be rolled out across Scotland by 2010. The new model will bring a particular focus to improving outcomes for young people who leave school at the earliest opportunity and for those who need additional support to make a successful transition.

There were a number of questions there. I refer the member to the national performance framework, because it has the responsibility and the targets. Local community planning partnerships and, more important, the partnerships that involve Skills Development Scotland and all the other partners that can help the young people to whom she referred have made provisions to make significant progress. That is why we already see a gearing-up of the partnership work to help those young people. The member is right that the position in Scotland is not acceptable. That is one of the reasons why, in the 16+ learning choices model—I hope that the member has an opportunity to review the consultation on that—we want to focus support to allow more flexibility and more choices for those young people so that they can combine experiences in the voluntary or other sectors with more traditional school work. We want to provide opportunities for more young people to remain in education out of choice, as opposed to having compulsory education until the age of 18. We want to provide a far wider range of experiences and help to fund better provision than that which those young people might find in colleges. I strongly urge the member and others to have a look at the 16+ learning choices consultation.

We had debate on that yesterday and I think that the member is stretching the question. However, it is important to put on record that we welcome the cross-party support that exists for assessment of young people in primary to ensure that we improve pupil literacy and numeracy. In tackling literacy and numeracy skills, we also need to focus on adults, so our recent announcement of a survey on adult literacy and numeracy is important. I agree with those members who said that we should not have formal external examinations in primary 7—a point made by Elizabeth Smith in yesterday's debate—as that would not necessarily be the way forward. However, we want better assessment for better teaching and learning to ensure that young people have the tools that they need. To go back to my response to Helen Eadie's question, if we can get literacy and numeracy supported by smaller class sizes in primary 1 to 3, perhaps the problem that Johann Lamont mentioned of young people leaving at 16-plus without going into positive destinations will be tackled properly.

The chief executive of Skills Development Scotland met the Scottish Government at the regulatory review group meeting on 19 December 2008. The discussion focused on the role of Skills Development Scotland in improving regulation within the Government's better regulation agenda.

Clearly, the Government is working on its economic recovery plan to focus on the support that is needed for economic recovery, but particular attention is being put on partnership  action for continuing employment. We are improving and refocusing PACE to ensure that it is geared up to do what is required. I can reassure the member that PACE was actively involved with Woolworths staff in particular in the weeks before and during the Christmas period. I put on record my thanks to all the staff in Skills Development Scotland and the PACE teams for their work over the past few weeks, particularly in supporting the staff of Woolworths and other companies that have announced redundancies. I am committed to delivering and improving on the PACE agenda. I will make an announcement on that shortly.

Key issues around barriers to asylum seekers accessing further and higher education were raised in research that was conducted by the Scottish Government and the Scottish Refugee Council in 2004. They included lack of proficiency in English language and literacy, lack of full refugee status, and child care issues. We have been working to remove those barriers and, as a result, we now have the most generous provisions available to asylum seekers across the United Kingdom.

The terms that are laid down for young asylum seekers reflect the terms and conditions that affect other students. For example, the three-year residency requirement affects all students who apply for the support that young asylum seekers get. We are trying to ensure that young asylum seekers get the same access and financial support as similar students who have been resident in Scotland for three years. Although I am happy to keep that under review, my scope might be limited. We always knew that the numbers would be limited—there were 17 last year and this year there are slightly more—but we wanted equity of treatment, and that is what we have managed to deliver.

I have pursued this issue consistently. I welcome the announcement on the new code of practice and duty by the UK Border Agency. It is important for the new code to ensure that there is fair treatment that meets the same standard that a British child would receive; that the child's interests are primary so that there is no discrimination; and that their asylum applications are dealt with in a timely manner. I understand that that will be part of an amendment to a UK bill. I am also pleased to see that progress has been made on alternatives to detention. This Government has called for that for some time. Home Office officials have the key responsibility of driving the pilot forward and positive work has been done with Glasgow City Council officials in particular. It is important that Scotland ensures that children's needs are always paramount, wherever they come from and for whatever reason. We have to have a sense of decency about how we treat children. The Government welcomes the alternative to detention pilot.

UCAS will be considering the tariff rating for the interdisciplinary project element of the new Scottish science and language baccalaureates in its work schedule for 2009. The Scottish Government and the Scottish Qualifications Authority will be working with UCAS between now and the spring to ensure that it has all the material that it needs to carry out that exercise, with a view to having the results ready in time for the first learners starting their baccalaureates in summer 2009 and applying in autumn 2009 for entry to university from 2010.

That is an interesting question and I look forward to the answer. I am not sure that it is appropriate for Government ministers to set the tariffs for universities. If I did so, I am sure that I would hear a howl of complaint from elsewhere. That should be left to the specialists and educationists who can evaluate a course and  subsequently set the tariff. As was said in the debate yesterday, the improvements in the tariff ratings for highers and advanced highers compared with those for other qualifications south of the border show that Scottish students are well placed. Even with an A* rating coming in for advanced highers, the likely, or proposed, rating that could be achieved by the interdisciplinary project as part of the baccalaureate will certainly provide an additional assurance that Scottish students who apply to universities do not lose out. If anything, they will be far more competitive than ever before.

Does Ken Macintosh understand the difference between assessment for qualification for later life and lifelong learning and assessment for learning, the purpose of which is to improve the teaching and learning in primary school? Everybody is agreed that we need assessment to improve teaching and learning in the early years. Indeed, smaller class sizes in P1 to P3 will provide more teaching time for literacy  and numeracy. Let us hear the ideas that he has for qualifications in secondary school.

indicated agreement  .

I agree that it is important to have a simple system that employers can understand, but will the member reflect on the fact that the new exams will not be introduced until 2013-14 and many youngsters will sit standard grades before then? The standard grade has worth, and when we debate the issue it is important that we do not demotivate youngsters who are studying for the qualification or will do so in the years to come.

The point is an important one in building consensus. We are not talking about an either/or situation, in which pupils gain a qualification in secondary school or have an assessment in primary school. We have to have assessment if we are to improve teaching and learning. We also have to give pupils the opportunity, time and space for literacy and numeracy early in primary school. Until the age of eight, children learn to read; from the age of eight onwards, they read to learn. Let us get the basics right at the outset. I think that there is a consensus throughout the Parliament on taking that forward.

Will the member give way?

I point out that, in the summer, we appointed a representative from the college sector to the curriculum for excellence management board precisely to ensure that colleges are represented. Clearly, the national qualifications system is not just a schools system, so I reiterate that we need to ensure that the qualifications are fit for a lifelong learning agenda. On that issue, I agree with the member.

I wanted Parliament to have the opportunity to express its views on the proposals that were put forward in June. I await constructive ideas and suggestions—as I have heard from a number of members on my side of the chamber—from Labour members, and to hear where the Labour Party stands on qualifications. That would help me in my decision making.

That is an important point. It is because of such concerns that we have ensured that representatives of business organisations are members of the curriculum for excellence stakeholder group. We want them to be involved in that way partly so that they can inform our decision making, but also because we want to ensure that employers and businesses are fully aware of the new qualifications system.

It is important to make it clear that the choice for advanced highers has not changed. Mr McLetchie cites the case of Renfrewshire. Although accusations to the contrary have been made by some parties, the same choices for advanced higher are available this year as were available last year.

I am delighted to say that when I announced the detail, including the distinctions and other aspects of the baccalaureate, I was overwhelmed by the interest that was expressed. I announced at the end of November that we would look at other subjects.

I make it clear that national qualifications are not just school qualifications. One of the strengths of our system is the credit and qualifications framework. I agree that if we are to tackle the illiteracy and innumeracy problems that exist in the adult population, it is essential that national qualifications serve adults as well as pupils and that they are not just school-based qualifications.

It might be helpful if I explain that the consultation is on national qualifications, not the curriculum for excellence.

Will the member take an intervention?

I want to address the point about funding. The funding settlement from Westminster was tight, but local government got a fair settlement from the Scottish Government. More important, local government got a record level of funding. The majority of the funding for local government—40 per cent or more—is for education. There is therefore a record level of funding for education, but we expect it to be applied to education and CPD, as it has been previously.

I want to see breadth of experience in S4. There are some misplaced concerns that there will be restrictions, but I do not think that there will be. I reassure Rhona Brankin that I will not accept a situation in which there are restrictions. Moving literacy and numeracy assessments to S3 provides an opportunity to ensure that that is not the case.

The start of a new year is an ideal time to think about the future, and one of the most important decisions in education this year is to decide how the next generation of national qualifications can best meet the needs of our young people and adult learners. The curriculum for excellence is about delivering a modern education system for a modern Scotland. Building on the previous Administration's initial work, we will return professional autonomy to teachers and we will engender greater responsibility in them for raising the standard of learning and teaching in their classrooms. We will encourage breadth of experience throughout education and we will reduce overassessment in qualifications, which will provide more time for quality teaching and learning. We will also support teaching and learning that draws out the strengths of each pupil through more personalised learning. We will improve standards, raise achievement, provide appropriate challenges for all and provide greater coherence and progression in education, supported by the qualifications system. We will ensure that literacy and numeracy are embedded at all stages: for the first time under devolution, all teachers of all subjects at all stages will be responsible for literacy and numeracy. We will provide a progressive educational experience with greater focus on skills for learning, skills for life and skills for work, and we will ensure that parents are informed about the curriculum for excellence. Members should make no mistake: to give our young people the best possible chance to succeed in a changing world, our education system has to change to reflect that world and it needs to be supported by a coherent curriculum and a coherent assessment and qualifications system. The consultation on the next generation of national qualifications was launched in June last year, along with "Building the curriculum 3: a framework for learning and teaching". The consultation ran until the end of October, and we received more than 1,800 replies from individuals and organisations. That is a remarkable response  rate, and I am grateful to all those who participated. I am particularly pleased that parents, young people and representatives of business responded to the consultation. All the individual responses were made publicly available in December. Independent researcher Ipsos MORI is currently analysing the responses, in addition to a range of other evidence, and its report is due to be published next month. As well as considering the evidence from the Ipsos MORI report, I will take advice from the curriculum for excellence management board and the stakeholder group that I chair. Those groups involve the key players in education, including local authorities, the main teacher associations, colleges and universities. I want today to give Parliament an early opportunity to make its contribution to assessing and addressing the opportunities and challenges of introducing a qualifications system that supports the curriculum for excellence. We deliberately set out an ambitious vision and a strong set of proposals in the consultation. I wanted to set a clear direction for the debate, while remaining open to ideas and suggestions around the details. We consulted on four main proposals: the retention of access, higher and advanced higher qualifications, with their content being reviewed to ensure consistency with the aims, vision and values of the curriculum for excellence; the introduction of new qualifications to replace standard grade at general and credit levels and intermediate 1 and 2; the introduction of new qualifications in literacy and numeracy; and increased flexibility in taking qualifications to allow young people more freedom to personalise their learning. A substantial majority of respondents favoured the first proposal, which was the retention of access, higher and advanced higher qualifications with a review of their content to ensure that they are consistent with the curriculum for excellence. Those respondents supported our view that the next generation of national qualifications needs to reflect the learning of the revised curriculum with its emphasis on enabling young people to develop the four capacities. Some concerns were expressed about practical issues, especially the timescale for introduction of the revised and new qualifications. I have addressed those concerns by introducing a further year of implementation for the new curriculum. Consequently, the start of the revised and new qualifications has been moved from 2012-13 to 2013-14, which will give teaching staff greater opportunities to undertake high-quality preparatory work. I am pleased to announce that, in order to support that work and to acknowledge how  important successful implementation will be, we will provide in-service days in the current and the next two school years in addition to the existing in-service days and continuing professional development, which should increasingly focus on the curriculum for excellence. That will give an additional three in-service days to help teachers to implement the curriculum for excellence and will, perhaps, address some of the concerns that are raised in Margaret Smith's amendment.

The curriculum for excellence is not an additional initiative. It is about the bread and butter of what should already be happening—and increasingly is happening—in schools. I urge Ken Macintosh to engage with and encourage his local authority, East Renfrewshire Council, which is taking an active and progressive role in engaging in training and in development of the curriculum for excellence. I hope that he will welcome the point that I just made. The issue is certainly addressed by Margaret Smith in her amendment.

No, thank you. The strength of our higher and advanced higher qualifications was re-emphasised recently when the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service decided to increase from 2010 onwards the tariff points that are awarded for them at grades A to C. UCAS's review clearly demonstrates the value of those qualifications and is good news for Scottish students who apply for university places in Scotland and elsewhere. Most respondents welcomed the second proposal—the introduction of new qualifications to replace standard grade at general and credit levels and intermediate 1 and 2—and agreed that that will reduce the complexity of the qualifications system. A small number of respondents did not agree and suggested that standard grade be retained. There were different views on some issues. For instance, most respondents agreed that the new qualification should have a unit-based structure because that will provide motivation and help to ensure that our young people receive recognition for their achievements. However, some respondents were concerned that, as a result, courses might become overly driven by assessment. That is one of the main challenges that we have to address. It is extremely important that we get right the assessment arrangements for the new qualifications. They need to promote high standards and to be fair, credible and reliable. Crucially, assessment must support good-quality  learning rather than serve as a potential barrier to it. I have therefore asked the curriculum for excellence management board to provide me with early advice on assessment issues. The purpose of the senior phase is to build on the preceding broad general education by providing young people with a range of learning opportunities that include more practical or applied learning through the curriculum framework and the qualifications system. The number and range of qualifications that are undertaken in the senior phase will be a matter for schools, colleges, parents and young people to decide. I make it clear that the Government wants the senior phase to contain breadth of experience. The feedback that we have received states that further advice would be helpful, so we will take that work forward. On 28 November 2008, we launched 16+ learning choices, which is our new model for supporting delivery of the senior phase of the curriculum for excellence and ensuring that more young people enter employment or training. It is Scotland's alternative to compulsory education to 18.

I thank the former First Minister—and, indeed, former education minister—for his intervention. I hope that my actions and responses have demonstrated to him that I am actively engaging in the process and will respond—after all, the culture in this country must be one of openness and responsiveness. We have to end the era of dictating everything from the top down, leaving no room for manoeuvre, even in the light of evidence to the contrary, so I give a  commitment to creating such responsiveness at national and—increasingly—local level. With regard to the introduction of new literacy and numeracy qualifications, respondents were generally in favour of option A—in other words, of assessing the new awards at the end of secondary 3. Again, there were differences in views about assessment and other practical matters, such as the implications for existing maths and English courses. I have asked the curriculum for excellence management board to consider those issues carefully. Making the awards at the end of S3 could help to alleviate misplaced concern about the narrowing of subject choices in S4. Bearing in mind Elizabeth Smith's constructive amendment in this respect, I emphasise that these awards are only one of the actions that we are taking to improve literacy and numeracy from three to 18. Improved learning and teaching in primary school will be accompanied by effective assessment: for example, the new national assessment resource, which will be available from 2010 to help staff build confidence in assessment and to develop relevant responses, will ensure that steps can be taken to address problems at an early stage. Smaller class sizes in the formative years will also help to embed literacy and numeracy. Assessment for the new qualifications clearly serves a different purpose in providing formal recognition of young people's literacy and numeracy skills. Our fourth proposal is to encourage greater flexibility in qualifications, in order to give young people more freedom to personalise their learning. A majority of respondents were in favour of allowing highers and advanced highers to be studied over two years as well as over, as they are at present, one year. However, there was less support for allowing them to be taken over 18 months because it is believed that such a move would require a winter exam diet. A majority of respondents were also in favour of enabling the most able students to bypass qualifications at lower levels and to start studying for highers from S4 onwards. Some concerns were raised over timetabling and other administrative issues and over whether, in reality, parents would accept such a move or still demand the safety net of lower-level qualifications. Concerns were also expressed about how universities' admission procedures, come 2015, would treat highers that were gained over more than one year. I know that, although they generally support greater flexibility, universities wish to consider for themselves any implications for their admissions policies. I am keen for universities to consider carefully the implications, not just of qualifications, but of  the curriculum for excellence as a whole, for their admissions procedures and for the transition between school and higher education more generally. My letter of guidance makes it clear to the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council that universities will have a responsibility for taking forward the curriculum for excellence. After all, a major aim of the curriculum for excellence is to improve the quality of learning rather than simply to accelerate young people's progress through the qualifications system. Although the Scottish science and language baccalaureates were not part of the consultation on the next generation of national qualifications, I am sure that some members will mention them during the debate. I announced the detailed structure of the baccalaureates at the end of November 2008—the first awards will be made in 2010. The Scottish Qualifications Authority is continuing to engage with schools, colleges, universities and employers over the awards, and I am particularly pleased that UCAS will this year tariff rate them for university entrance purposes. That, along with UCAS's uprating of higher and advanced higher qualifications that I mentioned earlier, will put Scottish pupils in a good position as we move forward. Of course, we cannot and should not underestimate the challenges that lie ahead. The consultation has raised certain issues, particularly with regard to assessment. We are already looking ahead and considering new approaches to assessment, and we will want to carefully think through that issue and others to ensure that our qualifications system is improved and that any improvements are safely delivered. I intend to announce my decisions on the future shape of our qualifications system before the end of this academic year, in order to give the SQA the necessary time to develop the qualifications and to give schools, colleges and other providers a clear basis on which to plan. This debate gives Parliament the opportunity to contribute its own views. I appreciate the constructive approach that many members have already taken and will listen very carefully to the views that will be expressed this afternoon. I believe that, in our stewarding of the Scottish education system, it is incumbent on us all not only to ensure that we provide clear direction and leadership but—as Jack McConnell made clear—to be unafraid of responding when issues arise or other evidence emerges. In this debate, Parliament has the opportunity to shape the future of our qualifications system in the best interests of Scotland's young people and adult learners. I look forward to hearing what members have to say.  I move, That the Parliament recognises the importance of developing the next generation of national qualifications in Scotland in line with the aims, vision and values of the Curriculum for Excellence, with its emphasis on equipping all young people to respond to the demands of the 21st century through developing their capacities as successful learners, confident individuals, responsible citizens and effective contributors and acknowledges the challenges and opportunities in taking forward the findings of the national consultation exercise and the key role to be played by local authorities, schools, colleges, universities and others in ensuring that we develop a system that meets the expectations of society, in which robust and credible assessment supports good learning and teaching and all young people have the opportunity to acquire the skills, knowledge and experience that they require to take their places in a modern society and economy.

Despite the fact that Westminster has imposed the tightest financial settlement since devolution, we have restored the principle of free education and have increased the share of spending that is going to Scottish universities. We are investing a higher proportion of our budget in Scotland's universities than the previous Administration did—the figure has risen from 3.73 to 3.79 per cent, which is more than £1 billion a year. We have also delivered an above-inflation increase of 3.4 per cent in university funding for teaching and research in the current financial year.

I take this opportunity to congratulate Scottish Universities on its tremendous achievement in the research assessment exercise, which is published today. I recognise and celebrate the exciting and innovative work that goes on in universities throughout Scotland. The results reflect both the hard work of those who are working in our universities and the substantial investments that we are making in our universities.

The Universities UK report contained a lot of mistakes. For example, education funding is £6,044 per student in Scotland, whereas in England it is just over £5,500. We also have a better record on international students, having taken forward the new horizons fund, which will have an impact on universities' funding. I will be taking up the mistakes in the Universities UK report with its author shortly.

We attach a great deal of importance to the role of rural schools and recognise their significance within their local communities. That is why early next year we will introduce a bill to safeguard our rural schools and improve the way in which all school closure proposals are consulted on and handled.

I am aware that South Lanarkshire Council is informally considering possible future options for schools in the Clydesdale part of its area, and my understanding is that things are being done entirely openly with parent councils. If—and I stress the word "if"—the council were to decide at some stage in the future that it wished to consult officially on proposed changes to the current arrangements, a full, open and transparent public consultation process in accordance with the current statutory requirements would be conducted, which would allow all interested parties ample opportunity to give their views.

I thank Murdo Fraser for his continuing interest in the issue. The bill that I mentioned will be aimed at improving the consultation process, including the process at the start of consultations, and ensuring that if any concerns exist about the information that a council provides, there are opportunities right at the beginning of the process for that information to be corrected and shared with parents.

The bill that we will introduce is intended to maintain existing rural schools, which should not cost any more to do than it does under the current settlement. The allocation of grant-aided expenditure already takes account of rurality—that is reflected in the settlement that rural areas receive. I welcome the Liberal Democrats' support for improving consultation on rural school closures and I look forward to hearing their constructive suggestions when the bill is introduced.

Under the terms of the concordat, local government agreed that it was funded to maintain teacher numbers broadly at 2007 levels despite falling school rolls, and our planning assumptions are that it will do so.

The member posed a variety of questions. His initial question was about the target number of teachers, but this year's situation is a result of planning that was done, and decisions that were made, by his Government two years ago. Quite clearly, a number of today's post-probation teachers were recruited as a result of decisions by the previous Government. That is one reason why I set up the teacher employment working group. A series of recommendations has been made. It is absolutely correct to identify the need to ensure more permanent employment, particularly for primary school teachers, but 79 per cent of  post-probationers are employed in teaching. We need to work to improve that situation, but it is not helpful when some local authorities do not maintain teacher numbers at 2007 levels, even though they have been provided with the resources to do so.

The Government is fully committed to supporting science education. That is being addressed through the curriculum for excellence, the Scottish science baccalaureate and the new science framework that I announced to Parliament this morning.

Scottish schools and the Scottish Government would challenge creationism if it were taught in our schools. However, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education reports that no schools in Scotland currently conduct education on creationism.

I am certainly prepared to publish the support that we have for the proposal. The member's concern is misplaced and she exaggerates in saying that there are grave concerns. I think that stretching our most able pupils will be welcomed. Many parents and secondary 6 pupils report to me that pupils drift through S6 if they have already been successful in their application for university. We need to challenge our brightest and best if we are to  capitalise on science in the future as we take ourselves through the economic downturn.

The Scottish Government, the Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council are actively working with the UHI Millennium Institute to assist with its preparations for an application for university title. The timing of such an application to the Privy Council is ultimately a matter for the UHI Millennium Institute in the light of its assessment of its ability to reach the quality and standards that university title in Scotland carries with it.

I recognise and share the member's ambition, and perhaps impatience, to proceed to university title. However, it is important that we recognise that university status will be granted not only on the basis of taught-degree awarding powers, but on the basis of research.  That is a differentiation between the Scottish university system and the system in England, where the number of teaching-only institutions is increasing. We are working extremely hard on the issue. Meetings took place as recently as 4 October. Scottish Government officials and the sponsoring universities are working to ensure that provisions are in place and that the concerns that the QAA has raised are dealt with swiftly but properly, to allow university title to be granted.

Indeed, I do. There is great excitement, not only about the potential for the UHI, but about the existing research, the standards that are being transmitted and the co-operation, intellectually and academically, throughout Scotland, supported by other universities. University title for the UHI will be a driver for economic progress for the Highlands and Islands. Its innovative way of working will be a benchmark for other institutions in Scotland and elsewhere—they will want to follow that approach.

The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth and I discussed a number of issues, including education budgets, when we met Dumfries and Galloway Council on 29 July 2008.

We expect that the welcome policies on the extension of free school meals for P1 to P3 and the reduction in class sizes will be met from the agreed provisions of the local  government settlement for the next three years. As the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has acknowledged, the resources are in place for maintaining teacher numbers in the face of falling school rolls. As the member knows, Dumfries and Galloway has an ageing population, so there is potential to use the headroom resulting from falling rolls to ensure that teachers are employed in classrooms. I acknowledge that, when we met Dumfries and Galloway Council, it raised issues about capital in relation to classrooms. At the meeting, we made it clear that funding for the commitments is included in the local government settlement. Clearly, the Government cannot be held responsible for overspends by individual council departments. I relay to the member that we made our position clear when we met Dumfries and Galloway Council at the end of July.

I congratulate the Presiding Officer on reaching question 10. We are consulting on draft guidance for local authorities on the use of biometric technology in schools. While preparing the draft guidance, and since the launch of the consultation, we have either spoken to or been in contact with all local authorities in Scotland.

Yes, and the consultation on the guidance makes that point. Indeed, the position was raised initially by Patrick Harvie in discussions of previous legislation in this Parliament.

Change happens progressively over time, but a clear vision and a well-understood sense of direction are crucial. Just over a year ago, the Government set out our vision for Scotland. We published our economic strategy, defined our economic purpose and said that there would be a new framework for science, which would outline how Scotland's success as a nation will be underpinned through developing knowledge exchange, increasing overseas investment in research and development in Scotland and developing the science base. The clear focus of those science goals emerged from an extensive consultation in 2006. The new framework, "Science for Scotland", also reflects more recent dialogue with key stakeholders, including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, Universities Scotland, the Association of Scotland's Colleges, the Scottish science advisory council, the Royal Society of Edinburgh, the Confederation of British Industry Scotland, the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce and many others. I attended a meeting to hear the views of 12 key sector advisory boards and I commend everyone who contributed to the development of the framework. Of course, science and policy development do not exist in a vacuum. We have continued to launch initiatives that will have a positive impact on science and economic growth. Those initiatives include the £10 million Scottish institute for cell signalling in Dundee, the £10 million saltire prize, the new science baccalaureate and the report of the joint future thinking task force on universities, "New Horizons: responding to the challenges of the 21 st century", which aligned the university science base with the Government's economic  purpose of delivering sustainable economic growth for the benefit of all. This morning, copies of the new framework and associated background papers have been placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre and published on the Scottish Government's website. The new framework is deliberately more focused and accessible than was the 2001 science strategy that it replaces. It is, however, supported by background papers, which provide greater detail. Much has changed since 2001. Indeed, much has changed in the past few months. Across the world and here in Scotland, individuals and institutions and homes and high streets are feeling the impact of the economic downturn. As we know, other Governments are taking steps to minimise the impact of the downturn and recover quickly. Ambitious nations know that science, engineering and technology have shaped the modern world, so they are continuing to invest in building their scientific capacity, promoting that capacity's economic and commercial relevance and advancing their competitive advantage in global markets. Governments around the world want to be better able to shape and respond to future science-based market opportunities. They want to develop and attract scientific talent, investment and high-value jobs, and they want to attract, encourage and grow innovative businesses that use science and research to prosper. Scotland is well placed to use science to underpin sustainable economic growth. This week, the unveiling in George Street of a statue that honours James Clerk Maxwell provided a timely reminder that Scotland has a proud heritage of scientific excellence. To this day, our science base stands comparison with the world's best. Many of our key economic sectors are science based, and later today I will visit Optos, a medical devices company in Fife, which is a great example of a high-tech, Scotland-headquartered business that uses science to compete internationally. "Science for Scotland" is focused on fostering science as a comparative advantage. It describes key ways in which Government, in partnership, will sustain, enhance and more effectively exploit Scottish science to support the economic purpose, enhance our international reputation for science and support individuals, organisations and businesses. It sets out how we will develop four key areas: individuals; scientific research and economic and business demand; international standing and inward investment; and connections in Scotland and in Government. I will not list each element of the framework. Three elements are key, the first of which is science education and careers. Scotland's people  are our greatest asset. A key challenge is to encourage more Scots to study and build careers in science and engineering, so that we can develop the technicians, world-class researchers and science entrepreneurs who are needed by businesses and the economy now and will be needed in the future. We will therefore launch a new marketing campaign—do something creative, do science—to promote a more positive and realistic understanding of the diversity of science-based careers, particularly among young people who are leaving school. Skills Development Scotland will develop a new national science careers programme: the path is science, engineering and technology—the path is SET—which will support improved and informed choice and help school pupils and college students and their parents and teachers. Both programmes will start in 2009. We will make science in schools and colleges more challenging, relevant, interesting and exciting, through the on-going development and implementation of curriculum for excellence and the science baccalaureate. Indeed, only yesterday I set out more detail on how the baccalaureate will operate. The baccalaureate will encourage more of our young people to take science courses in the later stages of secondary school, raise the status of secondary 6 and assist young people in making the transition from school to higher and further education and employment. The interdisciplinary project, which is a key feature of the baccalaureate, should encourage students to draw on many areas of learning, recognise the interdependence of subjects and make connections between the study of science and the world of work. The second key area is research. Scotland's scientific research base is ranked first in the world in terms of the rate of research citations relative to gross domestic product. A major challenge is to maintain that position. Our investment in research infrastructure sustains and enhances the excellence of Scotland's science research base, which attracts significant project funding from the United Kingdom research councils, charities and business, provides international profile and attracts a significant proportion of inward investment. Scotland provides a major element of the UK's research capacity. Indeed, we punch above our weight. I have discussed science with UK ministers twice in the past few months and I will continue to support and enhance productive links at every level with research councils and the European Union. A clear consensus emerged from the consultation. On-going support for Scottish investment in infrastructure to secure UK project funding is the best way to improve research  outcomes and enhance our international profile. Therefore, we will continue to support science infrastructure, as is confirmed in "New Horizons". Such support underpins existing and emerging world-class research, which in turn supports our science capacity, sustains and enhances our international standing and helps to improve Scottish business competitiveness and prospects for inward investment. The third challenge is knowledge exchange. Our economic goals have not been and will not be realised solely by continued investment in our academic science base. Scotland's expenditure on R and D in higher education compares favourably with spending in most competitor economies. However, our business expenditure on R and D is less than half the UK rate, which in turn is well below the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development average. That is crucial, because OECD studies confirm that business R and D is the optimum driver of economic growth. Perhaps one of the most important issues for Scotland is how we increase business R and D. Also, how do we improve how scientific expertise in colleges, universities and research institutes supports businesses, key sectors and the economy? Improved university commercialisation is extremely important but is not the complete answer. We need to generate demand from industry for science. That is a well-established challenge in Scotland and internationally, for which there is no quick fix. Culture change in academia and in business will be involved. To promote such an approach, "Science for Scotland" confirms plans for a progressive shift in emphasis and resource allocation. Currently, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council allocates only a tenth of its research resource to knowledge exchange. In future, we will take a new and distinctive approach. We will prioritise research excellence and strategic knowledge exchange as key priorities, given their different impacts on sustainable economic growth. We will increase investment in scientific knowledge exchange faster over time, to support industry-led projects that help key sectors to use science to prosper. That commitment to increase the proportion of funding for targeted knowledge exchange provides a signal of intent and will influence culture change. Support will be directed to key businesses and sectors, allowing them, rather than Government, to articulate and address their needs by taking forward strategic projects, with support from all Government agencies and with sustainable economic growth as an outcome. The approach will foster longer-term growth in business demand for knowledge exchange and business R and D. It will also adjust the balance of  current incentives in academia, promoting growth in participation in knowledge exchange. Knowledge exchange works best when the partners work together closely and establish a lasting relationship that is based on trust, respect and an understanding of how their different talents produce mutual benefits. There are already several exciting examples of industry-led collaborative projects in Scotland, which are building R and D capacity. For example, the funding council recently invested in 30 PhD placements in small businesses in the chemical industry. We need more of that sort of industry-led initiative. We want the business community to bring forward ideas. The funding council, Highlands and Islands Enterprise and Scottish Enterprise will respond positively to jointly facilitate project development, particularly in key sectors. Government and all its agencies will work with businesses and with colleges and universities to promote faster economic growth. Together we can increase business R and D, growing companies of scale and supporting the economic purpose of increased sustainable growth. At the start of the statement, I said that vision is crucial. Our vision is of a nation of world-class scientific achievement, a magnet for talent and investment, and a powerhouse of technology innovation and enterprise, increasing sustainable economic growth. "Science for Scotland" will begin to make that real.

Rhona Brankin has a positive way of promoting her case. The science strategy sits alongside the innovation strategy. As I said in my statement, the science strategy draws on work by the previous Administration, particularly the consultation in 2006. I point out that the 2001 science strategy that was produced by the previous Administration was not accompanied by any increased resources for science. In the rebalancing that the Scottish funding council will take forward in developing the knowledge exchange agenda, growing business demand for science will be a key focus. Recognising and stimulating that demand is a key task for us all and our enterprise agencies in particular. There has been an increase in advanced highers since last year, despite the scaremongering of some of Rhona Brankin's colleagues, particularly Wendy Alexander. It is recognised that, even in Renfrewshire, there is the same access to advanced highers as there was last year. The baccalaureate is based on existing highers and advanced highers, so it will not crowd the curriculum. It will stretch our ablest pupils in S6, some of whom perhaps coast through their sixth year, and it will include an interpretative and integrated project. We have a wealth of supportive quotations from organisations, universities and businesses to welcome the baccalaureate. Indeed, universities and colleges are offering to provide support for the integrated projects. For schools that cannot provide the integrated project, the fact that they can draw on employers' support and that the work can take place in universities and colleges will provide the bridge to universities that we so want. Local government resources education, which, together with social services, accounts for almost half the local government spend. The fact that local government received record funding, despite a tight spending settlement, is testament to our support. John Swinney made a serious point yesterday. If the Parliament and Government face a £500 million cut in public resources in 2010-11, that will be a big challenge for us all. I hope that we can come together to resist that. Investing in education, universities and colleges and in local government will help us to come through the  economic downturn and ensure that we are well placed for the future.

The first question was on the numbers, and that is the challenge. We currently have about 30,000 sixth year pupils, and only about 3,000 would probably be eligible. There is a lot of welcome interest from early adopters of the baccalaureate, but we would not expect all those pupils to take it in the early years. However, that is the point: if we want more pupils to take science at universities, we need more of them to take more science subjects and at higher levels—to higher and advanced higher. The point of the exercise is to grow the numbers and provide an incentive to do that. As Elizabeth Smith identified, the interpretative project will be part of that. The second question was about university entrance. We published the details of the strategy yesterday, and we have had discussions with the Scottish Qualifications Authority and universities. Universities across Scotland are welcoming the baccalaureate and, following their advice and at their request, we have included advanced higher English in the languages baccalaureate and  advanced higher maths in the science baccalaureate. Over the next few months, the Universities and Colleges Admissions Service and universities will consider the tariff values of the baccalaureate for university entrance. The first baccalaureate graduates will take the award in summer 2010. The intention is for university website prospectuses to mention the baccalaureate immediately, while printed prospectuses will do so to cover applications for university next year. In the next few months, universities and UCAS will therefore take forward the tariff requirements. The third question was on why only some subjects are in the baccalaureate. We need to improve our science position in Scotland. I make no apologies for trying to do that, and that is why we are advancing the science baccalaureate in particular. Such is the interest that has been generated that we are considering arts and social sciences for the future, but science must be our main focus at this stage.

We should be honoured that one of the prestigious professors of the Chinese Academy of Sciences has agreed to join the judging board for the saltire prize. I understand that further details of the prize will be announced next week. It is attracting great international attention and focuses on Scotland's capabilities for renewable energy. We should all pull together to support that. The member asked about funding. In this comprehensive spending review period, the Government is investing a greater proportion of its overall budget in our universities and colleges than the previous Administration did. Universities asked us to ensure that the profiling of the resources was extended so that there were increases in the later years of the spending review rather than the early years, and we took a responsive attitude towards that request. I agree with Jeremy Purvis that the connections between enterprise and the local economy are vital. Knowledge exchange must not only reach for high-profile proposals—particularly proposals in life sciences, such as those that we see at Little France—but penetrate deeply into our economy, particularly our small and medium-sized enterprises. The biggest challenge is stimulating the demand for science at SME level. That can happen not only with universities but with colleges. Part of the knowledge exchange agenda is to progress that with colleges and universities.

The answer is yes. Indeed, as reflected in my answer to Elizabeth Smith's question, the baccalaureate focuses on science, engineering, technology and mathematics precisely for that reason. We have a big demand for engineers in Scotland and we must stretch the most able in our schools to ensure that we fulfil it.

I agree absolutely. Maureen Watt visited Lifescan Scotland only recently. We have a comparative and competitive advantage in Scotland because of the collaborative pooling that has been established, which is the envy of many other areas in Europe. The UHI Millennium  Institute, in which David Stewart takes a keen interest, makes a particular contribution to collaboration between institutions, but we are working with different universities throughout Scotland. The connection between companies and universities is critical, which is why the science framework places a strong emphasis on what we can do to improve it.

The integration of enterprise work is critical. Joe FitzPatrick welcomed the announcement that the Scottish institute for cell signalling was to be established at the college of life sciences in the University of Dundee. The institute is a good example of how to ensure that businesses are plugged into the fantastic, world-class research that takes place in Scotland in a way that helps to commercialise that research, which is critical. Its development was a result of co-operation between the Scottish funding council, our enterprise agencies and the University of Dundee.

We are all operating within the budgets of the current spending review—everybody is aware of that—but we have given a clear indication of the direction in which we want to take investment in knowledge exchange in the future. It would be far more helpful if members would recognise that, although we would like to have additional resources to distribute across the sectors—in particular, science—it will be particularly challenging to find those resources in 2010-11 if we face £500 million cuts in the Government's budget.

That is an appropriate question. We need role models in science for young women. We have no better such role model than Professor Anne Glover, who is the Government's chief scientific adviser. Alison McInnes is right to identify the gap that we must bridge. There is a real issue, particularly at primary level. Primary school teachers are predominantly women and 90 per cent of them feel more comfortable teaching biology than physical science or chemistry. That is why we introduced £250,000 for the science centres—Glasgow Science Centre in particular—to bridge the gap by helping to support education for, and the understanding of, primary school teachers. There is much that we can do on that matter. If we think that we could do more, we will do it and, if Alison McInnes wants to suggest anything to me, I would be very interested in taking it forward.

The saltire prize will help to showcase the capability in that industry. However, ensuring that we have the necessary technical expertise at all levels—not only in high-level research, but at the technical level—is a real challenge. Another challenge that we face is the economic downturn. That is why the Government's economic strategy still stands. We should look to the renewable energy sector to help us to come through the economic downturn and become a place of expertise, skills and development in renewable energies. I am discussing with the Scottish funding council and Skills Development Scotland how we can best support that. Particularly in the short term, transferring people with similar engineering skills from other areas of work into renewable energy would be worth while.

Dr Ian McKee raises an interesting point. I would like that to be the case, but we must deal with the statistics that we have. Indeed, various parliamentary committees have taken a keen interest in the matter since the Parliament was established and have identified a shortfall of research and development in Scotland. We should certainly interrogate the statistics more to determine whether there is an issue with companies that are headquartered in England attributing R and D solely to that country and not to Scotland. However, there is still a big gap and, if we want to improve Scotland's productivity and economic growth, we must tackle that gap and bridge it.

Some 100,000 pupils will be lifted out of poor-quality school buildings and classrooms by 2011 as a result of a school building programme that continues apace, with 250 schools to be delivered during the lifetime of this Parliament. Around £1 billion-worth of construction work is under way on major schools projects for which Government sign-off and the initial construction commenced within the last 18 months. Over the next three to five years, authorities will invest more than another £1 billion in schools, which will be supported by the funds made available in the local government settlement. In total, the Government is supporting in excess of £2 billion-worth of school building programme.

The additional £150 million of extra capital in the local government settlement each year is providing opportunities for prudential borrowing, which provides value for money for the public purse. Perhaps North Lanarkshire Council might want to look at South Lanarkshire, where  only this week I opened Calderside academy, which is part of a £230 million school project that is funded and supported by the Scottish Government.

I appreciate the member's concern about the use of playing fields. The decision on Cuiken primary school was developed prior to May 2007. I understand that the school's capacity is extensive compared to the number of those who attend it. The key issue, I suppose, is the school premises regulations, which identify the size of playing fields relative to the school population. The member raises some separate planning issues that can be addressed by the council, but it is in all our interests to ensure that the facilities for school playing fields are part and parcel of the community interest in the building of any new schools.

I am aware that Highland Council has recently announced an £88 million regeneration and school support programme for school buildings. I understand that that includes significant improvement to Lochaber, Thurso and Wick high schools. Perhaps the questions about immediate developments would be best addressed to Highland Council. We would be very interested in Highland Council's offer to work constructively with the futures trust on Wick high school.

Like everyone else, students will be affected by the current economic climate. We recognise that that may mean that more students are facing hardship, so we are working closely with colleges and universities to establish what demands are being made on the money that we provide to alleviate student hardship through the Student Awards  Agency for Scotland and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. A total of £16 million—up from £14.7 million last year—has been allocated to the higher education discretionary funds in this academic year. That funding will enable students who are facing particular financial hardship to continue their course of higher education in college or university. For students studying in further education colleges, a total of £6 million, which will be administered by the Scottish funding council, is available. In addition, the funding council has undertaken an early in-year redistribution exercise, and has been able to reallocate an additional £5.4 million. That reallocated money will be used to provide additional bursary support and meet requests for help with child care costs. We should not underestimate how quickly and effectively the funding council has responded to the pressures on college budgets. That has been recognised and supported by the college sector.

I do not think that the member's second point is true, and I am happy to write to her on the matter. A recent announcement by the Westminster Government shows that it got its sums wrong and now has to cut £200 million from grant support for students in England. The member's question might have slightly more credibility if she had supported the abolition of the graduate endowment fee. If it had been left to her and her colleagues, students in this country would have to pay an additional £2,300 in student fees. We are pleased to have abolished the graduate endowment fee and I am disappointed that the member was not able to support that.

We have introduced £38 million of additional support, which did not previously exist, for part-time students, to ensure that they no longer have to take out loans to study but can obtain grants to help them to further their studies. That is particularly important in the current economic climate, and it is only one element of the additional student support that the Government has already introduced. It will enable 20,000 students to take part in part-time study. That is very welcome in the current financial climate.

The Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has indicated that he will examine that issue. We have some sympathy with the position of students in relation to exemption. We have indicated that we are sympathetic to the idea of consulting on a minimum income guarantee in relation to any developments with regard to student support in the future.

The member raises an important issue, which the Government moved swiftly to address. We can do two things to tackle it, the first of which is to abolish unruly certificates for 14 and 15-year-olds, which we are currently consulting on. Secondly, we can ensure that those who are under 16 and on remand are not placed in prisons. That also involves the relationship with local government and ensuring that it meets its responsibilities. On Marlyn Glen's point, as part of this debate, I have had discussions with the Cabinet Secretary for Justice in which he outlined his proposals in this area. He has undertaken far more activity on the issue than the previous Government did when it was in power.

I appreciate the member's concerns, which the Government shares. Does she support the Government's proposal that 17 and 18-year-olds who have been in secure accommodation should remain there rather than being transferred—as they have been previously—to either young offenders institutions or adult prisons?

I am grateful for the opportunity to discuss children's rights in Scotland. It is a fitting time for the Parliament to reflect on Scotland's position following the conclusion of the most recent reporting cycle to the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child. Of course, everyone agrees that all children should have the best start in life if they are to fulfil their potential. We want them to be happy, to have fun and to grow up safe and strong. For children to achieve their full potential, to flourish, to thrive and to develop into successful learners, confident individuals, effective contributors and responsible citizens, they need to understand their rights and to be given every support to realise those rights. They need to be protected from harm, but also to have opportunities to participate, to express their views and to help us to see the world through their eyes. Scotland already has a strong tradition of protecting, including and providing for children. To ensure that we meet the very highest standards, we must aim for the international gold standard, which is the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. The Scottish Government has made clear its commitment to the provisions of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child and our intention to use it as a driver for improvements to children's rights. It is a powerful tool to help deliver the improved outcomes that we want for all Scotland's children. Children and young people are part of public life and they value taking an active part. Scotland benefits when children and young people express their views and see those views reflected in what we do and how we do it. We do not just improve policies and services for children; we also improve relationships between adults and children. Active participation recognises the unique perspective that children can offer as individuals, and it also recognises them as fellow citizens now, not just citizens of the future. I recently visited St Monans primary school in Fife to speak to the pupils and staff about our commitment to children's rights and to present them with a United Nations Children's Fund rights  respecting schools award. That is one example of children's rights in action. The school uses the UNCRC to support a rights-based approach in all their interactions in the classroom and beyond. It has a contract, which was mutually agreed and is prominently displayed, with clear roles and responsibilities for everyone in the school to ensure that their behaviour allows everyone to enjoy their rights. Pupils, staff and other adults drew up together a plan of what children's rights are, what action pupils need to take to ensure that everyone can enjoy those rights, and how all staff, parents and carers can support the children to enjoy those rights. The pupils recognise that if they disrupt the class, they are infringing on their fellow classmates' right to an education and that if they exclude a child from a game at break time, they are limiting their right to play. An understanding of everyone's rights instils recognition that to be part of a community requires responsible behaviour.

In recognising the rights of children on justice issues and in other areas, it is important that we consult young people. Children's impact assessments are something of which I am very supportive, and there are issues in relation to the Sexual Offences (Scotland) Bill that have led to representations from different groups that represent children. However, Cathie Craigie raises an issue that the Justice Committee is looking at carefully, and I will take a keen interest in that committee's response on the issue. The creation of the office of Scottish Commissioner for Children and Young People was a major signal of the importance that Scotland places on the rights of children and young people. The present incumbent, Kathleen Marshall, has worked tirelessly to raise the profile of children's issues and to ensure that all our children—particularly the most vulnerable—are listened to and represented at every opportunity. The consistent stance from both previous and current Administrations on children and families who seek asylum has seen real progress made on the United Kingdom Government's approach to asylum and immigration policy within Scotland's borders, especially in relation to children. Lead  professionals are in place to promote and support the welfare and rights of children who seek asylum, and officials continue to work with partners on the development of a Scottish alternative to detention pilot. We have been pushing for the pilot for many months, and we are hopeful that the first families will enter it early in the new year. It is right that we do whatever we can to keep children out of detention at Dungavel or elsewhere. The Government has also made a commitment to end the remand of under-16s in prison—another significant step towards improving the rights of Scotland's children. The UN committee issued its concluding observations at the end of the latest reporting round on 3 October. Those are the committee's recommendations on where the state party falls short in compliance with the convention. Although the focus is largely on the UK as a whole, the majority of the recommendations are directly relevant to Scotland. Therefore, the Scottish Government will take positive action to respond to the important issues that have been raised, always bearing in mind the fact that our ultimate aim is to improve outcomes for children and young people.

The provisions that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice announced are to be welcomed. They were part of our submission and were recognised by the UN committee. The unruly certificates for 14 and 15-year-olds that were issued under the previous Administration and the practice of incarcerating under-16s can and will be addressed by the SNP Government. Those proposals have been welcomed by those who are considering the issue. We will work with different groups to identify what we can do. We must recognise the key challenges and move forward together as a Parliament to use the opportunities that we have in Scotland to face them. I hope that we gain the Parliament's support for doing so. The UN highlights the fundamental need for all children to have an adequate standard of living and the risks to a child's development when they do not. Children in Scotland deserve the best possible start in life. Poverty is one of the issues that we must address in Scotland—we know that. It is morally unacceptable that more than 20 per cent of Scotland's children live in poverty. Our work on developing the anti-poverty framework, on  the early years framework, on health inequalities and on the curriculum for excellence has at its core a desire to see the generational cycles of poverty—financial poverty, social poverty, poverty of choice and poverty of aspiration—broken. Those interlocking policies also offer opportunities to improve outcomes for all, regardless of race, disability, gender or sexuality and regardless of whether a child is looked after within the family or by a local authority. Those areas are also of concern to the UN. The UN committee mentions the right to play, and we are confident that the prominence that we are giving play in the early years framework and other innovative work such as the play and leisure opportunities that are available through cashback for communities will address those concerns. In addition, in some important areas, the UN committee is critical about issues that can be philosophically complex for us, such as the age of criminal responsibility. We will reflect on its comments on those areas and consider carefully our response.

I agree with that, and believe that one of the most important pieces of legislation in this area is the Children (Scotland) Act 1995. I look forward to this Parliament legislating in ways that will improve on the current legislation by, for example, improving the children's hearings system. On the age of criminal responsibility, the fact that we have a welfare-based system of justice for young people must be reflected in any changes that we might bring about through democratic legislation. We must reassure people that acknowledging that children have the same rights as all of us does not take power away from adults. Rather, it is about strengthening bonds between adults and children, re-establishing relationships based on respect and ultimately improving outcomes for the next generation. In order to do that successfully, we must tackle some of the underlying negative perceptions of children and young people that persist. I am sure that all of us have been enthused and enlightened by certain projects or pieces of work that children have been involved in. Members will have seen the artwork that is in the lobby. It is disappointing that some of the representations of young people  that we see in the media are not as positive as that artwork. Nelson Mandela said: "There can be no keener revelation of a society's soul than the way it treats its children." I am confident that, here in Scotland, and in this chamber today, we are aspiring to the best that those words imply. We are acknowledging the challenges, committing to address them and demanding the best for our children. I am delighted to be able to use this time in the chamber to discuss constructively what we can do to support the rights of all Scotland's children. I know that the cross-party group on children and young people had a particular focus on the UN convention in the past year, and that many members have contributed to ensuring that children's rights have been kept on the agenda in this chamber. I look forward to hearing more of those contributions and to taking this agenda forward.

The consultation on the next generation of national qualifications in Scotland closed on 31 October. Individual responses will be published on the Scottish Government website by 28 November 2008. The independent research company Ipsos MORI is analysing the responses and a range of other evidence, and is due to report in late January 2009. Following consideration by the Scottish Government, an announcement on the way forward will be made in spring 2009. The expanded curriculum for excellence management board, whose membership now includes teacher and headteacher associations, met last Friday, 31 October. Following its advice, I took an early decision and announced on Friday that the standard grade replacement and other new qualifications will be introduced in 2014. I wrote to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee to inform it of that on Friday.

The curriculum for excellence is already being implemented across Scotland. Many schools are implementing the curriculum for excellence structure from secondary 1 this year, and all schools are expected to do so by 2010. The extra time for implementation automatically means that the timing of the examinations has been moved to 2014. Because the Scottish baccalaureate involves existing highers and advanced highers, the timetable for its introduction will continue according to the original proposal, so the first students will benefit from it in August 2010.

On 5 June, I announced that I had set up a teacher employment working group, chaired by Joe Di Paola of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, to assess whether the current teacher workforce planning process, which we inherited from the previous Administration, was fit for purpose. The working group was asked to review the teacher workforce planning process, taking into account relevant policy developments; to examine whether improvements could be made to maximise the compatibility of student numbers and employment opportunities for teachers; to consider the impact of the teacher induction scheme; and to make recommendations for improvements in the process. It included all those with an interest in the agenda: the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland, the Educational Institute of Scotland, the Scottish Secondary Teachers' Association, the Association of Head Teachers and Deputes in Scotland, School Leaders Scotland, the teacher education universities, the General Teaching Council for Scotland, the Scottish Government and COSLA as the representative of local authorities, who are the responsible employers. I am pleased to say that the group has submitted its report. Copies of it have been placed in the Scottish Parliament information centre and are available in the chamber for members. I have also arranged for the report to be published on the Scottish Government website. I am grateful for the efforts of all involved in drawing together this important piece of work. The fact that the report's recommendations have been agreed unanimously by such a wide range of interests is instructive and provides assurance about the way forward. I will make it clear how seriously the Government takes this issue. At this time of year, any system would result in a proportion of teachers who had completed their probationary year not yet being able to find permanent employment. If that were not the case, come the winter—when more teachers retire and others get sick—we would have children being sent home because of a lack of teachers. That is not a new problem: the proportion of post-probationary  teachers unable to find permanent employment has been increasing year on year since 2005. When the GTCS survey is published later this year, we will know whether the trend that started under the previous Administration has continued. It is important that we understand the difficulties that are inherent in teacher workforce planning. The number of teachers who completed their probationary year this summer and who sought jobs as fully qualified teachers in the autumn is the product of decisions on teacher workforce planning taken by ministers of the previous Administration in December 2005. That applies only to the one-year postgraduate course. For teachers who undertook the four-year BEd course, workforce planning decisions were taken in December 2002. It is important that we do not underestimate the complexities involved. Soon after taking office last year, we demonstrated our intent on this agenda by investing an additional £9 million to provide 300 extra teaching jobs—300 more jobs than would have been available had Scotland not elected a Scottish National Party Government in May 2007. In the local government settlement for 2008 to 2011, £34.9 billion was allocated to Scotland's councils—a 13.1 per cent increase across the period. Regardless of efficiency savings in other areas, we provided a package that ensured that local government could maintain teacher numbers at August 2007 levels. In Fife, an additional £41 million is being spent over the next three years, creating 27 additional teaching posts to implement the reduction of class sizes. In South Lanarkshire, the council has taken on additional teachers in 11 primary schools and has already set a maximum class size of 18 for primary 1 classes in schools with the highest levels of deprivation. North Lanarkshire Council is reducing class sizes in its primary 1 intake from 25 to 23. Progress is being made. West Lothian Council and Orkney Islands Council are both reducing class sizes year on year. The teacher employment working group report concludes that, fundamentally, the teacher workforce planning system in Scotland remains broadly fit for purpose. I welcome that. However, I want to ensure that no stone is left unturned in improving the system. The report makes 12 recommendations on how it might be improved, and I am pleased to accept them all. I will highlight a few recommendations on which I want to be even more ambitious. When I took office, I was surprised to learn that the system that I inherited did not fully factor council plans into national workforce planning. It is essential that that happens. Today, I am asking that COSLA and local authorities work more closely with the Government's annual teacher  workforce planning exercise to ensure that supply and demand do not get out of sync. National workforce planning decisions are taken at the end of the year and local staffing needs are established by authorities in spring. There is also the difficult time lag that I explained earlier. We need to be creative in looking for ways to bridge that gap. We must use the local data more effectively to inform national decisions on teacher training provision. I am pleased that the report recommends a review of the winding-down arrangements for teachers, which were originally proposed and agreed as part of the McCrone agreement. I want to find out how we can help those teachers who would like to scale down their working week as they approach the end of their careers, thereby making space for newly qualified teachers. The group recommends that, whenever possible, local authorities should use new post-probation teachers to fill supply vacancies. I am happy to endorse that approach, because it will help probationers to secure employment, improve their teaching skills and improve outcomes for our children. The group recognised the changing financial environment in which we find ourselves. More than 6,000 teachers are expected to leave the profession this year alone, but some authorities that I visited over the summer told me that they had seen early signs that some teachers were delaying retirement because of financial uncertainty. We should bear it in mind that no profession guarantees graduates a permanent job immediately. Teachers in Scotland are in a privileged position in that after they leave university they are guaranteed one year of employment, which propels them to full teacher qualification. That system is without parallel in other professions and is envied around the world. We invest in it because we acknowledge the vital contribution that teachers make to our country's future. However, I agree with the report's recommendation that probationers' expectations must be better handled. We must be clear that the guarantee is for one year's employment, after which teachers are in the same position as members of every other profession. The preference waiver scheme is an important incentive to encourage teachers to live and teach in parts of Scotland that they would otherwise be less inclined to live and work in. Despite the existence of the scheme, it can still be difficult to fill vacancies in certain secondary subjects in certain parts of the country, including Dumfries and Galloway, Aberdeenshire, Highland, Argyll and Bute and the island authorities, so I intend to  increase the preference waiver payment for secondary teachers from £6,000 to £8,000 to help meet that difficulty. In addition, I welcome the recommendation to examine the housing, employment, family and relocation issues that are involved in attracting teachers to rural areas. Let me make one final observation. The report notes with concern the potential impact of public debate about teacher unemployment. Over 93 per cent of newly qualified teachers who entered the profession last school year were in employment by the time that the follow-up GTCS survey was carried out in April. We should not lose sight of that fact. No one wants to create an environment in which the bright and committed people whom we need to enter teaching are put off doing so because of unfounded fears about a wholesale lack of opportunities. Not only would that present a completely false picture of the opportunities that exist in teaching, but it would have a significant impact on the quality of teachers who will be available to work with our young people in the future. That means that all politicians must be responsible in what they say on the issue. I believe that the report's package of recommendations will ensure that the teacher workforce planning system is improved to deliver even closer alignment between national and local decisions, so I accept all its recommendations. In particular, I accept that there needs to be greater reconciliation between local and national workforce decision making; that the preference waiver payment scheme to attract teachers to areas that have vacancies should be raised to £8,000 for secondary-sector probationers; that there should be a review of the winding-down arrangements for teachers who are approaching retirement; that authorities and teacher education universities should explore whether more teachers can be educated by distance learning or in remote campuses; and that, whenever possible, post-probation teachers should fill supply vacancies and local authorities should consider making more use of permanent supply pools. The Government will work with employers and unions to improve teacher workforce planning in Scotland. We owe it to Scotland's pupils to do so. I hope that I will have the support of all parties in the Parliament in that endeavour.

I had been going to thank the member for the sensible and mature way in which she is treating the subject. We are talking about people's lives and livelihoods. We have to identify the workforce planning for this country. Some decisions on requirements have to be taken years in advance. It would have been helpful if the member had welcomed the report and the fact that we can bring together directors of education, the unions and the universities to ensure that we have a system that is fit for purpose. There are important aspects to remember, such as the additional funding for universities. The arrangements within the local government settlement to maintain teacher numbers at 53,000 are also important. We have heard that recruitment has improved, with 38 new teachers being recruited in Fife and another 59 in Aberdeen. Teachers are being employed. However, if we are serious about achieving a system that is more streamlined, we should consider closely the conclusions of those who have studied the workforce planning exercise. The member raised staffing issues that I know are being raised by some of the unions. The unified response to all the recommendations is something that we can take forward. The fact that the Government took the time to take stock of the inherited workforce planning system should be welcomed. There is much to do. I give Rhona Brankin a guarantee that the Government is absolutely committed to ensuring that our youngsters have the time and attention that they need from teachers. That is why I am delighted that, throughout Scotland, local authorities are recruiting teachers precisely to reduce class sizes.

Although two organisations representing head teachers were represented on the working group, the member's proposal that head teachers should have responsibility for aspects of teacher employment was not one of the group's recommendations. The problems in the system of workforce planning have not manifested themselves just this year. The GTCS survey shows that the downward trend for permanent positions started in 2005. The problem is related to the geography of the issue. It is about changing populations between east and west, and it is vital that the changes that we are introducing allow a far more responsive provision, reflecting the difficulties in different local authorities. Rural authorities are finding it difficult to fill vacancies, but teachers in other parts of the country cannot find jobs. We have to address such challenges. People do not take family relocation lightly, but rural authorities across the country have told me that, if we want to maintain the quality of teaching in rural areas, we will have to have better dispersal. The issue is serious, and the recommendations in the report will take us some way forward. Much remains to be done, and I am committed to ensuring that this Government works with local authorities on the issue.

In the secondary sector, the opportunities for permanent positions are far greater than they are in the primary sector. I agree with the member that that is a challenge, and we will tackle it. The member raises important issues about the supply pool. We want there to be a greater number of permanent positions for teachers, but we must acknowledge that there will always be a need for supply teachers. We expect 6,000 teachers to retire each year for the next three years. We have provided an opportunity for local authorities to ensure that the teacher cohort that is coming through can gain some experience of employment as supply teachers at least, until they are given a permanent position. A large number of new teachers will do that. I was pleased to see that more than 300 jobs were advertised in The Times Educational Supplement , which is not the only source of advertisements for teaching posts. So, even at this point in the academic year, an additional 300 posts have been advertised. Positions can arise during the year. The trend that we want to change is the trend in permanent positions, and that can be done only through greater co-ordination. As I have said, I was somewhat surprised at the lack of co-ordination in the system that I inherited. I intend to change that. A more responsive approach will help with better workforce planning.

When the cohort of teachers is 53,000, to have 18,000 retiring over the next three years is a great challenge. The current arrangements for notice of retirement vary from area to area. Three months is required for some of the paperwork, but in some areas only four to eight weeks' notice of retirement has to be given. Because of the flexibility in retirement dates that are offered to teachers in some areas, local authorities cannot plan in the way that other organisations might be able to. The report refers to notice of retirement, and we will be considering the issue so that we can have more effective planning. That will allow permanent positions to be filled sooner than they might otherwise be filled.

The proposal for permanent supply pools, which I mentioned in my reply to Margaret Smith, will help. Over the period of the post-probation year, when post-probationers will be seeking permanent employment, they will have access to a permanent supply pool. The report also recommends that local authorities should recruit post-probationers for supply positions, as opposed to newly retired teachers, and that will make a difference as well. We have put £9 million of additional funding into the system and have created 300 new jobs, which has made a difference and has dealt with the problem that we faced when we came into Government. We found that the planning process that we inherited had had problems with it from day one. Despite the number of years for which the previous Administration was in power, it did not conduct an inquiry such as the one that has now reported. The previous Administration introduced a system that had flaws in it, which is why we established the teacher employment working group. Labour members should therefore not complain that there is a problem with the system that they owned and should not criticise those of us who are seeking a constructive solution. The fact that 18,000 teachers are due to retire over the next three years gives us an opportunity,  and we all have a responsibility to ensure that the quality of teachers is maintained. Frankly, some of the approaches that are being taken in the debate are not helping the teaching profession. The curriculum for excellence is an exciting opportunity and we need the brightest and best teachers to be involved. We are working constructively to support them in that, and I would welcome the support of Labour members. I hope that, in future, they will be able to provide that support.

The responsibility for supply teachers clearly lies with councils, and having some permanence in the supply pools will assist in some of that planning. Nevertheless, it is important that we reflect the view that has been expressed to us by our constituents and by the professionals, that the permanent positions are what we must address in tackling workforce planning. That is not an easy task, as our system is sophisticated. I asked the teacher employment working group to consider whether the system was fit for purpose, and it has said that it is. That is a major reassurance, but it does not mean that the system is operating on a supply-and-demand basis that guarantees the achievement of some of the projections that it is vital that we achieve. Kenny Gibson raises the important point that, although we are looking for permanent employment for teachers, we will always need supply cover for a range of eventualities. With a cohort of 53,000 and the different life opportunities—including pregnancy—that arise during the year, especially with a feminised workforce and particularly in the primary school sector, we must ensure that we plan and make provision not just for permanent positions, but for supply teaching.

The member raises two points. If he listened to my statement, he will realise that his point about ensuring that newly qualified post-probationary teachers have access to the supply lists is covered in detail in the report and, indeed, forms one of its recommendations. However, any attempt to establish such access as a right in guidance or in any other form will, as he will be aware, raise certain age discrimination issues. In fact, that is why the member's second point is vital. We must ensure that the teachers who will come into the profession to replace the 18,000 who will leave over the next three years have professional experience of regular and continued employment, because that is what we need in order to give our children the education that they deserve. However, this is a very delicate area. As the member will appreciate, given his own background, we have to be aware of certain undercurrents in employment legislation. That said, as I made clear in my statement, we must ensure that the rationale behind and reasons for any move to give newly qualified post-probationers access to the supply pool firmly reflect the need for continuing professional development and have benefits and opportunities for the children in our schools.

We should reflect on the finding in the GTCS survey that 93 per cent of post- probationers who entered the profession last year have found employment as teachers. However, that does not mean that we underestimate the difficulties that people face in getting into those positions and the problems that they will face over the year as they wait for the 6,000 teachers to leave the profession. Although expectations about job prospects need to be handled, there is a mismatch that needs to be dealt with. We know, for example, that there is a focus on the central belt and are aware of particular problems in Edinburgh and certain other areas. Although the education authority in Glasgow, for example, has an increased education budget, it is not necessarily recruiting teachers to replace those who are retiring. That presents problems to those teachers who trained at Jordanhill, had probationary experience in Glasgow and might be seeking—and might expect to find—employment in that city. Similar problems have arisen in East Renfrewshire. Although, for understandable reasons, a large number of students will want to train or spend their probationary year in the area, they will not necessarily have the opportunity of finding employment there. There is a geographical aspect to this issue. It is not just a simple question of the areas where post-probationers are seeking jobs; the fact is that most training opportunities are to be found in the central belt. As a result, we increased teacher training provision in Aberdeen to deal with problems in Aberdeenshire and at the Crichton campus to deal with teacher recruitment problems in Dumfries and Galloway. Teachers will be more likely to seek employment in the places where they have trained and, in that respect, we are aware of the consequences of people training at Moray House and Jordanhill. Although both institutions provide excellent training that can be supported, we simply need to find better ways of managing people's expectations that they will be able to find employment in those locations. Perhaps information about local authorities that have job opportunities should be made available to students as they undertake their teacher training to ensure that they understand that, although they might have probationary experience in a particular local authority, that does not guarantee them a permanent position in that authority after their probationary year is up.

Local authorities have the resources in the funding settlement for provision for the cohort of 53,000 teachers. Hugh O'Donnell makes an important point. Local authorities have the ability to improve and change things now. The teacher workforce planning group included representatives of directors of education and unions. Some of the recommendations can be taken up swiftly, as opposed to managing better what is already in place.

The Scottish Government is fully committed to the training and retraining of Scotland's people. We invest heavily in Scotland's lifelong learning system, providing individuals and businesses with access to a range of training to help to prepare them for the challenges that lie ahead. In particular, reflecting the current economic climate, I am working with Skills Development Scotland and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to identify opportunities to support people wishing to retrain. Recent steps to support those who wish to retrain include triggering our partnership action for continuing employment programme which, for example, is currently working in conjunction with the management of Freescale to deliver support through local PACE partners to those affected by the closure of Freescale's manufacturing facility; and opening up access to individual learning account funding to more people who are on low incomes and widening the range of work-related courses that attract ILA funding.

We have to monitor the jobs situation. I reassure the member and Parliament that, during the past month, I met the board of Skills Development Scotland and the Scottish funding council to make the precise point that we should look for creative and different ways to work cross-sectorally and with institutions such as universities and colleges to ensure that we maximise workers' full potential, whether they are  in work, are seeking to retrain, or may have to seek alternative employment in the future depending on the jobs market.

We do not need to renegotiate the concordat as the local government settlement already provides sufficient funding to fulfil the Scottish Government's progressive policy to provide free nutritious school meals for all P1 to P3 pupils. We estimate that that will cost about £30 million when rolled out fully for the academic year 2011-12, with the roll-out starting in August 2010. That was confirmed by the all-party Convention of Scottish Local Authorities leadership group on Friday 10 October and again by the full convention on Friday 24 October. Labour MSPs might want to block free nutritious school meals for our youngest, but the rest of Scotland wants to see their implementation.

Unlike some members, I have read the written evidence that was presented to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee, and I think that the gross distortions that have been made by some people will come back to haunt them. In the submissions to which the member refers, there was no evidence that anyone said that we had not fully funded the proposal. As my colleague Adam Ingram indicated, there are issues with councils' decisions having to reflect the current economic situation, energy costs and so on. Some councils—I am thinking of certain Labour councils that have given evidence—might want to raid the school meals budget for other purposes, but that is a dangerous course to go down. I do not think that the health of our young people and our nation should be compromised by petty party politicking when there is a genuinely progressive, fully funded policy on the table.

Absolutely. Our job is to implement this progressive policy. I am pleased that COSLA is recommending that we move to the next stage, which is about legislation. The legislation will remove the legal block to free school meals. We know that, in the previous session, the Labour Party refused to remove that block or, indeed, extend the policy. I hope that the Parliament can come together behind what is a commonsense, practical and popular policy that will improve the health of our youngest pupils.

Yes. Just last week, we signed off another major school building project in Inverclyde, which will see the construction of four new low-carbon schools. The project will benefit 2,500 pupils and the construction industry to the value of around £80 million. Since May 2007, the Government and authorities have committed a further £2 billion to the on-going school investment programme. We anticipate that, during the four-year parliamentary session, we will deliver or secure through a range of funding mechanisms around 250 schools, benefiting more than 100,000 pupils. That certainly matches the previous Administration's school building programme brick for brick.

It is up to the City of Edinburgh Council to ensure that its programme proceeds. At the end of the day, each and every one of us must make choices. It is regrettable that in Edinburgh the Liberal Democrats chose to support trams rather than capital investment in school building, but it is for authorities to make choices based on local circumstances. The school investment programme is progressing and has not been halted. A range of funding mechanisms is being used, including the traditional procurement method of borrowing. It is important for the construction industry to know at this time that, over the next four years, there is £2 billion-worth of construction business in the school building programme from which it can benefit.

Yes. HMIE's work is the subject of a significant amount of independent review as part of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development study and the Crerar review, through scrutiny by Audit Scotland and the Parliament, and as part of the assessment for prestigious awards such as the charter mark. The strong body of published evidence from those independent sources gives ministers confidence in the work of HMIE and the contribution that it makes. The inspectorate also commissions regular external, independent research; it did so most recently in March 2007. I am aware that it is commissioning an independent evaluation of the new inspection models that have just been implemented. That work will involve a range of stakeholders and is a signal of HMIE's openness and commitment to the independent evaluation of the services that it provides.

The member raises serious issues, and I note his concerns. I suggest that he write to me about the case that he has asked about, so that I can pursue the matter further.

We intend to introduce legislation to extend entitlement to free school meals to all primary school and secondary school pupils whose parents or carers are in receipt of both maximum child tax credit and maximum working tax credit in spring 2009, to enable the concordat commitment for that to be delivered as planned in August 2009 in all schools in Scotland.

So, the member welcomes our commitment—but. Local government has indicated that it wants to deliver the policy  because, like the Scottish Government, it wants to support vulnerable families who are in need. Had the Labour Party—including Marlyn Glen's colleagues, Cathie Craigie and Karen Whitefield—supported the bill last year when it was going through Parliament, the legislation would have been delivered sooner rather than later. It is the SNP Government that is delivering it. Local government has agreed to extend the entitlement to free school meals in 2009. Vulnerable families will be supported by the SNP Government.

Under the terms of the concordat, local government has undertaken to make year-on-year progress on class size reduction in primary 1 to primary 3. Therefore, it was unnecessary for local authorities to include references to class size reduction in primary 1 to primary 3 in their single outcome agreements.

I can certainly make representations that that is the Liberal Democrats' view when I meet representatives of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities this afternoon. However, there are 14 commitments in the concordat with local government, many of which are not mentioned in the single outcome agreements. The freezing of council tax rates, the small business bonus scheme, free school meals, allowances for kinship carers and carers support through extra respite weeks are all commitments that have been agreed by local government in the historic concordat, although none of those is in the  single outcome agreements. The agreement is with local government; it will deliver and we trust it to do so.

I refer Murdo Fraser to the First Minister's reply, in which he said that we are reviewing the judgment in the East Lothian case. I point out that the 12 per cent of classes that are already smaller than 18 are not operating illegally. Yes, we need resources to reduce class sizes. Indeed, the concordat refers to maintaining 53,000 teachers in our education system, which would allow headroom to make progress. However, Murdo Fraser is right to identify placing requests as an issue—the case that the Court of Session recently considered was not about the SNP's commitment with local government to class sizes of 18, but about the previous Administration's proposals for class sizes of 25 in primary 1. We will reflect on whether there is a requirement for legislation, but it is not a prerequisite to deliver on class sizes. Murdo Fraser might consider the Conservatives' position. If they take the position that there should be no class size limits whatever and that headteachers should have discretion, that would make it difficult to protect parents when they make placing requests. Parents would have difficulty making such requests without class size legislation unless there was another test for access to a school: passing an examination. That may be the system south of the border, but it is certainly not the system in Scotland. Murdo Fraser should tread carefully before asking for legislation that would put the Conservatives' policies in jeopardy.

I last met Highland Council in Inverness on 5 August. During that meeting, I had constructive discussions on a wide range of issues, including the school estate.

We discussed issues regarding the current provision of school buildings and we reflected on the fact that an additional £115 million of capital has been allocated to local government each year for the next few years to help to support continuing education and school estates provision.  I am pleased to see that Highland Council is using its share of the resources to invest £88 million over the next four years to provide improvements in the school estate. Our discussion also reflected on the need to look further. In my answer to a parliamentary question last week, I announced the establishment of a working group on a school estates strategy that will report in the spring next year. That strategy will look to the longer term and will reflect the recommendations of the Audit Scotland report "Improving the school estate". I think that Highland Council and many other councils will welcome that as a step forward.

It is up to Highland Council to determine and decide on its own school building priorities. Only last week, I responded to a question from Jamie Stone on the situation with Wick high school. The fact is that the issue must be considered in the light of the longer-term agenda for school estate management. That said, I understand the concerns that have been expressed by parents and pupils about the condition of many of the schools, and we—and, indeed, the Audit Scotland report on school estates—acknowledge that we are only halfway towards our aim of restoring school buildings and ensuring that they are fit for purpose. I look forward to engaging this afternoon not only with Highland Council but with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities on how we will take forward the school estates project and continue the school building programme. I am very pleased that under this Administration 250 schools will be either built or under construction. We should certainly mark the benefit of that to 100,000 pupils.

During the stage 3 debate on the Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill, I made a clear commitment to Parliament that the minimum income guarantee that the National Union of Students has proposed will be considered as part of the wider consultation on student support to be launched later this year.

I thought that the member might have welcomed the fact that we will consult on the minimum income guarantee proposal as part of the wider consultation on student support.  The transition from loans to grants is being funded separately. Some £38 million has already been allocated to tackle that, and 20,000 part-time students can already benefit from it. The consultation that will take place later this year is on the £30 million that was referred to. As I have said, I made a commitment on considering the minimum income guarantee proposal as part of the wider consultation. We have delivered for students. The abolition of the graduate endowment fee, which was a tax of more than £2,000 on education, has been warmly welcomed by students in Scotland.

In response to parliamentary question S3W-16167, I informed Parliament this morning that the Scottish Government and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, in accepting the recommendations of the Audit Scotland report of March 2008, have established a joint working group to discuss future policy, funding and delivery and to prepare a new school estate strategy by next spring. Under the current local government settlement, we are already providing local authorities with almost £3 billion of capital resources over three years—an increase of £115 million for this year and the next two years—to secure investment in schools and other infrastructure. We expect around 250 schools to be delivered over this parliamentary session. I met East Renfrewshire Council only last month and made it clear that investment priorities for individual schools are matters for the local authority.

I am delighted that yesterday's announcement means that the Scottish Futures Trust is being established. We have a new chair for it and we also, as of this morning, have an answer to Ken Macintosh's question that indicates  that we will produce our school estate strategy in the spring. Yes, pupils will benefit from SNP policies. I was delighted this morning to visit Denny high school, which is under construction. That project was agreed to and committed to by this Government. Construction was started in June or July last year and the school will open for the benefit of pupils in the Denny area next year. I also point out that it is being funded on a not-for-profit basis.

The discussions that will take place with COSLA will do exactly what Jamie Stone asks: they will identify where in Scotland the priorities are and where attention is required. However, I acknowledge that, in discussions that I have had with Highland Council, it acknowledges that it has resources to make improvements. The council has made decisions about its priorities for its funding for the next four years. I understand that some funding will go to Wick high school but the council will, no doubt, be able to inform Mr Stone of that. His point is well made. That is exactly why we are responding to the Audit Scotland report's recommendations and will produce a school estate strategy in the spring.

The simple answer to that is yes. When I met East Renfrewshire Council, we had a constructive discussion. Too many Opposition members are prepared to take a cannot-do attitude; the can-do attitude that we are witnessing in councils throughout Scotland will be helpful. I enjoyed my visit to East Renfrewshire Council very  much and I hope to progress the matters that we discussed at the meeting.

My understanding is that the Government came to power in May 2007. The approval for the Falkirk schools was given in May 2007. It is this Government, under our funding settlement, that supports Falkirk Council to the tune of £5 million on an annual basis. I would take the word of the site construction manager, who said that construction work started in June and July 2007, over the member's understanding.

An historic concordat was signed with local government on 14 November 2007. Under that agreement, local government is committed to make year-on-year progress on the reduction of primary 1 to primary 3 classes to a maximum of 18 pupils.

I am delighted that there are class size reductions across Scotland in a number of areas, including those of SNP-run administrations, not least in Fife and West Lothian, where we have seen significant progress.

I understand from something Gordon Matheson said on Radio Scotland that Glasgow City Council's education budget has indeed increased over the past year. It is for the council to make decisions about the employment of teachers, but it would be disappointing if it did not use the opportunity of retirals this year to replace such teachers with the probationers and post-probationers we discussed in the debate earlier today.

Does the member acknowledge that more teachers were in employment in April 2008, under this Government, than under the previous Government? Does he acknowledge that the number of permanent jobs for secondary  teachers has increased under this Government, compared with the last year of the Government that he supported? Those facts are in the GTC survey, which is the basis of the inaccurate motion for which Ken Macintosh is asking members to vote. Surely he should put the facts on the table. That is what the Government is doing.

I said that I do.

I am more than happy to acknowledge that the biggest challenge is at primary level. The Official Report will show that I said that in my speech. Will the member acknowledge that the GTC survey indicates that there were more teachers in permanent posts in April 2008, under this Government, than in the last year of the Government that he supported, when a similar survey was conducted? That makes the motion that he is putting before Parliament factually inaccurate.

I think that the member refers to information from individual councils and directors of education. Indeed, the Association of Directors of Education provided information to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee on the subject. That information was a snapshot to demonstrate what would be necessary if a big-bang approach were taken. Everybody recognises that that is not the case, therefore the progress that has been made, even by Moray Council, should be welcomed.

There are 770 post-probationers in permanent jobs and another 750 have temporary jobs, which makes about 1,500. Another 300 jobs were advertised in just one week. That is 2,000 post-probationers who are in a  job or about to go into one out of a total of 3,000. That is before we take into account retirals throughout the year. It might be helpful if Mr Whitton thought about addition in considering the matter.

The member says that we should consider trends, and he mentioned teachers on the dole. Perhaps we should consider the fact that in 2006, 295 teachers claimed jobseekers allowance and that, out of 53,000 teachers, the same number—295—are claiming that allowance this year. There is the same trend.

I remind Mary Mulligan that this Government came to power in May 2007, after the start of the financial year. The £9 million that was made available for 300 jobs was not just for one year, but for every year. As the measure was implemented in September—that is, after all, when the new autumn term started—the full £9 million was not, of course, going to be available in the first year. However, that £9 million, and the 300 additional jobs that it provides, is still in the budget.

I must correct Margaret Smith; the survey is not about last year. TESS took a  snapshot in August, which showed that 700 had permanent jobs and another 700 had temporary jobs. Moreover, the week before, the paper had advertised an additional 300 permanent jobs—which, I think, takes the total to over 2,000.

We provide resources to local government, which then seeks to deploy them. As for the geographical issues that the member has referred to, we wanted more teacher training places in Aberdeen and on the Crichton campus in Dumfries to address those very challenges.

The debate needs to benefit from some cold hard facts rather than hot-headed attacks on Scotland's education system as the Labour Party seeks to undermine it. Fact—the TESS survey was out of date on the day that it was printed, on 29 August. It showed that almost 50 per cent of post-probationers had jobs but failed to mention that, only the week before, on its back pages, the TESS had advertised more than 300 additional permanent jobs, taking the number of those in employment or about to get a job to more than 2,000—hardly the crisis of thousands not in work that Rhona Brankin wants to whip up. Fact—the GTC survey does not show that an increasing number of post-probationers are not getting permanent jobs. In October 2006, when the Labour Party was in power, 54.7 per cent of all respondents to the GTC were in full-time or part-time permanent jobs. In April 2008, when the SNP Government was in power, 55.3 per cent of post-probationers were in a permanent job. That is an increase in the number of permanent jobs under our Government, not a decrease. Perhaps we need to introduce numeracy tests for some MSPs. Also, Presiding Officer, perhaps you could check the standing orders and inform us whether there are any rules that prevent Parliament from agreeing to a motion that is factually inaccurate. The self-same GTC survey also showed that 93 per cent of teachers were in teaching jobs of some sort by April 2008—more than when Labour was in power. The challenge is to make more of those jobs permanent, especially in the primary sector. Nineteen per cent of Scotland's teachers are over 55 and 6,000 teachers out of a total of approximately 53,000 that we are funding are due to retire this year, providing job opportunities for approximately 3,000 probationers and the 3,000 who have finished their job guarantee year. Vacancies will also arise during the year as older teachers reach their retiral date. Furthermore, I would have thought that colleagues across the chamber would have welcomed the establishment of the teacher employment working group that I set up in June.

I am aware that, despite its convener saying that it has an increased education budget, Glasgow City Council is not replacing teachers who are retiring. The Labour member might want to take up that matter with the Labour-led Glasgow City Council and ask what the situation is there.  Fact—the Labour Party might not like it, but there are now thousands of children in primaries 1, 2 and 3 who are already in smaller classes than they would have been in under the previous Government. In Dumfries and Galloway, P2 class sizes have been reduced from 30 to 25, and extra resource is being targeted at areas of deprivation. In Fife, 27 additional teaching posts have been created to start to reduce class sizes. Moray Council is reducing P2 class sizes in 2008. In North Lanarkshire, P1 classes have been reduced to a maximum of 23 this year. In Renfrewshire, the council is reducing P2 and P3 class sizes to a maximum of 25, and South Ayrshire Council has indicated that it will do likewise. There are already smaller class sizes for thousands of children. Yes, the list includes councils—Fife Council and Moray Council, to name but two—that did not volunteer to have their class size reductions appear in their single outcome agreements. The Tory dossier is not a secret—that information is freely available. There was no requirement to include class sizes in the agreements.

Fact—the concordat with local government notes the specific arrangement that means that the Government has provided funds to maintain teacher numbers at 53,000. With falling rolls in most parts of the country, that gives scope to reduce class sizes. That is what we have agreed with local government—that is the accountability structure that Mr McLetchie questions. I add that, since coming to power, the Government has provided an extra £9 million for 300 additional teaching jobs. Fact—we do not need legislation to reduce class sizes. However, placing requests may put pressure on some—albeit few—classes; therefore, we will keep the situation under review.

I am conscious of the time. Margaret Smith may want to note that the current court cases cite the previous Administration's policy, not ours.

I hear calls for legislation. We have said that we will keep the situation under review. I expect that, should the Government decide to introduce legislation to address matters, we would get full support from Labour and Liberal Democrat members. That might be difficult for the Conservatives, who do not want to see any class size limits because, if headteachers are to have  discretion, that might cause difficulty for legislation on placing requests in the future. I warn those members who appear to be in haste to oppose the Government that they may taking at face value what they would like to believe rather than what the facts tell us. I rest my case on the facts. I do not pretend that the system cannot be improved. I have set up a teacher employment working group to assess the situation, which involves the unions, the employers, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and the headteachers. The truth is far from the situation that is portrayed in Rhona Brankin's motion. I let the facts speak for themselves. I move amendment S3M-2525.3, to leave out from "with concern" to end and insert: "that the Scottish Government has set up the Teacher Employment Working Group, due to report in October 2008, which includes members from the General Teaching Council for Scotland, teacher education institutions, COSLA, the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland, teacher unions, the headteachers' associations and the Scottish Government, to establish whether the long-standing teacher workforce planning process remains fit for purpose."

The GTC survey shows that more post-probationers were in permanent jobs—whether full time or part time—under this Government in April 2008 than under her Government in April 2006. Does the member acknowledge that fact?

HMIE invests in a thorough programme of continuing professional development for all HM inspectors to ensure that inspections are conducted professionally and constructively and that they  lead to improvement for children and other learners. The member will be aware that the majority of inspections include a current practitioner as part of the inspection team, and important aspects of HMIE's programme of development extend to those team members.

The issue of a fatal accident inquiry is a matter for the legal authorities. I understand that a report is currently with the procurator fiscal. HMIE has been developing a new approach to school and pre-school inspections since September 2007. The new models were piloted in April this year and, following intensive staff development for inspectors, associate assessors and lay members, they have been fully implemented from the start of the current term. The inspections are shorter and more proportionate, and they reduce the burden and bureaucracy on schools. In addition, much more emphasis is being placed on a school's self-assessment. The new approach increases professional engagement between inspectors and staff, and further supports effective partnership working to bring about improvement.

I agree with the member that effective leadership in our schools is of paramount importance, and I pay tribute to the many headteachers who deliver that in our schools today. I reiterate the importance of acknowledging that there is a new inspection regime, which has been piloted since April and which is now in place from the current term. It has been welcomed so far by headteachers and professionals across the education system.

The responses to the "Draft Children's Services (Scotland) Bill Consultation" from the professionals, including COSLA, the Association of Directors of Social Work and Glasgow City Council, strongly recommended that we should not rush to legislation on the matter, and that we ought to use the available information and learn the lessons from the pathfinder project. We are listening to the professionals in not legislating.

I hope that the member appreciates the efforts that we have made to help support parents in particular. Adam Ingram announced support for parents' advocacy and further support for parents in cases that they might want to take forward with councils. Situations should not have to be resolved in the courts, but we have made efforts to ensure that parents are supported in those circumstances. An announcement on that was made in recent weeks.

The member raises an important point about health visitors. I reiterate the Government's view that the health visitor service is a universal service. "Health for all Children 4" and the current review were initiated under the previous Administration. I share the view that we should have universal access to health visitors to help our early years framework and the getting it right for every child model.

Duncan McNeil cuts to the heart of the issue. We cannot use crisis management to support children's needs. The fact is that all children need support. However, some have not yet hit our radar screen, and this process is meant to anticipate where support might be needed to ensure that all children's needs are recognised. The challenge, as the member makes clear, is huge, but that is what our focus must be.

The member makes an important point. There is a big issue about how local authorities support children, particularly those with residential needs. When I have been speaking to the local authorities across the country, I have said that that is one of the areas in which we can work co-operatively to ensure that the children who need support in their own council area can get it. We need to work collectively to ensure that we have a proper system that meets the needs of the child but which is not exponentially expensive for local authorities.

We now move from a debate on standards in the Parliament to one on the standards that we expect to be met when support is provided to meet the needs of vulnerable young children. I am delighted to open the debate on the getting it right for every child programme. I hope that there will be a measure of consensus and that we all share the same fundamental aim, but it is right that we discuss, scrutinise and challenge how we achieve that aim. Of course, getting it right for every child builds on previous work. I acknowledge the previous Administration's development of the programme, which we are pleased to take forward. Naturally, there are changes of emphasis to reflect the new Scottish Government's strategic approach. We are focusing strongly on practical development, implementation and testing. In line with the concordat, we emphasise working collaboratively with local government and other organisations. We want to encourage local determination of how outcomes are achieved. I hope that we can all agree on the direction of travel. I regret the amendment in the name of Rhona Brankin, which I do not intend to accept. Although it has the implied merit of agreeing with the motion, it seeks to undermine it. Labour might not like it, but at the start of this school year thousands of children are in smaller classes than they would have been under the previous Administration. There is no evidence nationally of reductions in the number of teachers of children who require additional support for learning. If there is such evidence at local level, any constituency MSP is quite entitled to raise that with ministers in the normal way.

There is no evidence nationally of cuts in the number of health visitors, either. A pilot—which I understand was initiated by the previous Administration—is being conducted as part of the review of nursing in the community. Government ministers are open-minded about the results of that review and about any decision that they will take in the future. In addition, this  Government is the first under devolution to take action to support kinship carers.

I want to move on to the substance of the debate. Scotland faces big challenges.

No, I will not at this stage. More than 14,000 children are looked after by local authorities. We know that, all too often, the support that is offered to looked-after children is not reflected in improved outcomes. We need to translate our aspirations into practical reality. That will require the senior management of all relevant public bodies to be committed to the common approach. Awareness and training of all staff who are involved with children and of adults who work with parents and carers—for example, in situations in which parents' misuse of drugs or alcohol impacts on children—will also be necessary. A common language will have to be used across services to underpin a shared assessment of children's needs and risks, and to ensure a common understanding when more than one agency is involved. In addition, of course, the child must always be at the centre, and children and their families must be involved in the process as fully as possible. That is the essence of our approach. To achieve that shared approach, the Scottish Government is working in partnership with local authorities and other service providers at local level. A range of services are being brought together to work through how to achieve positive change. The early years and early intervention framework that we are working on collaboratively with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and other partners will be a key aspect of our approach. Early intervention means responding to need when signs emerge rather than waiting until that need reaches a threshold at which action is thought to be justified. The pathfinders emphasise how we can work more efficiently and get better-quality information that can be shared securely so that the best decision can be taken in the interests of the child. I am pleased that we have been joined in the visitors gallery by several representatives from the pathfinder projects and from other bodies that are testing out the new approach. The voluntary sector will be a key player in the policy. It is not just in the pathfinder projects and among learning partners that the getting it right approach is being adopted on the ground. Over the summer,  I met 11 local authorities, often with their community planning partners, and in every case we spent time discussing the getting it right for every child framework. Developments are taking place across the country. They include work on integrated assessment from Dumfries to Shetland; a system in Dundee for supporting children who have particularly complex needs; and the work by Children 1 st to link the family group conference service that it provides for half of Scotland's local authorities with getting it right principles. What does all that mean in practice? I will give a few more detailed examples from the pathfinders. First, work has been carried out in the Highland area on referrals from the police to the reporter. Careful screening of referrals has led to a fall of around 70 per cent in the number of cases that go to the reporter. That does not mean that children are not being supported; it just means that their support needs are being met much more quickly as a result of direct referral to the relevant agency. A second example is from a domestic abuse pathfinder site. A woman was threatened by her former partner, who was immediately arrested. The next day, the police passed the information to the pathfinder's multi-agency group, which collected more information on the family. It identified that the school was concerned about one of the children, who had previously been performing well but who had been absent for some time. The school was unaware of the family situation. The multi-agency group was able to make appropriate contacts in the school aware of the position, discreetly and securely, and with the consent of the mother and the child. The process took a week. The child has now returned to school and has been provided with additional support from school staff and the local Women's Aid children's worker to ensure that the transition back to school works. Rapid and responsive support to vulnerable children in need is what our policy can and will deliver in practice. As that last example suggests, for practitioners the policy is about ensuring that a timely and integrated approach to meeting the needs of the whole child is adopted across all relevant agencies, and that there is appropriate involvement of children and families in decisions that affect them. The pathfinders are showing the way and testing what is needed. That process has involved business process mapping to streamline procedures; agreement on a common way of recording concerns and on protocols for exchanging information; the provision of clear leadership commitment and the governance structures that are necessary to support the change at the top level of government; the building  of awareness and training to promote the new approach; and management of the transition. We are on a long journey together. We all need to understand how our actions contribute to the outcomes for individual children and how, collectively, we can make a difference for children. To help that process to work, the Scottish Government is building a learning community to help practitioners to exchange lessons and experiences. Today we have published on the web a guide that sets out the practice model that is being tested in the pathfinders. The guide describes the emerging practice model that supports getting it right for every child, which will help practitioners to examine children's needs in the round and to identify how outcomes can be improved by the whole community working together to provide additional support. It is wholly child centred—it is not the preserve of any particular service. It can operate in a single-agency setting to plan for children's needs. It will support interagency or multi-agency activity to ensure a common approach to needs and risk assessment. It will help to structure the way in which information about a child's needs is captured, recorded and shared, which will feed into the development work that is being done under the eCare framework for secure information sharing across Scotland. I know that members such as Richard Simpson have concerns about data sharing. In that regard, the commitment on the part of all the partners involved in funding and supporting data sharing is absolutely critical. Harriet Dempster, the director of social work in Highland Council said: "Each agency is modernising its own system and developing better means to share information when this is necessary to protect vulnerable children. While new technology will always present challenges, effective communication is down to people working well, and we are all very committed to that here in the Highland partnership. The initial funding from Government to establish the partnership has been very helpful, but it is important that it becomes our normal business. Accordingly, all agencies have recently agreed to continue to support the partnership." That is evidence of the commitment that I have seen. As I said, I have spoken to chief executives across Scotland about their commitment to this agenda. The issue is about ensuring that the information about a child's needs is captured, recorded and shared in a better way. The web publication of the guide builds on the development work and helps shift the getting it right for every child programme into the implementation phase. We encourage all agencies that work with children to consider how the guide and model might be incorporated into interagency work with children, to ensure a common approach to needs and risk assessment. The model is  generic, but does not exclude more specialist assessments where necessary, for particular needs and risks. It expects information obtained from those specialist assessments to be viewed alongside other analysis, so that all relevant issues are taken into account and action is tailored to address the individual child's needs. Separate, but closely linked guidance on corporate parenting, which has been developed with key partners, has also been placed on the website today. The publication is called "These Are Our Bairns: A guide for community planning partnerships on being a good corporate parent", and it will be fully launched next Tuesday. It focuses on getting it right for a particular group of children for whom Scotland has seldom got it right in the past. It demonstrates how everyone can work together to provide children with the help that they need when they need it, in a way that is centred around children's needs, not the needs of services, in order to make a real difference to children's lives and improve their future chances in life. The Government has a national responsibility for those children who are in need. We know that, in the past, Scotland has not served those children as well as it could have. Collectively, we can shape up and ensure that this country is in a fit position to support children's needs in the future. There is a shared commitment across the chamber and across the country to doing that. That is the key to the getting it right for every child approach. It is concerned with the needs of every child, including looked-after children and any and every child who needs that extra support. Getting it right for every child is about getting on and doing the right thing for all Scotland's children and helping them all to fulfil their potential. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the continuing support for the Getting It Right For Every Child programme, initiated by the previous administration; acknowledges the significant progress in pathfinder activity, both in Highland and for children and young people experiencing domestic abuse, exploring how best agencies can work together to record and share information as necessary to inform effective decision making around children's needs and to redesign services to reduce overlap and bureaucracy; welcomes progress in developing the eCare Framework to support positive practice change across all services and the plans to develop a safe and secure environment for exchanging information where necessary and for a particular purpose, respecting both data protection legislation and the privacy of individuals, and supports continuing activity to develop understanding and awareness of implementation of Getting It Right For Every Child and how services can best work to improve outcomes for children and delivery of the national outcomes.

The costs that are associated with providing student loans to postgraduate students who have chosen to settle their liability for the graduate endowment fee are the same as the costs that are incurred for providing all other student loans. Those costs, which are referred to as the student loans subsidy, amount to 31p for every £1 of loan paid out. The enactment of the legislation to abolish the graduate endowment fee has no bearing on those costs.  The member should be aware that this Government has now laid regulations to allow postgraduate students to pay their fee liability by loan and to do so legally, in order to close the loophole that the previous Administration created and honour the previous promises that were made to those students. We will also allow eligible postgraduate students to continue to defer payment.

It was of some concern to us that, when we looked into the issue, we found no legal basis for the previous Administration's offer of loans to these students. We moved swiftly to rectify the situation, which—as I said—has no bearing on or relationship to the abolition of the graduate endowment but relates to the legal mess that we inherited from the previous Administration. Clearly, in order to honour the promises that the previous Administration made, we are moving quickly on this. I hope that members across the chamber will help to support us in honouring the commitment that the previous Administration made. We will see these students all right.

The member's understanding and analysis of the situation are completely wrong. I have written to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee to explain the provisions that we have had to put forward in the regulations to rectify the problem that was created by the previous Administration. She should have the good grace to acknowledge that we are moving swiftly to help the students and to honour the commitment to them.  The member asked a specific question about interest. It was clearly wrong for the Student Loans Company to apply interest on a loan that had no legal basis in the first place. We are taking steps to help these students and to honour the promises that were made by the previous Administration by ensuring that any interest that has been charged to any student is rewound so that they do not have to pay interest. We are also making provision for them to defer their payment until they become liable. We will sort out the previous Administration's messes and will ensure that its promises are adhered to. More important, if the graduate endowment fee had not been introduced in the first place, we would not have had this mess to sort out.

Local authorities have a legal responsibility to provide adequate and efficient education for their area. It is for the authorities themselves to determine admission policies for their schools.

The member raises a number of issues. I ask him sincerely to be careful in the advice that he gives to parents, in order not to scaremonger or to concern them. I understand that the City of Edinburgh Council is able to guarantee a place at their catchment school at the start of next term to everyone in Edinburgh who is seeking one. I assume that that guarantee covers the member's constituency. If any parents think that their child will not receive a place as part of this autumn's primary 1 intake, the member may want to take up the issue with the City of Edinburgh Council. We understand that every child who is seeking a primary 1 place in the City of Edinburgh Council area at the start of the autumn term will get one. The member mentioned the provision of resources for additional classrooms and teachers. There has been a record distribution of funds to local government—an additional £115 million in capital expenditure has been made available in the forthcoming year alone. The member was right to highlight the issue of resources for teachers, as we need to ensure that there are additional teachers who can be employed in early years. Our agreement with local government is that there are sufficient resources to maintain teacher numbers at 53,000. With falling school rolls, that will enable local authorities to reduce class sizes by providing sufficient headroom for teachers to be deployed in primary schools, especially in primary 1, 2 and 3.

The member may recall that, as far back as June last year, I gave evidence to the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee in which I indicated that there had been a court case—in North Ayrshire, I think—regarding placing requests. The case related to the previous Administration's policy of reducing class sizes in P1 to 25. We should consider the issue that the member raises and identify the best way forward. I know that there are already  pressures in the member's constituency because of existing statutory instruments, regardless of the Administration's policy on class sizes. I am not promising that we will change regulations. A variety of methods, including circulars, legislation, the McCrone agreement and teachers' terms and conditions, have been used previously to determine class sizes. Currently there are three or four different ways in which class sizes are monitored. We will look at that issue as we implement the policy of class size reduction.

The Scottish Government provides a range of information on exam results through national statistics publications and the Scottish schools online website. Those products have been designed to provide a clear and rounded picture of attainment by placing the results in context. We regularly consult stakeholders on the presentation of statistical information on attainment. That will be particularly important in light of the curriculum for excellence programme.

Exam results are presented in a way that provides the most accurate picture of attainment by an entire cohort. Staying-on rates are also presented alongside exam results to give  an indication of their potential impact on the figures. We launched a consultation document on national qualifications arrangements on Tuesday. The presentation of exam results will be considered in line with curriculum for excellence developments and national qualifications arrangements resulting from the consultation. We will bear in mind the points made by the member, but I reassure him that the staying-on rates should give some recognition to the fact that some pupils go on to college to take examinations.

Our skills strategy "Skills for Scotland: A Lifelong Skills Strategy", which was published last year, set out our plans and aspirations for a cohesive lifelong learning system. A key ambition is establishing a learning environment with simple structures and supported transitions, making it easier for all Scotland's individuals to access and move through learning. We are turning that ambition into a reality, and the Government has produced a number of initiatives. We have announced changes to individual learning account Scotland that will specifically direct more funding at harder-to-reach learners—those on low incomes, with lower skill levels or with adult literacy and numeracy needs. We have developed the new higher education £500 part-time grant that will be delivered through ILA Scotland and which will be introduced for the 2008-09 academic session. The grant will give thousands of low-income part-time students fee support for the first time. We are also providing an additional £1 million annually to higher education institutions' discretionary funds to support part-time students' study, travel and child care costs. Those are examples of how we are realigning our skills infrastructure to ensure that the learning and skills opportunities available to all continue to meet the needs of Scotland's individuals and employers.

I am well aware of that development and the member's proposed apprenticeship rights (Scotland) bill, which deals with related matters. We will examine closely the on-going question whether the Westminster Government's proposal is for a legal right to time off, which is an employment issue, or a legal right to request time off, which is perhaps an educational issue. We will monitor developments, and I will be pleased to talk to the member further as the consultation on his bill progresses.

I recognise that the member has a clear interest in the point. One benefit of ending ring fencing as part of the historic concordat that we signed with local government is that that has given South Lanarkshire Council, for example, the opportunity to remove the costs of many of the lets of its community facilities and schools, enabling greater provision of a variety of activities, including community education.

The concordat states that, as quickly as possible, local authorities will reduce class sizes in P1 to P3 to a maximum of 18. Local government will be expected to show year-on-year progress towards delivery of the class size reduction policy. At the meeting of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee on 28 May, ADES expressed support for that concordat commitment. Between 6,000 and 6,500 teachers are projected to leave teaching each year for the next few years. The Scottish Government will deliver more than 20,000 teachers in training by 2011 to support educational needs, including reducing class sizes. There are specific resources in the local government settlement to maintain teacher numbers at 53,000 at a time of falling school rolls,  which will enable the concordat commitment on class sizes to be met.

I refer the member to the variety of written answers that have been supplied on single outcome agreements. A briefing from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities that members might have received in recent days says: "We are also aware that there have been ... references in the media and in political circles to the need for £360m to meet the costs of reducing class sizes in P1-P3. This figure emerged in an ADES submission to the Education Committee. The ADES submission makes it clear that this is their estimated cost of implementing this policy with immediate effect. ADES have acknowledged that immediate implementation of the policy" for everyone all over Scotland "is not the intention and we are happy to re-emphasise this point."

Does the member acknowledge that the bulk of the education budget is in the local government settlement, which went up under this Administration after years of going down under Labour?

Will the member at least admit that the Government is spending more on schools of ambition in this parliamentary session than the previous Government spent on the programme?

Can Mary Mulligan bring herself to recognise that West Lothian Council, which serves an area of growing population, will reduce class sizes in 14 primary schools this year? She told the people and parents of Armadale that Armadale academy would not be built if Labour were to lose and the SNP were to win the election 12 months ago. Will she recognise that it is being  built and will be opened under an SNP council and Government?

The merchants of despair and disaster and the soothsayers of scaremongering are at it again. The harbingers of doom who long for Scotland to fail have found their champion in Rhona Brankin, who vindictively misquotes directors of education, milks the Educational Institute of Scotland's shot-across-the-bows motion—its third motion on industrial action in four years—and fails to recognise that the problems in Aberdeen, Glasgow and Edinburgh have their roots not in the fair local government settlement from this Government, but in Labour management at both national and local level in the past and, in Glasgow's situation, today. I will set out the details of the local government finance settlement again. There is overall funding of £34.9 billion over the next three years. For 2008-09, there is an increase of 5 per cent; in 2009-10, there will be an increase of 4.1 per cent and, in 2010-11, an increase of 3.4 per cent. That is all in the context of a tight Government departmental spending limit, which is growing by 0.5 per cent this year, 1.6 per cent in 2009-10 and 2.3 per cent in 2010-11. With the settlement we have not only halted the decline in local government's share of total expenditure but have also provided an annual increase. Education is well placed, given that it accounts for almost 50 per cent of all local government expenditure.

No, I will not. Labour's views on cuts in provision are not universally shared. John Stodter, the general secretary of the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland—the very association that  Wendy Alexander misquoted at First Minister's question time last week—has said: "Councils have been given an increased budget settlement this year." Bruce Robertson, the director of education in Aberdeenshire, stated: "The budget settlement was certainly tight but there have been no cuts at all and there has been some growth". East Lothian Council's education budget increased by 2.9 per cent to £74 million and Falkirk Council's education spending increased by 11 per cent. In Fife, there is an increase of £41 million, including £9.6 million to support a reduction in class sizes. East Ayrshire's education budget increased by 6.9 percent in 2008-09 and North Lanarkshire's education budget increased by 5.5 per cent.

Sorry, but Labour's front bencher did not take an intervention. Dundee publicly characterised the education budget as being fair with opportunities for growth. South Lanarkshire is employing teachers to reduce primary class sizes in deprived areas and West Lothian's education budget has increased by 4.1 per cent. Of course, we recognise that one or two councils face particular challenges, in particular Aberdeen City Council. That is not a direct result of this settlement, as it was caused by a legacy of funding issues: a £50 million overspend under administrations of Labour, Tory and Lib Dem hue. Surely the responsible thing is for all parties to pull together to support Aberdeen. We are working with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to do so. Councillor Gordon Matheson, executive member for education in Glasgow City Council, said on 27 May: "education's budget in Glasgow, in real terms, will be higher next year than it is this year". What a pity that the council does not choose to invest that increased budget in maintaining teacher numbers, as it is resourced to do, and cutting class sizes. However, Labour does not believe in smaller class sizes. Let us tell that to the parents of Glasgow as they see class sizes come down elsewhere in Scotland while Labour stands in the way in Glasgow. Wendy Alexander said in her famous hungry caterpillar speech that our request for 2 per cent efficiency savings was not ambitious enough and that she wanted the figure to be 3 per cent. Labour's position was to take all those savings out of local government.  The councils that are seeking efficiency savings from schools—and it is by no means all councils—are, like Renfrewshire, putting those savings back into education. Let us talk about Renfrewshire. I quote from the headteacher at Gleniffer, who stated about the said letter: "I wish to express my concerns as to its creation and contents. I am concerned that staff may have added their names to a document without checking its accuracy." This is not the first time that Labour has come to the chamber to speak about Renfrewshire without checking the accuracy of its comments. The two local members of the Scottish Parliament were asked to comment on the draft budget and failed to do so. Believe it or not, despite raising the issue in the Parliament and broadcasting a blatantly misinformed letter from teachers at one school, which the headteacher rightly corrected, the two local MSPs—Wendy Alexander and Hugh Henry—have not even offered their local council a meeting or bothered to ask for one.

No. I am sure that Mr Henry will get his chance to comment.

It is expected that around 6,000 teachers will leave the profession this year—most of them are retiring—and 3,500 probationer teachers are coming into the system. There is plenty of opportunity for councils to maintain teacher numbers at a time of falling school rolls to reduce class sizes throughout the country. The local government settlement provides for that. In its desperation to find isolated examples of local authorities making changes to how they provide their education services, Labour continues to miss the point. The concordat unfetters local government to allow local authorities to make the choices that they consider most appropriate for their areas. We will continue to work with local government on that task. More important, this Government will not use children's education for political posturing or to score cheap points. If Labour maliciously fosters discontent, as it is doing, without firm foundation,  parents will find its position on education unforgivable. I move amendment S3M-2120.3, to leave out from first "recognises" to end and insert: "welcomes the potential for educational improvement for Scottish pupils offered by the local government settlement which delivered record levels of funding for local authorities and which Labour members voted for; recognises that the Concordat between local and national government is giving local authorities greater scope to improve educational outcomes by freeing them up from unnecessary bureaucracy, as well as giving them greater local accountability, and notes that the new single outcome agreements, which will be finalised shortly, will include specific local and national outcomes which, over time, will deliver real benefits for pupils in every local authority area in Scotland."

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way now?

Will Rhona Brankin give way?

Local authorities are responsible for the employment of teachers. We have provided a record funding settlement of £34.9 billion over the spending review period. Under the terms of the concordat, we have agreed specific arrangements and sufficient funds for local authorities to maintain teacher numbers at the 2007 level against a backdrop of falling school rolls. Those arrangements will provide increasing opportunities for probationer teachers to find employment. In addition, approximately 6,000 teachers are expected to leave teaching this year, mostly for retirement reasons. That is almost 400 more than  the number who left last year, which therefore creates vacancies for new teachers.

There are 300 more jobs in teaching under this Government compared with the number that the previous Government provided. The General Teaching Council for Scotland's employment survey shows that 92.7 per cent of last year's probationers are in teaching employment. I have established a teacher employment working group, in which the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities is a key player; local authorities are employers and have key responsibilities. I am pleased to announce that Joe Di Paola, the head of the employers organisation within COSLA, will take the lead role in that group. The group's remit is to assess whether the current teacher workforce planning process that was inherited from the previous Government is fit for purpose, taking into account relevant policy developments; to examine whether improvements can be made to maximise the compatibility between student numbers and employment opportunities for teachers; to consider the impact of the teacher induction scheme; and to make recommendations for improvements in the process. That reflection will be welcome, and I hope that it will be warmly welcomed by all members in the chamber.

I reiterate that the Government has provided specific arrangements and funding to maintain teacher numbers at the 2007 level. Providing resources to maintain teacher numbers at 53,000 is a very positive step. The teacher employment working group will examine the implementation and the interface with local authority workforce planning systems to ensure that they are compatible. It will consider the implications of new policy drivers such as the Government's desire to drive down class sizes at early primary level, and whether the system of allocating probationer teachers needs to be adjusted to take account of developments over the past year, using new demographic data. I am pleased that the GTC will also be a member of the teacher employment working group.

The draft experiences and outcomes for curriculum for excellence, which have been released over the course of this school year, provide rich opportunities for schools to use outdoor education and outdoor learning to achieve the outcomes that are sought. Our new framework for learning and teaching, "Building the Curriculum 3: A framework for learning and teaching", which I will launch on 10 June, will also provide an opportunity for outdoor education and learning to flourish. The Minister for Community Safety and the Minister for Schools and Skills led a summit with stakeholders on 5 March. Building on that, we are  setting up a strategic advisory group to explore creative ways of delivering outdoor education, of sharing good examples across the country and of encouraging schools to provide more outdoor education opportunities.

As I said, we expect more children to experience more outdoor education opportunities. At the summit of stakeholders and interest groups on 5 March, they were clear that they expected that to be delivered through curriculum for excellence, which is indeed part of the historic concordat that we have with local government. The local government settlement, which is part of the historic concordat, will fund not just that education provision but many other education policies from the SNP. I am more than happy to make the same offer to Iain Smith—if he wishes to pursue his interest in the issue—as the Minister for Schools and Skills made to the Conservatives, who have proposed a constructive policy in this area.

I am aware of the member's proposals, and I understand that the Minister for Schools and Skills is meeting Elizabeth Smith in June to discuss them. That perhaps provides the opportunity to take the matter forward.

Regrettably, public-private partnership provision has brought a reduction in school playing fields. We are determined to resolve that under our proposals to ensure that young people have outdoor learning experiences at their own schools. I am delighted to say that, with the launch of "Building the Curriculum 3", we are confident that more schools will take the opportunity to have outdoor education, outdoor classrooms and outdoor learning. Outdoor education is not just about residential provision; it also takes place in schools. The excess private profit that led to some of the concerns that Ian McKee has expressed will be addressed by the SNP Government.

I last met representatives of Glasgow City Council on Thursday 6 May 2008, when a number of education and skills matters were discussed.

Glasgow City Council is responsible for providing education in its authority area. Our national skills strategy, the first-ever skills strategy for Scotland, addresses the needs of young people who require more opportunity to develop their skills. The situation of young people with disabilities is, as Johann Lamont said, clearly a matter for serious representation under that strategy. I am planning to meet the leader of Glasgow City Council in the next few weeks, and I will certainly discuss her concerns with him.

I am fully aware of those concerns, which I discussed with Gordon Matheson on 6 May. The provisions in the act to which Patrick Harvie referred—the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004—make specific mention of children and young people who have additional learning support needs in respect of English language provision. I am concerned about that issue, which I have raised with Glasgow City Council. It is vital that we provide such support—the increase in the number of pupils who require such provision is a matter of concern. We must ensure that the necessary resources are put in place to meet that requirement. I have discussed the issue with Gordon Matheson and I hope to discuss it again when I meet Glasgow City Council in June.

In our concordat, local authorities have committed to developing and delivering the curriculum for excellence. We have made it clear that, as part of the curriculum for excellence, we expect schools to continue to work towards the provision of two hours good quality PE for each child every week. That is reflected in the health and wellbeing experiences and outcomes of the curriculum for excellence that were released on 13 May.

The target is a joint target with local government. I gently remind Ross Finnie that his Administration had such a target when it was in power. I thought that he might have welcomed our wanting to continue with the target. Between 2004 and 2007, only 211 specialist postgraduate PE teachers graduated, whereas the forecast for this year alone is for approximately 150 graduates. That demonstrates the pace of change to ensure that enough PE teachers are coming through sooner rather than later. The  previous Administration singularly failed to meet its target. I would like to think that Ross Finnie shares our ambition to achieve our target. If he does, he might congratulate us on having so many PE teachers graduate this year—only English and Mathematics will have more graduates coming through—to go into schools to help to deliver the target.

It is important that PE be delivered by specialist PE teachers, although it is unfortunate that the situation has been made more challenging because only 211 postgraduate PE teachers graduated during the previous Administration. However, as I said to Ross Finnie, I am pleased that more than 150 PE teachers will graduate this year. In addition, there is specialist PE training for primary school teachers in the short term, in recognition of the fact that we do not have enough specialist PE teachers to ensure that two hours of PE can be provided to every pupil by a specialist. Some 3,000 primary school teachers will experience PE training between August and December this year. If Rhona Brankin does not recognise that that approach demonstrates our commitment to PE, I wonder why she is doing the job that she does on the Labour Party front bench.

Margo MacDonald made a number of points and I acknowledge her work over the years in pursuit of the issue. I also acknowledge her concerns about the one-year training course, although 150 new graduates this year is a great improvement on the 211 that graduated during a three-year period under the previous Administration. Currently 250 people are going through, or being recruited to, the four-year BEd programme, which demonstrates the important acceptance that we must invest in four-year teacher training, as this Government has done. We must distinguish between physical education and physical activity, which are both important. I acknowledge the importance of daily exercise because the Government helped to fund a pilot scheme in a number of primary schools and in one secondary school in Dumfries and Galloway—I think the pilot included schools in your constituency, Presiding Officer—in which children undertook daily aerobic skipping exercises, managed by their teachers. We did that because we must find mechanisms and create unique opportunities that will attract boys and girls to indulge with great enthusiasm in daily physical activity, which can be supplemented by physical education. We recognise the different tasks that we have to take forward. The fit for girls programme is another example of our work to encourage girls into physical activity. I hope that that gives an idea of the broad range of the proposals that we are taking forward. If it would be helpful to Margo MacDonald, I will be more than happy to meet her to discuss some of our other proposals.

As Hugh O'Donnell knows, the concordat with the local authorities makes clear the specific arrangements to maintain 53,000 teachers across Scotland. Obviously, it is up to local authorities to employ them: they are the employers of teachers. I am confident, bearing in mind authorities' joint commitment to the curriculum for excellence and two hours of quality PE a week, that they will accept responsibility for taking forward the opportunity to recruit the new probationers into permanent positions, once they have fulfilled their probationary period.

Good progress has been made. On 14 November 2007, we signed an historic concordat under which local government agreed to reduce primary 1 to primary 3 classes to a maximum of 18 as quickly as possible. Since then, we have been working with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and local authorities on achievement of that joint commitment.

I want to make it clear that the agreement that we signed with local government and COSLA on 14 November set out a joint commitment. In order to help to progress class-size reductions, it also set out arrangements for local authorities to maintain teacher numbers in the face of falling school rolls, which allows significant progress to be made. Liam McArthur may be disappointed, but the Liberal Democrats' FOI request may have reached councils at the wrong time. For example, the implication was that West Lothian Council would not be participating, but West Lothian Council is progressing with class-size reductions. As of this year, it will have class sizes of 18 in P1 to P3 in areas of deprivation. I am delighted that South Lanarkshire Council—a Labour-controlled local authority—is also employing 11 more teachers this year to progress reductions in class sizes to 18 in  a number of schools, particularly in areas of deprivation. Renfrewshire Council has allocated £1 million to reduce class sizes to ensure that it can help to deliver the target, and Fife Council has allocated £9 million. Opposition members might think it preferable to see the doom and gloom and wish that things will not happen. However, many parents and pupils are congratulating the local authorities that are moving forward and improving things. The reduction in class sizes in P1 to P3 in areas of deprivation will help to give firm foundations of learning to our young people. It will improve literacy and numeracy and ensure that our young people have the best start in life. Instead of trying to denigrate those who are trying to deliver class-size reductions, we all should be working collectively towards that end.

The Scottish Government does not have a record of the number of students who will be affected because the previous Administration did not collect that information. In future years, however, we will be able to ascertain how many will be affected.

On the first point, there was a general consensus that means testing had to be revised: it had been in the same state for decades. In its response to the consultation, the National Union of Students supported what we are doing. However, I acknowledge the point about introducing changes for students during their courses. We had to consider that carefully but—unfortunately—our advice from the Student Awards Agency for Scotland was that administration of two systems running concurrently would have caused a great deal of difficulty in the information technology and administrative function. We recommend that any students who experience hardship as a result of the changes apply to their institution's discretionary fund for relief and support in the meantime. There has been widespread support for addressing a longstanding need for change. I know that the previous Administration supported such changes, which had to be made at some point. I acknowledge that the simplest thing may  have been to implement them just for new students, and we genuinely considered that option, but for administrative purposes and in order to avoid difficulties not only for students and parents, but in the operation of the system, the sensible decision was to introduce the changes as we have done.

The debate has centred on the fundamental premise of whether Government should adopt a supply-led, centrally controlled approach that is heavily influenced by training providers, or a skills agenda that is responsive to employers and is demand-led, and in which the individual learner and their needs drive policy. The SNP recognises the need for skills and training to be aligned with the Government's economic strategy, as Alex Neil said. We have set out our vision for a smarter Scotland, and the first ever lifelong skills strategy. The previous Government had eight years and produced no skills strategy. As Elizabeth Smith referred to, our skills strategy is cradle to grave, and should be seen in that light. I have been delighted by the feedback and support from stakeholders, employers, learning providers and awarding bodies in relation to not only the skills strategy but our increase of 1,000 additional construction and engineering modern apprenticeships and our introduction of a life sciences MA. Liz Cameron, the executive director of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce said: "It is one of the best documents we have seen and reflected what we have been asking for." Skills expert Professor Ewart Keep was reported as saying: "In my native England a clapped-out old model, born out of a Cold War mentality, is still considered roadworthy ... The misalignment highlights the limitations of a 'supply side only' approach to skills ... Scotland has joined a small club of nations that are thinking in 21 st -century terms about the skills issue." Dr Peter Hughes, the chief executive of Scottish Engineering, said:  "Scottish Engineering welcomes the Government's approach in emphasising the importance of Modern Apprenticeships in the Construction and Engineering Sectors." We believe that it is not appropriate to import Gordon Brown's volume-driven approach wholesale into Scotland. We face different challenges in Scotland, and we must ensure that our skills interventions are tailored and appropriate for Scotland.

Improve, the food and drink sector skills council, is pleased that we are introducing level 2 modern apprenticeships because it recognises the importance of access into the industry. We are adopting a flexible approach to modern apprenticeships, which it welcomes. Alan Wilson, the outgoing chief executive of the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, said: "Often there is too much emphasis in this country on bits of paper and arbitrary numerical targets for modern apprentices, and not enough on the skills that a qualification actually gives the person, or how it serves the needs of employers."

If the Labour Party's approach to skills was so successful, why does Scotland's economic growth rate lag behind the rest of the UK and why, despite higher levels of skills in the workplace, does our productivity lag behind the rest of the UK? Other parties in the chamber may want more of the same, but they will find that in the world outside, many people recognise the need to break out of the cosy world of stockpiling skills qualifications at any cost, with no regard to their use or sector. We want modern apprenticeships in construction; other parties want modern apprenticeships in dog grooming. We want modern apprenticeships in engineering; they want modern apprenticeships for nail technicians. Important though nail technicians are, they will not drive the economy forward.

Skills Development Scotland, which has the same training departments as  Scottish Enterprise had, is taking forward the contracts.

Members have asked for evidence. I will put reports in the Scottish Parliament information centre that outline the issues. In a survey of 2,400 employers, 70 per cent said that adult modern apprenticeships made no difference to the number of people being employed. Modern apprenticeships are extremely expensive. With failure to complete rates of 30 to 40 per cent, is that an effective use of public money? As part of the review of the national programmes, I am asking Skills Development Scotland to discuss with the tourism, food and drink, and retail sectors what form and format qualifications should take. It is important to stress that carrying on regardless, and taking on expensive four-year contracts, would have prevented the Government from implementing the changes that are needed to provide training that is fit for purpose. We are taking Scotland forward and we have a challenging skills agenda. However, complacency and the supply-driven approach to the skills sector taken not just by the previous Government in Scotland but by Gordon Brown will not produce the changes that we need. We need Scottish solutions for a Scottish skills system. We are providing leadership that is welcomed outside the chamber. I hope that in the months and years ahead it will start to be welcomed inside it.

I do not frequent the Conservatives' website, but a submission to the United Kingdom shadow cabinet that has been placed on it states: "The current supply-led structure (overly influenced by the providers of training) would be transformed into a demand-led framework." I am genuinely interested in the Conservatives' position. Do they believe in a volume-based, supply-side approach to skills development or in a demand-led approach, led by individuals and employers?

On the latter point, I refer the member to my letter to two committees with interests in this area. Does the member recall the Liberal Democrat manifesto commitment to bring together Careers Scotland and learndirect Scotland, which, according to PA Consulting Group, would have cost £22 million? Setting up any new agency will incur costs, but I can tell you—by which I mean, of course, the Presiding Officer—that the efficiencies and improvements that we will get from Skills Development Scotland will lead to improvements in skills in front-line services.

I inform Parliament that I have approved board appointments, which will be announced shortly. The advert has been placed for the chief executive, who will be in place in the next few months.

Why does Rhona Brankin think that Scotland's productivity and economic growth rates have lagged behind those of the United Kingdom as a whole? If skills provision by the previous Government was so successful, why has there been no improvement in those rates? Does she have the grace at least to support the Government's proposals to increase the number of construction and engineering modern apprenticeships by 1,000?

I think that the minister meant to say "translucent".

The spending review delivered a record level of funding for Scotland's local authorities and the historic concordant with local government set out the various ways in which we are working in partnership with Scotland's councils, including Aberdeen City Council, to improve opportunities for Scotland's school pupils. The proposed improvements in the curriculum will increase the educational choices that are available. Our measures to reduce student debt and support students at college, alongside increased opportunities for vocational learning, will present the school pupils of Aberdeen and Scotland with increased opportunity to make positive education choices that are based on their talents rather than their financial situation.

The education authority in Aberdeen is responsible for the provision of education in the city. However, I will shortly meet directors of education from throughout Scotland and I will impress on them the importance of ensuring that subject choices are available, particularly at higher and advanced higher level, so that the educational choices that pupils and their parents expect are available for our young people.

I emphasise the fact that this Government is not about micromanaging local government. We recognise that councils will determine what departments they have. The previous Administration encouraged local authorities to have integrated children's and education departments, which was very much part of the joint working that the previous Administration suggested would benefit youngsters, not least in the context of child protection issues. We share concerns about child protection throughout the country, and there are differences in performance in child protection in different authorities. The move to integrated departments was one way of addressing that. There are some successful integrated departments—Mary Mulligan, who is sitting beside Lewis Macdonald, may be familiar with that approach working across the Lothians. However, it is not the responsibility of national Government to micromanage what committees local government sets up to scrutinise its affairs.

I reiterate that it is up to Aberdeen City Council, as an education authority, to engage with staff and, particularly, unions. I am sure that it will do that. It is important to record that national Government's contribution to Aberdeen City Council for 2008-09 is of the order of 4.7 per cent of core revenue funding, which is a very adequate settlement—indeed, it is above the percentage given to other local authorities. I respect the fact that Aberdeen City Council, as an education authority, must administer its own affairs. Nevertheless, I encourage it to engage with the EIS, in particular, to address the concerns that Elizabeth Smith and Nanette Milne have raised.

All 32 local authorities in Scotland have submitted draft single outcome agreements that set out how they will contribute to the agreed national outcomes in relation to education provision. Those drafts are currently the subject of discussion. We aim to complete the process of finalising all the agreements for 2008-09 by 30 June. Subject to agreement with the authorities, all the finalised single outcome agreements will be made publicly available shortly thereafter.

I understand that Richard Baker was part of the cross-party delegation that met the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth yesterday to explore some of the issues that are particular to Aberdeen City Council. I understand that Aberdeen City Council has yet to make decisions about its school provision, for which it is responsible. However, it is important to consider that there are provisions for falling school rolls in different parts of the country that will  enable the reprovision of education and a reduction in class sizes. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has given a commitment that it will deliver class size reductions year on year throughout Scotland, and we expect every local authority, including Aberdeen City Council, to make progress and reduce class sizes over the spending review period.

On 31 March, we announced a package of changes to the modern apprenticeship programme to ensure that public money supports the Government economic strategy. Those included the development of a new life science modern apprenticeship framework, an increase in the number of construction and engineering-related modern apprenticeships by providing 1,000 additional opportunities, and the provision of an additional 6,500 level 2 modern apprenticeships through reform of the skillseekers programme. The package amounts to substantial change and illustrates our commitment to target support to the construction and engineering-related sectors, in which we know our investment delivers results. That growth equates to increasing the number of adult modern apprenticeships by 50 per cent and increasing the number of 16 to 19-year-old modern apprenticeships by 10 per cent, which will support individuals in industries that face particular training pressures. We also announced that we will continue to support the get ready for work and training for work programmes, which will ensure that those who are in most need of support continue to receive it.

Yes. As the Government has promised a 40 per cent increase in new build in future years, it is essential that we train people to carry out the construction, engineering and other aspects to help the economy and show that our country is making progress. It is essential that any programme that is funded by the public purse  helps to support the Government's overarching purpose of sustainable economic growth. The changes in modern apprenticeships will allow us to do that.

The revision of the modern apprenticeship scheme, which will allow for an extra 1,000 modern apprenticeships in construction and engineering, was part of the redirection of the training programmes. Skills development Scotland is being restructured to ensure that we have more space and scope in the future to develop training opportunities where they are needed. I know that the food and drink industry, in which we have a particular interest with regard to helping domestic industry, is pleased at the provision of level 2 modern apprenticeships, which will help that sector. I want support to be provided in the tourism industry and I will engage with my enterprise colleagues on how that might best be done. We can do that because we have reprofiled the modern apprenticeship scheme. If we had not done that, such support might not be possible.

I congratulate the member, as she is probably the first member to ask the 10 th question at question time. Her question is important.  Decisions on staffing issues at Scottish higher education institutions are the responsibility of the management teams of those institutions. RSAMD is no different. As a fully autonomous body that is independent of the Government, it alone must judge what decisions it must take to achieve its strategic objectives. That said, I expect it to discuss its restructuring plans in full consultation with staff and the unions. I have been assured that it is doing so.

The member will be aware that Parliament passed legislation, which she supported, to establish the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. That legislation makes it clear that as a minister, I cannot direct independent institutions. However, in a letter that I sent to the chair of the funding council, John McClelland, on 25 January 2008, setting out strategic guidance—I am allowed to do that under the legislation—I stated: "My priorities for the university sector are: - growth in undergraduate and taught post-graduate numbers (for excellence in the performing arts, including dance; Crichton; and rural healthcare)". I also provided for a 4.8 per cent increase in funding for the academy in 2008-09, which is greater than both the inflation rate and the 3.4 per cent increase in funding for the university sector as a whole. That shows that we are supporting the academy. I recognise the tributes that the member has paid to it, but we must respect the right of individual institutions to carry out restructuring. That is a matter for institutions to explore, but they must do so in consultation with staff and unions.

I welcome this opportunity to make a statement on my intentions with regard to future arrangements for national qualifications. During the parliamentary debate on the curriculum for excellence on 19 March, I outlined our vision for the programme and the considerable progress that was being made towards its implementation. I also indicated that I would be announcing further details on our plans for national qualifications, and I am pleased to be in a position to do so this morning. The curriculum for excellence's vision is for transformational change in Scottish education to provide better attainment and attendance and improved outcomes for all our children and young people, including those who are not achieving their potential and those who need to be challenged more. We will also place greater emphasis on developing and recognising young people's literacy and numeracy skills. We intend the curriculum for excellence to be a curriculum for all Scotland's young people. To meet our ambition of creating an education system that raises the bar for all, not only in what is being learned but in how learning is applied and used, we will need a robust qualifications system that meets the curriculum for excellence's aspirations. After reflecting on the current shape of qualifications, we have decided that, in general, our current system works well for many young people. Indeed, at a time when so many young people are preparing to take their exams, we should all acknowledge the hard work and application that it demands. Our best wishes go to those students. As the Government wants a qualification system that works for all young people, including those who are less likely to realise their full potential, we  must have a next-generation system that not only meets the next generation's needs but equips individuals with the skills that are required to meet today's needs and tomorrow's demands. As a result, we need a coherent system of curriculum and assessment from three to 18 and a qualifications system that reinforces the curriculum for excellence's values, purposes and principles. Moreover, some aspects of the current qualifications system need to be improved. All of that demands change. I intend to hold a consultation on a number of proposals for the next generation of qualifications for Scotland's young people and have set some broad objectives to underpin that. The qualifications system must meet 21 st century Scotland's needs by progressing the Scottish Government's principal purpose of achieving sustainable economic development and our five overarching strategic objectives. We want to let all young people have the opportunity to experience and enjoy a broad general curriculum to the end of S3, reflecting the traditional strengths of the Scottish education system. We must develop an assessment system that supports rather than leads the curriculum and ensures that young people have a smooth transition into qualifications. There should be no need for young people to take examinations prior to S4. We also want to promote a fuller recognition of each young person's achievements, including those beyond qualifications. Our final objective is to ensure that teaching and learning strike a better balance between equipping our young people with the skills for passing exams and equipping them with skills for learning, skills for life and skills for work. In particular, assessment must be used to support, motivate and challenge young people, and I want the new system to have a sharper focus on literacy, numeracy and other life and work skills. The revised qualifications system should reduce current complexity particularly at Scottish credit and qualifications framework levels 4 and 5, where the two different qualifications that are available—standard grade and intermediate—have different structures and grading systems. It should also provide a range of opportunities to meet all young people's needs. We also need to explore options for increasing flexibility in the time that is taken to achieve qualifications, including, for example, tackling the so-called two-term dash to higher level that can present such a barrier to some young people. Moreover, with so many young people staying on at school, we must look to enhance the S6 experience.  I intend to consult on a number of detailed proposals to achieve those objectives. In line with our priorities, my first main proposal is to introduce new awards in literacy and numeracy. The draft experiences and outcomes in numeracy and literacy in the curriculum for excellence provide a shared, modern definition of our expectations of learning and teaching in those areas. The fact that all teachers have a role in developing those skills is testament to the importance that we attach to them. Indeed, one of the differences of the new curriculum is that, for the first time, all teaching in all subjects will be expected to embed literacy and numeracy. To sharpen that focus, I propose the introduction of two new separate awards—the Scottish certificate for literacy and the Scottish certificate for numeracy—to accredit young people's literacy and numeracy skills. Those skills will be assessed in S4. We will have to consider the most appropriate way of recognising and evaluating such skills. As I favour providing the opportunity to certify all our young people, wherever they are learning, I propose that the awards be made available at SCQF levels 3 to 5. The awards should not only draw on evidence from young people's work across the curriculum but be assessed externally through an examination. As part of lifelong learning, they should also be made available to adult learners in colleges. However, I will ensure that we have an open consultation on the details of implementation. My second major proposal relates to standard grade and intermediate qualifications. Although these qualifications are good, the system is complex and must be simplified. The time is also right to consider whether in their current form they best meet the needs of tomorrow's young people, employers and other users of qualifications. Although both qualifications have served us well, education has moved on. For instance, standard grade is no longer the exit qualification that it used to be and, although originally designed for S5 and S6 pupils, intermediate examinations are being taken more and more by younger pupils. We need a next-generation qualification. Although each is valuable in its own right, neither of those two qualifications reflects the curriculum for excellence's values, purposes and principles, so we need to adapt the system to meet new challenges and circumstances. The consultation will propose a definite way forward while being open to ideas about structures and implementation. We propose to replace both standard grade at general and credit level and intermediate 1 and 2 with a new general qualification at SCQF levels 4  and 5 that will nevertheless reflect the best features of the present arrangements. The real strength of the standard grade qualification is generally felt to be its inclusivity; it provides certification for all. The best feature of intermediate qualifications is considered to be their unit structure, which provides flexibility and motivation for young people. I expect the new general qualification at SCQF levels 4 and 5 to deliver as many of the best features of the present arrangements as possible. At SCQF level 3, standard grade foundation level will be removed, with access 3 providing an appropriate replacement. That leads me to my third proposal. It will be necessary to ensure that the other parts of the qualifications framework reflect the changes proposed at SCQF levels 4 and 5 and the curriculum for excellence's aspirations. Scottish qualifications are held in high national and international regard, and I propose to build on the present system's success. Access, higher and advanced higher qualifications will be retained as valued qualifications and points of stability. Highers, in particular, will remain the gold standard of the Scottish education system. However, the content of all qualifications will be updated in line with the curriculum for excellence, and some aspects of their structure will be reviewed. As the children who are currently in primary 6 are likely to be the first to experience the new secondary curriculum in full, they will be the first to require access to the next generation of qualifications. We therefore plan to have revised qualifications in place from 2012-13 onwards. Of course, local authorities and schools will determine which subjects they offer and at what level. However, I underline my commitment to the future of advanced highers. Along with highers, those valuable qualifications are rightly held in high regard by universities, and they will continue to play an important role both in ensuring that our most able learners have an appropriate level of challenge and in securing the status of S6. As a result, we will make them an essential element of our science and languages baccalaureates, further details of which I will announce later this session. I turn now to other elements of the consultation. In addition to the main proposals, I plan to use the consultation to investigate ways in which we can increase flexibility so that we are better able to meet the needs of young people. We will suggest a number of options and ideas. For example, we will promote opportunities to bypass lower-level qualifications and we will consult on how we can encourage our most able young people—the ones who are likely to attain more advanced levels of qualifications such as highers—not to take the lower levels. Those who are clearly capable of  doing so could begin studying for highers in S4. That would be in keeping with our wider objective of ensuring that qualifications support and reflect individual learning, rather than having learning determined by qualifications. I want to test the opportunities for taking qualifications over a variable timeframe. The pressures of the two-term dash to higher have been a long-standing concern in the education system. To address it, I want to explore the possibility of giving young people the opportunity to study for qualifications over an extended timeframe—for example, over a period of 18 months or even two years, as well as the present one year. I come now to the final element on which we wish to consult. I want to explore the possibility of introducing a winter diet of examinations. I believe that a winter diet will provide opportunities for greater choice and flexibility, as it could facilitate courses of study over 18 months. The consultation concerns everyone. Qualifications have implications for our economy, our society and our future. For that reason, we will be holding the consultation over a more extended period than usual, so that we can gather views from as broad a range of stakeholders as possible. I expect the consultation to be launched in June and to take views until the end of October 2008. Its launch will coincide with the release of another key document, "Building the Curriculum—A Framework for Learning and Teaching". The document will set out our expectations for young people's entitlements as they experience a broad general education, and it will help those involved in planning the three-to-18 curriculum. In keeping with our concordat with local government, education authorities will be key partners in taking forward the further development and implementation of policy in these areas. I acknowledge the importance of ensuring that the qualifications system builds on the rich general educational experience to the end of S3, with its emphasis on helping our young people to build skills for learning, skills for work and skills for life; to follow an active, healthy and environmentally sustainable lifestyle; and to develop an appreciation of Scotland and its place in the world. That will extend to age 18. As a key element of our education system, the shape of our future qualifications system will be crucial for Scotland's young people and for Scotland as a nation. There is clear evidence that Scotland has a good education system. However, it can be better; indeed, it needs to be better. It needs to help all Scotland's young people to develop their skills, talents and ambitions to the full. It needs to help Scotland to become smarter, wealthier and fairer, safer and stronger, healthier  and greener. The curriculum for excellence presents us with a tremendous opportunity to create a truly world-class education system. Let us take that opportunity. This generation of young people and future generations deserve it.

I thank the member for her welcome and broad recognition of the need to improve our qualifications system. I hope that members will acknowledge that Scottish education needs all political parties to work together. This is  a long-term project for the next generation of Scotland's examination system and for future generations of Scotland's pupils. It is most important that we build a broad cross-party consensus in taking that forward. We are introducing certificates in literacy and numeracy. They are not leaving certificates, as the Labour Party proposed—given that the Labour Party also wanted to extend the leaving age to 18, they would have been leaving certificates at age 18. What we are proposing is certification for literacy and numeracy that will involve teacher assessment in the early years and be subject to examination in S4. The timing of the examination in literacy and numeracy in S4 will be set out in the document that I mentioned. I recognise the importance of embedding literacy and numeracy throughout the curriculum. That is why I said that the curriculum for excellence's literacy and numeracy outcomes are ensuring that literacy and numeracy will be embedded in all subjects. That has not been the case to date. It is important that we do not wait until secondary school to improve the literacy and numeracy of young people, which is why driving down class sizes in the early years is essential. For example, the early intervention programme on literacy in West Dunbartonshire is based not on one narrow definition of functional literacy but on early intervention in the earliest years. Today's statement is primarily about the qualifications system, which focuses on S4 to S6 in particular. The question about stretching pupils in S1 and S2 is relevant. However, we should recall that one of the drivers for changing the curriculum is to ensure that we have a more exciting, invigorating and motivating educational experience in S1 and S2. That is why we have to free up the system to ensure, for example, that there is far more vocational experience, especially in S3 and S4. I accept the OECD's recommendations that all young people should have vocational experience. The SNP has supported that for some time and the Government wants to take it forward. The OECD did not recommend separate skills academies with testing for who should receive vocational education. I am pleased that the OECD reflects the Government's position. The concern about the baccalaureates was not reflected in my discussions with employers and universities. It is recognised that we do not want to see pupils in S6 treading water and that it is essential that we stretch those pupils. Support for the science baccalaureate in particular was expressed at the national economic forum, as we need to ensure that we are stimulating and rewarding those who take more science subjects. We need to move in this direction because it is evident that if a young person takes more than  one science subject at standard grade, he or she is more likely to take more than one science subject at higher level; and if he or she takes more than one science subject at higher level, he or she is more likely to take science at university. That is clearly a logical step forward, as we want to encourage more people to take science at university. The member referred to the Welsh baccalaureate, which is quite a different qualification, as it is based more on vocational experience. When I make my announcement about the Scottish baccalaureate, it will be clear that it is distinct from the Welsh baccalaureate. I hope that I have identified and addressed the range of questions that the member asked.

I thank the member for her questions but, if the chamber will bear with me, today's statement deals with the national qualifications system. I will provide further details of the baccalaureate later in the session. However, I can say that the baccalaureate will be based on  highers and advanced highers which, as I said in my statement, I intend to retain, and that it will include an interpretative project that will involve interdisciplinary work. The chief executives of life sciences companies, with whom I have had discussions, have said that that will provide a great opportunity to engage pupils, particularly those in S6, in work with local employers that will develop their experience not only of a workplace but of the current application of science in the community and in companies. I am open to persuasion with regard to the extension of the baccalaureate concept to other areas; I simply think that, because of the needs of the economy and the drivers of economic growth, it would be appropriate to start with science and languages. On S4, I welcome the member's support for Scottish certificates in literacy and numeracy. Those will be national examinations, but there will also be an element of assessment, which will be based on teachers' assessments throughout the period. Therefore, the assessment process between S1 and S3 is helpful in the development of literacy and numeracy national examinations. The importance of embedding literacy and numeracy in the curriculum and the priority that employers place on having those skills demonstrated in certificate form is part of the thinking behind the proposal. Teachers will welcome the fact that their professional assessment will be part of the assessment process, but the qualifications will be subject to national examination.

The focus of my statement was on qualifications from S4 to S6. I welcome the support of the Liberal Democrats for our determination to update the qualifications system and the materials to support the qualifications. As I said, we will be updating the content of the material relating to the qualifications that we are retaining. Mr Purvis asked for more clarity about examination prior to S4. If the curriculum for excellence is to work in the way in which it was intended to work when it was introduced—at which time there was a Liberal Democrat Deputy Minister for Education and Young People—we need to ensure that the period from S1 to S3 is far more stimulating than it has been to date. We also need to reduce the overassessment that takes place in that period, in order to allow greater opportunities for teachers to exercise their professional abilities, make links between subjects and ensure that the context and content of learning are focused on the individual. We think that we can do that if we have a stimulating period from S1 to S3. Early presentations were designed to provide greater stimulation to young people and to stretch them further. However, the curriculum should be stretching young people; we do not need the qualifications system to do the stretching. The Liberal Democrats might not agree with that view, but we can explore that during the debate on the consultation. The skills-for-work concept is important. I have been impressed by what I have heard from pupils, colleges and employers around the country about how they have found the courses and qualifications. We should celebrate what has been done in this area, and acknowledge the recent report about the success of the skills-for-work concept. The skills-for-work courses will certainly continue in S3 and S4.  We are simplifying the system, as our system of standard grade and intermediate 1 and 2 qualifications is too complex. We expect all pupils to take the Scottish certificates for literacy and numeracy, but that will be in S4 and will mark the start of the formal examination and qualification process. The baccalaureates will be based on highers and advanced highers. The system will stimulate the taking of more than one science or language subject, and the qualification will be subject to an interpretative project. I thought that I made that clear in the debate on 19 March on the curriculum for excellence. However, we are not bringing in a new examination for the baccalaureate, which is why it is not the subject of the statement today.

We have a great strength in our Scottish credit and qualifications framework, which is one of the few such frameworks in the world that has both vocational and academic qualifications. It is important that we see our school education and qualifications system in the round as part of a single system of lifelong learning. The experience that young people need to have of vocational education is important. We have to have parity of esteem. Indeed, a challenge to the country is whether we are outdated when we talk about vocational qualifications and academic qualifications. Our university colleagues often remind us that many of the qualifications that are pursued at university level are vocational qualifications. That is why, as part of our promotion of the curriculum for excellence, we need to be pursuing skills for learning, skills for life and skills for work. There will be a combination of what would have been traditionally vocational and academic courses. Certainly, the improvement of school-college links is part of the concordat with local government. Indeed, improving vocational education for school pupils is one of the 15 commitments in that document.

I thank the member for his general support. The member referred to the looming implementation of the curriculum for excellence, but it might be helpful to embrace the reality, which is that we are already implementing the curriculum for excellence in many schools. If his question was about how the curriculum will be implemented in secondary schools in particular, the implication perhaps is that today's statement on national qualifications will be a key driver in helping to take that forward. Whether the qualifications system should be seen as the pinnacle of the curriculum is a matter for debate, but most educationists and teachers recognise that the curriculum should be the driver and that the qualifications should fit in around that. On the issue of subject choices, a general criticism that has been made, particularly of the early years of secondary education, is that overassessment—this is a particular concern of teachers—limits and reduces young people's educational experience. As I said in the debate on the curriculum for excellence on 19 March, we want the Scottish education system to provide a broad general education, and I am firm in my commitment to that. The strength of the Scottish education system has been that it provides a broad general experience that gives young people more choice and opportunity in deciding which subjects to study at higher or advanced higher level and, in future, at the new general qualification level. The idea is to provide young people with more choice and opportunity and a wider educational experience that will not just enable them to pass exams but equip them for later life in a world where the ability to learn will be as important as the content and subject that they have studied. Learning to learn is a key element of the curriculum for excellence that needs to be taken forward. Young people will have choices as they go through the educational system, but they will also have the opportunity to have a broader experience. I am also keen that we do not see everything in terms of what happens between S1 and S3. The curriculum for excellence is also about ensuring an effective transition from P7 to S1 by providing a continuity that is based around individuals rather  than on the school in which they operate. We must see things within the context of a curriculum for ages three to 18, which is the essence of the curriculum for excellence; to segment things using a much narrower definition of what happens between ages 12 and 15 undermines the curriculum for excellence, which should be perceived as being a run-through from three to 18. The curriculum for excellence should provide for a broad general education system. If anything, we are providing more space and opportunity for teachers and pupils in S1 to S3 to experience a stimulating, invigorating education system. I am happy to take on the baton from the previous Government in driving forward the curriculum for excellence. The previous Government believed that we had to provide a stimulating curriculum, particularly in S1 and S2; my proposals today will take forward the ethos that was started by the previous Government.

The Government is committed to ensuring that Scottish history, heritage and culture are experienced by all young people throughout our education system. However, as Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, I am reluctant to dictate the content of an examination process. If I were to do so, there would be an outcry from many people, including key educationists and teachers. However, I can say that I expect that the content of the examinations in the qualifications system will reflect the curriculum. From the draft curriculum outcomes, it is clear that an understanding of the Scottish perspective is embedded in the curriculum. That is probably as much detail as I can give.

As I said, I want to see skills for learning, skills for life and skills for work. Those terms cover vocational education in the traditional sense and academic experience. Karen Whitefield raised an important point about vocational education, which is one of the big challenges that Scotland faces and was identified in the OECD report as being a key element. As anyone who has heard me speak about the issue will know, I am passionate about the fact that the Scottish credit and qualifications framework is one of the gems of the Scottish education system, which is renowned worldwide—although we need to make it work harder. It is essential that vocational education be recognised, but one of the framework's strengths is that we can do that. I certainly want to ensure that the new qualifications are embedded in the Scottish credit and qualifications framework. I certainly see the need for parity of esteem between traditional vocational education and academic education, which is an issue that the Government can drive forward. I thank the member for her question and for her continuing interest.

In answering Murdo Fraser's question, I should reflect that we see the curriculum as applying to ages three to 18, with literacy and numeracy being embedded throughout. Teachers' assessments of literacy and numeracy levels, including in primary school and in the early years of secondary, are important. In the consultation, we will tease out and reflect on the content of the question that Murdo Fraser has asked. The Scottish certificate for literacy and the Scottish certificate for numeracy will include a combination of national examination and assessment, but whether—as both he and his colleague Elizabeth Smith have asked—the assessments from S1 to S3, rather than just the assessment in S4, should count towards the certificate is a matter on which we will listen to teachers' views when we request responses. I  know that teachers have already expressed concerns about whether the certificate should be based only on the examination or whether it should include the teacher's assessments. I have committed to listen to teachers' views on that. I know that, for teachers, a key driver is that their assessments should form part of the certificate. I have said yes to that, but the form and detail will clearly be subject to the discussion on the consultation.

Hugh O'Donnell raises an important point about Scotland's general engagement with the education system. Clearly, young people have been, and will continue to be, involved in the development of the curriculum for excellence. It is important that education reform is not seen as a matter that interests only teachers and parents. Commerce and business obviously have a clear interest in such reform, which is why I spent a considerable time raising curriculum reform with outside interest groups—businesses in particular. I have met all 25 chief executives of the United Kingdom sector skills councils. At every one of those meetings, I have ensured that they are aware of the particular Scottish direction of the curriculum for excellence and the experiences that we are having in that context. I have also ensured that they are aware of their need not just to engage with colleges, as they are currently doing—I was delighted this week that a collaboration agreement has been signed between the sector skills councils and colleges on the qualifications, which I was instrumental in making happen—but to have greater involvement with employers to ensure that they take an interest in what is happening in schools. The problem that we have had until now is that the complexity of the system has not made it easy for employers to use standard and intermediate grades. Employers themselves must also contribute to the education system.  Teachers are the professionals who will help, guide, develop and draw out the talents of our young people. However, we must have a community in which valuing education—which has always been valued highly in Scotland—is developed further. As I said when I chaired the life sciences session at the business in the Parliament event, I want to challenge employers about what they are doing to provide opportunities for young people, particularly those who are studying at higher grade level, to undertake work experience. We need to stimulate S6 in particular: the involvement of employers with pupils at that level is increasingly important. In universities, as part of my on-going regular discussions, I have met—even in the past week—just about every principal in Scotland. I have told them that they need to be prepared for young people coming from schools with a different emphasis on individual, personalised learning. I want universities to open themselves up more and to have more involvement with schools, particularly at the advanced higher level.

On the last question, the consultation will run from June through to October. The opportunity for choices will be when pupils choose which subjects to take going forward. Some may start to study for their highers in S4 and will therefore make choices about their highers earlier than they would previously have done. As far as the winter diet is concerned, if things were too difficult and ambitious, some students might not do anything. The status quo is always a comfort factor for many people. Of course, any implementation would have to be carefully planned, and it is something that the Scottish Qualifications Authority has been thinking about and developing for some time. However, if we are truly focused on individual learning and on ensuring that the needs of the individual are  paramount, the flexibility to offer different opportunities for taking examinations should be welcomed. It could allow pupils to take two diets of highers over 18 months, rather than face a two-term dash for highers in S5 and another two-term dash for highers in S6. Such flexibility will provide more opportunities for in-depth learning and a better learning opportunity. We should embrace opportunity, change and development—that is what the curriculum for excellence and the qualifications system are about. We should consider carefully the SQA's suggestions about a winter diet. I accept that they are subject to consultation and would need to be implemented very carefully, but let us not close our eyes to opportunities for the future.

I am delighted to say that there will be 20,000 new teachers in training between 2007 and 2011. Every one of them will be enmeshed in the curriculum for excellence as part of their initial teacher training and will be well prepared to take forward the new qualifications system.

He did not expect that.

The member will be aware of my personal commitment—and the First Minister's commitment—to the Scottish Trades Union Congress this week to extend and embrace a social partnership arrangement between Scotland,  the trade unions and employers generally. I will move forward in that spirit.

The member has made the case himself for encouraging more people to take science. It is about incentivising the study of more science subjects for the reasons that he mentioned in his speech.

The member makes an important point. That is why I am pressing local authorities and headteachers to engage and show leadership as much with parents as with pupils. The member is right that parent councils provide an ideal opportunity for that and I will certainly take that message to directors of education.

I, too, welcome the pupils of Lenzie academy. I am unsure whether David Whitton was in the chamber for my opening speech. If he had been here, he would have heard me say that, in the next couple of weeks, I will make an announcement on the qualifications system. It is important that qualifications follow the curriculum; they should not lead it. I acknowledge the previous Government's emphasis on that.

I encourage the member to read the draft outcomes in literacy. Under the curriculum for excellence, literacy and numeracy will for the first time be embedded throughout the curriculum in all subjects. Does the member welcome that and does he have any views on the draft outcomes in literacy, which have been published?

I am sure that the member will be pleased to learn that I have visited Cardinal Newman high school. In response to her—and, to some extent, to Hugh O'Donnell's point about vocational experiences—I say that schools do not need to outsource vocational education. North Lanarkshire's approach well demonstrates the important lesson in the OECD report that vocational education must be available within schools to ensure that it is not exclusive but is experienced by everyone.

I agree that we should move rapidly to address that. When I took office, I was concerned about the pace with which the examination system was being addressed. The session 2 Education Committee shared that feeling. In the next few weeks, I will announce our direction.

The origins of curriculum for excellence lie in the national debate of 2002. Between 2002 and 2003, the curriculum review group developed "A Curriculum for Excellence", which was adopted by the then Scottish Executive to address concerns about overcrowding in the curriculum; transitions between stages; the academic-vocational balance; skills development; how assessment and certification supports learning; personalisation and choice; and the pace of learning. Learning and teaching need to emphasise the capacity of education to equip young people with skills for learning, skills for life and skills for work. The balance has swung too far in favour of equipping young people primarily with skills for passing exams. Scotland has always valued breadth in learning. I want to reinforce that value and I want a sense of enjoyment and engagement in learning. Curriculum for excellence is not a top-down imposition. It has been and will continue to be developed in partnership with the education profession. Since September 2007, a set of draft curriculum learning experiences and outcomes has been produced by Learning and Teaching Scotland, with support from the Government, and made available for discussion and comment. The draft experiences and outcomes for the three remaining areas will be released in April and May. Trialling of the draft experiences and outcomes will also take place this year. A crucial factor in all this is the qualifications system, which needs to be simplified and designed to support the curriculum and young people's learning. I shall return to that point later. Curriculum for excellence is a programme of reform that represents the biggest change in education in Scotland for a generation. Its fundamental purpose is to ensure that, by providing the best possible learning opportunities from the ages of three to 18, our children and young people are enabled to become successful learners, confident individuals, responsible citizens and effective contributors. The Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee is examining curriculum for excellence. Today's debate is therefore timely, and it affords us all in the Parliament an opportunity to reflect on  the role and purpose of curriculum for excellence in Scottish education and to identify challenges and opportunities. I look forward to hearing views. If all our young people are to benefit from curriculum for excellence, we will require leadership from the education profession—from directors of education, leading their schools, headteachers, teachers and employers; from headteachers, leading their teaching staff and school communities, pupils, parents and others; and from teachers in their classrooms, leading their colleagues and pupils. For my part, I accept my responsibility to provide leadership at national level by engaging Scotland more widely. Curriculum for excellence should not be seen as party political, and I look to MSPs and the Scottish Parliament to recognise their leadership role in engaging Scotland and the schools that they visit. I want to see a Scotland-wide campaign for curriculum for excellence. I am investing time in building up support for curriculum for excellence with scientists, academics, employers, sector skills councils, colleges and universities to build the required community of support, trust and engagement. For example, I am asking the seven university deans of faculty to help support the trialling activity. To date, around 280 schools in 28 local authorities have signed up to trialling the full range of learning experiences and outcomes. Given that curriculum for excellence is not a top-down initiative, there is a genuine debate about the extent to which materials should be provided centrally and the extent to which teachers ought to create their own classroom materials. My view is that there is much to be gained from the centre providing a kick-start in terms of support, and I expect LTS to co-ordinate that. However, the principle that teachers create and exchange their own materials must not be lost. The new all-schools intranet, glow, which is being rolled out to local authorities, can play a significant role in facilitating support materials. Curriculum for excellence is about far more than just the content of the curriculum, and it extends well beyond schools. Our aim is to provide overarching coherence for all aspects of education in Scotland, for every child and young person, covering assessment, qualifications, recognition of achievement, support for learning, initial teacher education, continuing professional development, accountability within the system, and colleges and universities. The impact of the changes will reach far beyond the people who are part of the day-to-day workings of our education system. This is a programme of reform for the nation.

The member makes an important point. That is exactly the question that I am asking the deans of faculty in my discussions with them. They have given me confidence and an assurance that curriculum for excellence will be embedded in the work of the 20,000 teachers who we will train over the next five years. Indeed, the 17,000 teachers who have been trained in recent years are champions of curriculum for excellence in the many schools that I visit. We have to address the major issues that face us. We have to provide overarching coherence for the whole system, and ensure that we build on the strong foundation of intellectual inquiry and excellence in Scotland. We recognise that it is vital to encourage ownership of and interest in education throughout the community. That approach is backed up by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development's report "Quality and Equity of Schooling in Scotland", which highlights the importance of having curriculum reform that comes from schools and teachers, rather than having people wait for central directions. I do not pretend that any of that will be easy or without challenge. I would like to take a few moments to reflect upon the key challenges and consider how we can tackle and address them collectively to allow curriculum for excellence to progress. Fundamental to our ability to achieve our aims is ensuring that we have assessment and qualifications that serve and support the curriculum. There is a perception that the situation is the other way round at the moment. The role of inspection will be critical to the success of curriculum for excellence. Our new relationship with local government has significant implications for the nature of inspection. Significantly, the four capacities for all our young people are one of the 15 national outcomes. In addition to telling us how well our schools are performing, inspections act as a spur to improvement by identifying and spreading good practice and by supporting rigorous self-evaluation. I have been discussing with Graham Donaldson, the senior chief inspector of schools, ways in which the powerful contributions that inspection can make can be fully realised in the context of the Crerar report and curriculum for excellence. Our removal of ring fencing, coupled with the removal of the need to report continually on top-down initiatives from national Government, should also  lead to improvements. In examining the shape of school education, I believe that the three-to-15 curriculum should deliver a broad education and a rich learning experience. Every child in Scotland is entitled to expect their general education to provide them with literacy and numeracy skills and skills for learning, life and work. They are entitled to education across a broad curriculum that covers science, language, mathematics, social studies—including, specifically, history—expressive arts, health and wellbeing, religious and moral education, and technologies. They should be given a variety of learning experiences, including interdisciplinary projects in, for example, Scottish and world history, creativity and innovation, enterprise, culture, environmental studies, citizenship and community.

I would like to develop further my thoughts about the shape of education. Beyond that stage, from approximately age 15 onwards, the emphasis will shift from a broad, general education to greater personalisation and choice. Young people will begin working towards qualifications, and it is essential that those qualifications are flexible and offer pathways to the next stage, whether that is college, university, training or employment. We have reflected on the current shape of qualifications and have found that, in general, our existing system works well for many young people. However, we need to examine how our qualifications system can best meet the needs of Scotland in the 21 st century. To do that, we need a coherent curriculum and assessment system from three to 18. All qualifications will need to reflect the values, purposes and principles of curriculum for excellence. Most young people take standard grade and intermediate exams between the ages of 15 and 18. Those are good qualifications, but the system is complex and needs to be simplified. The qualifications were originally intended for different year groups and they have different structures and purposes. The standard grade was introduced more than 20 years ago and is a two-year course designed for pupils aged 14 to 16. One of the main aims of the standard grade was to provide an exit qualification for those who intended to leave school at the end of secondary 4, at a time when many more people did so. The more recently introduced intermediate 1 and intermediate 2 are one-year courses and were designed, in general, for pupils aged 17 and 18. I am currently considering what changes are needed to those qualifications, and I will announce further details of our plans in the next few weeks.  Higher qualifications will continue to be the gold standard of Scottish education, and we will look at how we can influence the system to ensure that the two-term dash is not the only route to highers for our young people. Flexibility will be key. I am keen to encourage more young people to pursue science and language subjects at higher and advanced higher levels. We will introduce a Scottish science baccalaureate and a Scottish language baccalaureate, which will consist of a package of highers and advanced highers. Importantly, the baccalaureates will include an interdisciplinary project.

It is unfortunate that when we have an opportunity to address the future of higher education and of our education system in general, the Labour Party resorts to scaremongering. That does a disservice to the debate and to the work that many people have contributed to curriculum for excellence.

The purpose of our support for the advanced higher will be to ensure that it is strengthened, and that there is a proper place and a greater status for S6. It is important that the Scottish Qualifications Authority, which has responsibility for the advanced higher, ensures that the qualification is robust and that there are opportunities for all to study for it where they can. That is particularly important with regard to the Scottish baccalaureate and its links with higher education, further education and employers. I will announce details of those awards soon. We have to ensure that curriculum for excellence puts learning in a practical context and makes connections with the world of work. Links between the classroom and the workplace will help young people to see the relevance of their learning and to increase their understanding of business and commerce. That is why I am engaging with commerce, from life sciences companies to sector skills councils.  Skills for work qualifications will also be important, and we will develop them. When I spoke last week to Professor Richard Teese, the author of the OECD report on Scottish education, he told me that the eyes of the education world internationally are watching with keen interest how Scotland reforms and improves its education system. Together, we can and must rise to the challenge of using education to help build a Scotland that is strong in community, society and economy. The young people of Scotland look to us to shape a system that meets their needs in a world that is ever changing. The responsibility of all of us—teachers, headteachers, educational experts and politicians—to provide wise, effective and enthusiastic stewardship of education is heavy, but it can and will be shouldered by the community of Scotland, working together to transform education as a powerhouse for the country and young people and to build Scotland the learning nation.

Skills development Scotland will be up and running by 1 April and will be fully operational by the summer. Skills development Scotland is on track for staff to transfer on 1 April, when an interim staffing structure will be in place. Contracts and systems will also be in place to allow continuity of service. The positions of substantive chair and board members have been advertised, and interviews will be held shortly. Processes to recruit the substantive chief executive are in train.

The Scottish Government has considered the review of modern apprenticeships that was conducted under the previous Government and we are taking lessons from it. We are also listening to the interim board's advice. The new board, which will be up and running from April, will provide us with advice on the future of modern apprenticeships and wider training programmes. I echo the First Minister's sentiment that it is important that modern apprenticeships help to support and drive forward the Government's overarching purpose of sustainable economic growth. It is vital that we support modern apprenticeships in the areas that will be of particular use to the economy. That is the best use of public resources in training programmes. Details of our plans will be forthcoming during the coming period.

We have signed an historic concordat in which local government has agreed to make year-on-year progress in reducing class sizes in primary 1 to primary 3. That concordat also provides local government with a record financial settlement of £34.9 billion over the next three years. The funding required by individual authorities to reduce class sizes will vary according to the progress that they are able to make over the next three years. We are planning to have 20,000 new teachers in training by 2011.

The member will recall that we have had a statement in Parliament on class sizes, and the committee that she chairs has had a considerable amount of time to ask questions on the issues. I reiterate that the historic concordat that we have signed with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities contains an agreement that there will be year-on-year progress on reducing class sizes. Those who attack the reductions do not acknowledge the important step forward that it represents, particularly in deprived areas where children will benefit most—as Bill Butler suggested. The member might not accept it, but I accept COSLA's commitment that it will be able to deliver the class size reduction proposals that are set out in the—[ Interruption. ]

I accept COSLA's commitment to the delivery of class size reductions, as set out in the concordat. We have arrived at that situation through discussion, not only with COSLA, but with deans of faculties and others. We will not compromise the teaching of our young pupils by recruiting teachers who are not of the required quality. That is why we will ensure that the delivery of our class size reduction policy will involve maintaining the quality of teachers in initial teaching training, acknowledging the population pressures, which are different in different parts of the country, and respecting—which Karen Whitefield clearly does not—local government's commitment to deliver class size reductions.

I acknowledge the member's interest in and concern about this area. It is important to remember that local government has been provided with record levels of funding. Whereas local government's share of total Government spend was going down, it is now marginally going up. If the member looks at the section of the concordat on class size reduction, she will see that we have recognised the importance of not displacing teachers from one area to another. We will be able to maintain teacher numbers at the current level, which means  maintaining staffing budget levels across Scotland. There will obviously be variations between local authority areas, but COSLA will ensure that teacher numbers are maintained over the piece so that the required access to school places is provided. As has been apparent over recent days, there are already pressures on popular schools in areas of growing population. Although the introduction of class size reductions does not change that, it highlights the fact that it is up to local authorities to determine placement policies—that is not something on which central Government will dictate to local government.

In opening the debate, I tried to dispel some of the myths that surround the graduate endowment fee and to set out our intentions in abolishing it. I shall address a number of points from the debate, First, I ask Rhona Brankin why the Labour Party is now so desperate to use graduate endowment fees for bursaries, when for years on end previous Labour Administrations did not use the graduate endowment fee for student support—they used it for in-year pressures and loan charges. I do not expect Ms Brankin to answer that, because her contribution showed a clear misunderstanding of the subject. Karen Whitefield said that she fully supports the intention of the bill. Is that the self-same Karen Whitefield who used her casting vote to try to stop the bill at stage 1? I welcome her conversion. However, David Whitton said that Labour will vote for abolition only if its amendment is passed, and asked whether nothing was gained from the budget process. Labour members are all over the place. Members either support the abolition or they do not.

No. Elizabeth Smith said that university funding is an issue of moral conscience. Does she not recognise that, for many members, the principle of free education can be described as such? Some members seem to choose not to recognise the impact that abolishing the fee will have on widening access. To remove any doubt, I shall repeat the basic premise.

If Labour members had been more receptive to interventions in their speeches, I might have allowed them the opportunity to intervene now. Debt and the fear of debt are barriers to university access. That has been clearly shown in numerous pieces of research. In fact, two weeks ago, a new study from the Sutton Trust—referred to by Keith Brown—showed the impact that increasing debt in England has had on attempts to widen access.

Let me develop my point. While university applications in England have increased since the introduction of top-up fees, when we look underneath those figures, as the Sutton Trust has done, we see that opportunities have been reduced for those from the lowest income families. They are forced to stay at home in an attempt to minimise their debts—that is, if they actually go to university in the first place. The study also shows no increase in applications from the lowest income groups and that almost two thirds of students who choose not to go to university cite financial concerns. It is clear that the expensive and complicated system across the border is doing nothing to help those most in need.

I am stuck for time. Can I say to the member, it is absolutely clear—

It is absolutely clear—

It is clear that there has been a reduction in participation in higher education—51 per cent in 2001-02 down to 47 per cent in 2005-06. The graduate endowment fee has failed in its attempt to widen access. It was a stated objective—[ Interruption. ]

It was introduced by Labour and the Liberal Democrats and has done nothing to help young people, as funds to provide bursary support have been made available without that income. As I stated at stages 1 and 2, abolishing the endowment fee will not on its own widen access; it is one part of our commitment. In the budget, we have earmarked an additional £119 million for student support over three years, including £30 million for support in 2010-11. Above that, we have introduced a simpler and fairer income assessment in further and higher education. The Government has not been idle on student support. It is interesting that the Labour amendment raises the issue of debt. I find it strange that while Labour members are concerned about student debt today, at stage 1 they voted against the principles of the bill—a bill that will reduce the debt burden on the individuals who pay the graduate endowment by more than 20 per cent. If they voted against abolishing 20 per cent of student debt, why should anyone believe that they would support removing the rest of student debt? The universities do not think that a review of student funding is necessary, and neither does this Government. [ Interruption. ]

We need the opportunity to challenge each other on the key issues affecting the sector. As David Caldwell of Universities Scotland remarked: "We appreciate that those calling for an independent review are doing so with the best of intentions. However the universities think that the most promising way forward at the present time is through the Joint Future Thinking Taskforce on Universities which has enabled constructive and positive engagement with the Scottish Government."

No, thank you. David Caldwell's view is consistent with that of the president of the NUS, James Alexander, who, as I stated earlier, believes that such a review would create the lethal cocktail of a review of both student support and university funding, which resulted in top-up fees in England. The task force will report to the HE/FE round table, where colleges, staff unions and student representatives meet as equals. I agree with Margo MacDonald that we need to have great alignment, collaboration and articulation between the college and university sectors. However, we also need to involve the  school sector. As the first minister to have responsibility for schools, colleges and universities, I am determined to take that forward. I suspect that the Labour and Tory amendments are more about scrambling to find an excuse to perform a volte-face and support the bill—or, perhaps, abstain on it. They are a face-saving exercise for those parties that voted against the principle of the abolition at stage 1. The Liberal Democrat amendment is worthy of more consideration, however. The consultation that we are planning later this year needs to provide a forum where we can have an open and frank dialogue about some of the key principles. I have no problem with widening the scope of that consultation to include the issue of a minimum income guarantee. I am aware that the NUS proposed that before the election, therefore we are content to support the amendment and consider it further during our consultation. Today, we have the opportunity to support our students by getting rid of this unfair education tax on graduation. I say to Mary Mulligan that abolishing the graduate endowment fee for 50,000 students and graduates is not a sop or a fraud; it is extremely popular. I appeal to all members to do the right thing today and vote in favour of the bill. In voting for it, members will be doing the right thing for our students and their families and providing increased opportunities for future generations of Scottish students. Scotland will, once again, be a country where access to learning is based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. The principle of free education has served Scotland well in the past, and it will provide new opportunities for young Scots in the future. I urge all members to support the abolition of the graduate endowment fee.

I appreciate the sincerity with which the member makes her point, but would she be satisfied with an independent review that reported at the end of 2009 but which had not received the Government's response, had not engaged with staff and students to come up with policy solutions and which arrived after the next spending review was published? Do we not have an obligation to move quickly to develop the bold  and radical thinking that we need in this area?

The member makes an important point. Because an increasing number of part-time students are taking higher education courses at colleges, we have moved quickly to equalise the system by ensuring that they do not have to take out loans to pay their fees. That will not happen overnight, but it is on the horizon and I have discussed the matter with students. Only last week, I met 30 college principals to discuss the future of the college sector in that regard.

The Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) Act 2001 had as a stated up-front policy intention the widening of access to, and participation in, university for people from poorer backgrounds. On the basis that that has not happened, does the member agree that the 2001 act has clearly failed?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member welcome the £38 million package of support for moving from loans to grants to help the part-time students to whom she refers?

I appreciate the member's comments, but the idea that the Liberal Democrats could fund in full the universities settlement by mutualising Scottish Water, which would not be realised during the current spending review, makes that analysis somewhat remote.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

It is important that the chamber is informed by members who understand not only the current legislation, but that which is proposed. It is clear that the existing legislation does not provide opportunities for investment in universities. It is also clear that the existing graduate endowment fee is not means tested. In terms of participation, does the member acknowledge that, whereas in 2000-01 51 per cent of people went to university, the figure is now down to 47 per cent? In debating the issues, it is important that members do so from a position of knowledge, information and understanding. Does she agree?

What about the figures?

With this bill, we are finally abolishing tuition fees. The Scottish National Party Government has promised to do so before and today we can deliver that commitment. The graduate endowment fee was a sleight of hand that replaced up-front fees with a back-end charge on graduation—a new burden for our students as they leave university to enter the world of work. Today the chamber has the opportunity to get it right for our young graduates by scrapping that unfair fee and removing the financial hurdle that they face when they leave university. Access to education should be based on the ability to learn and not on the ability to pay. Today the SNP Government is providing the Parliament with the opportunity to restore free education in Scotland.

I note the point that the member makes and welcome the Scottish Liberal Democrats' support for the abolition of the graduate endowment fee. I hope that the member welcomes the fact that the Government has already moved to tackle the unfair system that requires part-time students to take out loans to pay fees. Our introduction of a grant to help part-time students addresses precisely the issue that he raises. Abolishing the graduate endowment fee will immediately save 50,000 young people almost £2,300 each. The young people who will benefit include: those who graduated last year; those who will graduate this year; other students who are currently at university; and all future generations of graduates. The bill will send a clear message to students and graduates that the Scottish Parliament values the contribution that they make to society and will  do all that it can to support them at one of the most crucial stages of their lives.

We have to tackle student debt. Abolition of the graduate endowment fee will tackle 20 per cent of that graduate debt. If Labour members are concerned to abolish graduate debt, they should support us in abolishing the graduate endowment debt. I am delighted to open this stage 3 debate on the bill. I take this opportunity to record my appreciation for all the hard work of officials, the parliamentary authorities and the members of the Finance Committee and the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee. Both those committees considered the bill and its implications. In the wide-ranging discussion that took place throughout that process, I was pleased that the bill received such broad support from students, universities and many others who are involved in the higher education sector. With that overwhelming support, the SNP Government is assured that abolishing this unfair and inefficient fee is the right thing to do. As the debate has progressed, I have heard no substantial argument for keeping the graduate endowment fee. Indeed, from the amendments that have been lodged, it is clear that Labour and the Conservatives are falling over themselves to find an excuse to vote for this popular bill. During the budget process, Labour members of the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee unsuccessfully sought to amend the budget to divert funds from the abolition of the graduate endowment fee to provide additional funding for universities. They clearly did not understand that by keeping the fee and their original legislation, the Parliament would be locked into retaining that income for student support as the money could not be diverted into general university funding.

No, thank you. There are many myths about the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) Act 2001. It was meant to widen access; it did not. It was to provide income for universities; legally, it could not. It was to provide a regular, dependable income stream for student support; it never did. The issue of university funding is important, but the act that Labour and the Liberal Democrats introduced was not about university funding then and its abolition is not about university funding now.

If the member is prepared to listen, she will find that the evidence will be presented as the debate develops. Indeed, the evidence was presented at stage 1 and stage 2. The graduate endowment fee was a political compromise that suited no one. It bears repeating that more than two thirds of students cannot afford to pay the graduate endowment fee in cash so they are forced to add it on to their student loan. Furthermore, around one third of that loan income is lost because it is paid out in administration and other associated charges due to the inefficiencies of the student loan system. If a charity lost one third of its income to administration charges, there would be a public outcry. On the graduate endowment fee, there is a public outcry and it is being led by the SNP Government. We are investing in the future not only of our students but of our universities. An additional £263 million will be invested in our universities between now and 2010-11. That will increase our overall investment during the next spending review period to a massive £3.24 billion. Investment in universities represents 3.77 per cent of departmental expenditure allocated by the Government. The equivalent figure over the previous spending review period was 3.75 per cent. That represents an increase under the SNP Government. On top of that, since coming to power, the Government has provided universities with an additional cash injection of £50 million for use in improving their estates. Having said that I would explore the possibility of providing extra funding beyond that, I recently announced a further funding package of £10 million. The effects of both those allocations will be felt not just this year but over many years to come. To raise income for our universities, we need to use innovative and sustainable solutions that make the most effective use of all the available resources without adding to the burden on students or the universities that they attend. I am exploring a number of the issues around that with Universities Scotland, as part of our joint future thinking task force on universities, which is engaged in short, sharp, focused, radical thinking, not in kicking issues into the long grass. The task force will report to the further and higher education round table, where staff and student representatives and principals are equal partners.

Our aim is not to kick the issue into the long grass. Such a review would be too late to influence the next spending review. At the FE/HE round table to which the task force will report, unions represent staff and students as equal partners. Let me trade quotes. Murdo Fraser might not be aware that David Caldwell of Universities Scotland has today summed up well the work that is being done in the task force. He said: "We appreciate that those calling for an independent review are doing so with the best of intentions. However the universities think that the most promising way forward at the present time is through the Joint Future Thinking Taskforce on Universities which has enabled constructive and positive engagement with the Scottish Government." The president of the National Union of Students Scotland, James Alexander—who I believe is in the public gallery—is also against the review of higher education that is proposed by Labour and supported by the Conservatives, as it would create the lethal cocktail of a simultaneous review of student support and university funding, which in England resulted in top-up fees. Alongside the new partnership that we are forging with universities, we have been able to deliver new money for Scotland's students. As well as finding the funds to allow us to abolish the graduate endowment fee, we have pledged to invest an additional £30 million in student support in 2010-11. We intend to consult later this year on how to use that extra money to best effect. I assure members that our decision will see record amounts being invested in student support. In fact, our total package amounts to £119 million over the next three years. Through the actions of this Government, students in Scotland will experience something that, in years gone by, was available to many of the graduates on the Opposition benches, many of whom might, later today, vote to deny students the key benefit that they enjoyed—free university education. As we debate the future of the graduate endowment fee, it is important for me to address some of the issues that emerged during stages 1 and 2 of the bill's consideration so that all members are clear about what we are trying to achieve. I acknowledge that, in itself, abolition of the graduate endowment fee will not widen access to higher education overnight. The evidence clearly  shows that a number of deep-seated factors need to be addressed if we are to widen access to higher education. Debt, and the fear of debt, is one of many such factors. Debt, and the fear of debt, is a barrier, particularly to people from lower-income backgrounds. By removing a significant proportion of the debt that is incurred at university, we will remove part of that barrier, thereby aiding wider access. Our measure will help students from low-income backgrounds. The graduate endowment fee is not means tested, as some people believe and as members such as Rhona Brankin have suggested. As a front-bench spokesperson and a member of the party that was responsible for introducing the graduate endowment fee in the first place, she should have known better.

In a moment.

Under the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) Act 2001, which I hope will be swept from the statute book today, students were burdened with £2,300 of state-sponsored graduate debt. We will lift that burden, as part of the social democratic contract that this Government has made with the people of Scotland. Let us release our students from the burden of graduate endowment debt, let us remove a financial barrier to learning and let us restore Scotland to its proud place as the home of free education. We consider the abolition of the graduate endowment fee to be a down payment on our plans to tackle student debt. For those students who are affected, it will make a real difference as they leave university. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Graduate Endowment Abolition (Scotland) Bill be passed.

To put amendment 1 in context, two thirds of students cannot afford to repay the graduate endowment fee in cash, so they add it to their student loans, and one third of it is lost in administration charges. It is not an efficient generator of income for student support.  The terms of the original act meant that any income was uncertain because it came in via student loan repayments, had to be applied in-year, and could not be baselined. This Government—and, indeed, the previous Administration—did not rely on income from the graduate endowment to finance support for students, and the current budget for student support runs at more than £500 million. When the amendment to introduce new section 3B was first lodged at stage 2, I resisted its inclusion for two reasons. First, it was redundant, given that there could be no adverse effect on the student support budget and because of the actions that we have taken since, in the budget and spending review. Secondly, I thought that technically Mr Purvis's amendments were not expressed in terms that represented accurately the way in which budget proposals are made. Throughout the process, I have given clear assurances that the student support budget will not be adversely affected by the bill. That is clearly stated in the policy and financial memoranda, and I repeated the point on the record in the chamber and in committee during stages 1 and 2. The key point is that, due to the overly complicated system that was set up to account for the graduate endowment fee, income was never used directly for core student support. Instead, it was used to free up resources to fund other in-year pressures, such as language courses for non-English speakers, that we have now taken steps to mainstream. Through the Budget (Scotland) Bill, which the Parliament passed, we have been able to baseline those additional pressures, while increasing the amount of support that will go to students. Over the next three years, we will invest an additional £119 million in student support, to allow the abolition of the graduate endowment fee and the introduction of new support, in the form of a grant for part-time students to replace loans. In 2010-11, £30 million will be invested in improving support for students. Later this year, we will consult students and other interested parties on the best way in which to invest that money. I am happy to support the amendments, even though they take a posture on student funding. There is no shortfall or adverse effect to address. However, the amendments provide for post-budget approval of the actions that the Government has already taken to increase student support by providing £119 million over three years for that purpose. I am willing to take a generous view of the matter today, if it means that we can reach a consensus on removing this inefficient and unfair tax. I am satisfied that redrafting the amendments has improved them. If my supporting them will allow us to provide a final assurance that  the bill will have no adverse effect on student support budgets, I am content to do so.

I believe that Perth College, like all Scotland's colleges, has a bright future in delivering the skills that a smarter and more prosperous Scotland will require. I understand that it has ambitious development plans, but it is for the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council rather than ministers to discuss with the college the funding and other implications of those plans.

I am aware of the situation and will encourage all relevant agencies to build on the successful apprenticeship training programme—which, I understand, has provided 20 apprenticeships with Perth College in recent years—so that such effort continues in future.

We are keen to support the UHI Millennium Institute in its aspirations for university title and officials continue to work closely with it, Highlands and Islands Enterprise, the Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education and the Scottish funding council. Indeed, officials from the lifelong learning directorate recently met senior management from the UHI Millennium Institute and HIE in Inverness.

The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council has provided £6.9 million to support the Scottish universities physics alliance, which aims to strengthen physics research. The initiative is still at an early phase, but it has succeeded in attracting excellent international researchers and graduate students to Scotland.

The Government is very supportive of the pooling arrangements, of which SUPA is one part. The only delay to funding has resulted from the delay to Westminster's funding arrangements for the budget settlement. The allocations to universities from the funding council were discussed at a meeting last week. I draw the member's attention to the serious point that the Science and Technology Facilities Council, which is funded by the Westminster Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills, has had to announce an £80 million cut in its planned programme and a 25 per cent cut in research grants, which will significantly affect the physics alliance's proposals. I reassure the Parliament that my colleague, Jim Mather, has made representations to John Denham, the relevant minister, to ask him to suspend part of the council's delivery plan until the review into the health of physics, which the same Mr Denham commissioned, is completed. The matter is serious and I think that all members urge the Westminster Government to continue to support physics and science and regret the decisions that it has made.

I thank the member for his recognition that I managed to release £10 million from our budgets this year to support the university sector. That money has been warmly welcomed by all concerned. Many subjects will be discussed at next week's meeting of the joint future thinking task force, and the possibility and appropriateness of a concordat or covenant will no doubt arise during the coming months. I think that Ken Macintosh referred to collaboration in physics and science in Scotland. Such collaboration is a model for the future development of our university sector. Collaboration and co-operation will be a part of any future arrangements in the university sector.

I am delighted that the Government will give a higher percentage of the total budget to the university sector over the next spending review period than the previous Government did over a similar spending review period. Moreover, the Government will carry through what it said about supporting universities with in-year flexibility. I am delighted to say that the £10 million that I have released from my budget will help to tackle staffing pressures in universities. We committed to doing that, and we have delivered on that.

As members may be aware, the Scottish Government's practice is neither to confirm nor to deny whether legal advice has been received on any issue.

I am pleased to say that the Government has a positive and constructive relationship with local government—indeed, I had a positive meeting on class sizes with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities only this week. My officials have met representatives of a number of local authorities—six, I think—to discuss the practical implications of the popular policy of reducing class sizes. One important thing about Scottish education is that the vast majority of parents want to send their children to local schools because those schools are effective and excellent. It is important that that continues. We have no plans to change our parental choice policy. We trust local authorities to manage their school estate, allocations and catchment areas in a satisfactory manner.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. This has been a very interesting debate. I counted about eight members who had studied history—they shared their knowledge with  us—and we heard one professor. I very much enjoyed listening to all the speeches from all sides of the chamber. The contributions from opposition benches by Lewis Macdonald, John Farquhar Munro and Elizabeth Smith were all fitting; they were thought-provoking and tested our knowledge and they made us consider some of the key questions that we have to address in the education system. Maureen Watt highlighted in her opening remarks the role that the curriculum for excellence can and will play in enabling Scotland's teaching profession to teach our young people in a more exciting, engaging and relevant manner. Jeremy Purvis made a similar plea. Scotland already has a great deal of excellent teaching—I see examples of it regularly when I visit schools around the country—and the OECD was at pains to stress the point when we met it in December. Inspirational teaching can have a lasting and profound effect on children. With the roll-out of the draft curriculum outcomes, the challenge to teachers to own, embrace and drive forward the curriculum themselves is clear. It will also be appropriate to discuss the draft social studies outcomes when they come out. As the OECD emphasised, curriculum reform has to come from schools—not from politicians, not from officials and not from education theorists. Teachers are best placed to meet the needs of individual learners. We need exciting, engaging and relevant teaching from every teacher in every pre-school centre, school and college. In pursuing that aim, we will be creating the institutions that nurture, foster and give life to the talents and ambitions of all our young people. We have been asked about the development of the curriculum and about what will be prescribed and what can be decided by teachers. High quality materials will be essential if we are to ensure that teachers are able to make such decisions. The development of website application and the glow project will offer a fantastic opportunity for teachers to choose their materials. Members including Rhona Brankin asked—reflecting, I suspect, an unfortunate Liberal Democrat amendment—about the extent to which the Government prescribes the content of the curriculum. It is acknowledged throughout Parliament that Government should prescribe not the content, but what Scotland's children are entitled to experience up to certain levels. I hope that Parliament returns to that issue, because the Government will have a strong view of what a Scottish general education should be, without being prescriptive or having too narrow a perspective.

I will come back to that point. The activity of organisations such as the Scottish Association of Teachers of History in lobbying and petitioning Parliament over the past few years on the important role that the teaching of history can play in Scottish education in the 21st century is testament to a profession that is aware of and energised by that challenge. We want to ensure that Scottish history is a taught in our schools, but it is not just history teachers who can teach it. Many members have spoken about other subjects, such as geography and science. In addition to history as a core subject, the facts that our young people need to know can be taught by other teachers as well. I take this opportunity to mention the literature forum for Scotland, which lodged a petition with Parliament on St Andrew's day in 2005, emphasising the significant role that the teaching of Scottish history, literature and languages can have on education in Scotland. History fulfils a crucial role in illuminating the past and the present. By explaining the causes and effects of changes in the past, it contributes to a sense of perspective that is essential to understanding the present. A successful Scotland will need a population of young people who have hope, faith, vision and a fundamental belief in themselves. The teaching of history helps to create that individual self-belief and a sense of belonging to a society that has a past—a society that has been constantly changing over time. As Robin Harper said, self-belief and confidence are based on opportunity and taking chances. Rob Gibson quoted Professor Duncan Rice on the same issue. In Scotland, many people do not believe that they can realise their talents, so we must urgently tackle that failure of aspiration if we are to fulfil our ambitions. The curriculum for excellence will help us to tackle that by building people's capacity, ability and belief that they can achieve. We talk a good deal these days about the need for a country of creative and confident Scots. How can we expect people to enjoy a sense of self and self-esteem unless their national consciousness is informed by a thorough understanding of their country's experience? How can someone know something, let alone understand it or gain wisdom from an understanding of it, if they are not taught it? Professor Harvie posed an interesting challenge: How can Scotland in the modern world understand the renewable energy revolution without learning from the Scottish industrial revolution? The teaching of Scottish history does not seek to impose a value system on pupils, but to allow  them to examine how past values influence peoples' actions and how many of those values continue to influence the present. It is tremendously important that our young people understand what has happened in Scotland's past, and when it happened. It is possible to have a clear perspective on the past only if one's understanding of chronology is sound. I am particularly taken by Professor Tom Devine's thinking on the teaching of Scottish history in chronological order—the Scottish spine. It will be important and informative to explore that further in the pursuit of good learning and teaching, and of the materials that will support the outcomes. I spoke to Professor Devine yesterday and he supports my position on the role of Scottish history in the curriculum. We also have the support of other academics.

In his excellent speech, Willie Coffey made the point that he might have been more enthused about some subjects had he understood the local context. However, the point that I was making was about the importance of chronology, order and reference points in Scottish history to a sense of place and belonging. It is also clear that an understanding of the history of one's place builds a sense of belonging and community. That resource is everywhere—in cities, in towns, in the countryside and on our islands. We have only to look around us today to see it: this Parliament building has, on one side, a park that is rich in prehistoric and medieval farming settlements and forts and, on the other, the street of the medieval burgh of Canongate and the royal palace that was at the heart of the religious strife of the 16 th and 17 th centuries. By giving people a clearer understanding of who they are, we can address some of Scotland's current social ills. For example, sectarianism can be tackled adequately only with a proper understanding of its provenance as well as its current ill effects. There is enormous social value to be accrued from teaching real history instead of mythology, and of promoting democratic and inclusive agendas. Scotland has always been made up of a rich and varied mix of people. That is  where I challenge Lewis Macdonald and John Farquhar Munro, who asked where Scotland's history starts. It does not start with the Romans; there is a pre-Celtic and Celtic component that must be analysed.

This is a debate about Scottish history; I ask Lewis Macdonald not to get me started on Latin or we might have a lot to debate. Oral history and the female line that has generated it are interesting. The modern feminists of our country might want to learn from that oral history and young women might want to learn about the prominence of women in Scotland's history in many centuries gone by. We have had Romans, Anglo-Saxons, the Norse, Irish, Picts, English, Normans, Italians, Jews, Ukrainians and Poles in Scotland. History also teaches us that Scots have been migrants themselves. Indeed, there were so many Scots in Gdansk in the 17 th century that there was an area there named Little Scotland. The education of young people in this country would be incomplete without our ensuring that they have an understanding and appreciation of Scotland's past alongside and within the wider British, European and world contexts—which is where the Conservative amendment is coming from. The teaching of history can provide insight into the key events and personalities that have shaped our nation. Moreover, many Scots have made significant contributions to the development of countries in all four corners of the world. Members have asked about what the Government has brought to that. We see it clearly in the concept that, as part of the science outcomes, young people should understand what has happened in the past and understand our contribution to science to inspire them about what they can be in the future. We also look forward to the literacy outcomes, in which the Scots language should be pre-eminent. I echo Maureen Watt's commendation of the recent decision to include a compulsory Scottish element in the higher history examination. That change will undoubtedly contribute to fulfilling the ambitions that I articulated earlier. I say to Rhona Brankin that, yes, literacy and numeracy are important, but the Labour Party and Liberal Democrats had 10 years in government to tackle some of the literacy and numeracy problems in Scotland. This Government is determined to tackle them because we want to  equip our young people with the skills to understand their history.

There must be coherence, continuity and national understanding, which is why we emphasise the need to ensure that teachers have an understanding of the context of Scottish history. The materials that will be produced to support the curriculum reform are essential to that, but we must also have the flexibility to make the subject exciting. That is where local references are critical; they bring history alive to young people. That is the context that many members have spoken about and which is behind many of the arguments that have been made. The development of the curriculum for excellence offers professionals an opportunity to take stock of why they teach what they teach. I remind members that we are discussing draft outcomes, which the debate will finalise. There is an opportunity to improve pupils' understanding of Scotland and its relationship with other countries. There is also an opportunity for professionals to consider the aspirational and enterprising aspects of the people of Scotland, be that in a local, national or international context. That is why the Government is wholly committed to ambitious curriculum reform, and it is why we welcome the publication of the draft social studies outcomes and the inclusion of questions on Scottish history as a compulsory component of the higher history examination.

I am tackling the speed of roll-out now. The appetite of schools themselves to become pilots for some of the outcomes that have already been delivered is striking; all of them will be out by early summer, so progress will be fairly rapid. I hope that Parliament and the Education, Lifelong Learning and Culture Committee will  return to the matter in the weeks and months to come. What other European country would even have to consider the importance of teaching its own history? [ Interruption. ]

That indicates where we have been and, perhaps, where we need to go to seek new ways to give our children an understanding of their own country. The Government is determined that all children will be able to learn about their Scottish history, heritage and culture. We owe it to them, and they deserve to know their own country and where it has been in the past in order that they become the people who will fire future Scottish success and a Scotland of possibilities in the wider world. The story of Scotland and the history of Scotland need to be told and the Government is delighted to play its part in that. We welcome the opportunity to debate the subject today.

Does the member agree that it is important that young people should learn about history in the context of their local community? In her constituency, the mining of coal by the monks of Newbattle abbey in the 13 th century offers an illustrative way of bringing to life the cost that the people of Midlothian have borne over many years. The social and industrial history of Scotland is brought to life if it is related to the local context and community in which people live.

Does the member recognise that one of this Administration's contributions was to include in the draft science outcomes that were published some months ago the history of Scottish science and the inventions that Scotland has contributed to the world, in order to inspire young Scots' interest in science?

I thank Patrick Harvie for securing the debate, and I broadly welcome its terms. He is so youthful—I cannot believe that he was at university 15 years ago. However, I am sure that that is the case. I acknowledge the role of People & Planet in campaigning on environmental performance. If I heard correctly, Robin Harper is appealing for a resit for the University of Aberdeen to raise its position from third in the green league table. I am afraid, however, that my responsibilities do not extend to that. As members know, a greener Scotland is one of the Government's five strategic objectives. We  want Scotland to be a global leader in combating climate change. We will consult on a Scottish climate change bill, which will include proposals for a statutory target to reduce Scottish emissions by 80 per cent by 2050. That target is ambitious, and it will require everyone to contribute. Educational institutions can be leaders, both through improvements to their infrastructure and through the education that they deliver. Scottish building regulations already have the most demanding energy standards in the UK. Through Scottish planning policy 6, which is entitled "Renewable Energy", all future developments of more than 500m 2 , which will include most of our educational institutions, should incorporate on-site zero-carbon and low-carbon equipment, which will contribute at least an extra 15 per cent reduction in carbon dioxide emissions beyond the stipulations of the 2007 planning regulations. We will consult on further changes to the building regulations. The Government is committed to encouraging energy efficiency and making the most of Scotland's vast renewable resource. We support a number of measures to achieve those aims, such as the central energy efficiency fund and the Scottish community and householder renewables initiative. There are already some fantastic examples of sustainable schools, such as Windygoul primary school, which the First Minister opened last year. We will work with the school to provide further advice and guidance and to promote good practice as the fabric of the school estate is improved. I have already instructed officials to provide opportunities for the sharing of best practice in the environmental and sustainable development of the school estate. Learning to make Scotland sustainable is a major strand of our approach to sustainable development issues. In his speech to Parliament on 13 June 2007, my colleague the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, Richard Lochhead, made clear our commitment to drive forward Scotland's action plan for the United Nations decade of education for sustainable development in our schools, colleges and universities. Scotland's educational institutions are ideally placed to lead by example, by addressing their own contributions to climate change, by educating others and by helping to develop the solutions and technologies that will be needed for Scotland to be at the forefront of the global response. We support the eco-schools programme. More than 90 per cent of our schools are registered on the programme. Scotland is at the forefront of that important international initiative. Last year, the Minister for Schools and Skills, Maureen Watt,  presented the 500 th green flag award. That is a fantastic achievement, and we are international leaders in that regard. In addition, we fund Learning and Teaching Scotland to support sustainable development education in schools, and the curriculum review will ensure that environmental education is integrated into all curriculum areas. Members might be interested to know that this year, for the first time, the Scottish education awards has a greener schools category. The student-led campaign from People & Planet that we have heard about today identifies that some of our higher education institutions could perform more strongly. There is room for improvement, but we should also recognise some of the achievements of our colleges and universities in creating green campuses. Liz Smith was correct to address the issue of research. Just last night, I was discussing with Professor Andrew Hamnett and his colleagues from the University of Strathclyde some of the issues around power and renewable energy. I hear the call for university principals to do more to support the go green campaign. I note that Professor Hamnett previously took part in a go green week at his institution, and I urge other principals to do likewise. As a number of members have said, in November  2006 The Times Higher Education Supplement named the University of St Andrews as the university that had made the most outstanding contribution to sustainable development. St Andrews is also delivering internationally recognised education in sustainable development. Its sustainable development undergraduate programme is unique, not only within the UK but globally. It is a direct response to the United Nations decade of education for sustainable development and its first graduates will qualify in 2008. The new John Wheatley College in Glasgow was built on a commitment to the philosophy of sustainable development, and it has gained an excellent rating in the Building Research Establishment environmental assessment method—BREEAM—assessment, which is a fantastic achievement. Further, as Sarah Boyack said, the University of Edinburgh has shown leadership in reducing energy use. There are numerous other examples of good practice across the further and higher education institutions, which are signed up to the objectives of the environmental association for universities and colleges through its campus sustainability programme, which is supported financially by the Scottish funding council. Those institutions are well placed to pursue best practice, as a number of members have said. The principles of sustainable development have been incorporated  into the Scottish funding council's estate strategy guidance, and data on environmental indicators will now form part of the estates returns from colleges to the Scottish funding council. I expect the Scottish funding council to contribute to the Government's strategic objectives for sustainability, which Robin Harper and Richard Baker mentioned. There is much room for improvement. I look forward, in particular, to Aberdeen University improving its position—I am sure that there is a great drive for it to do so, under the leadership of its rector. It is important to share the best practice that exists throughout the sector. Measures are in place to support our objectives and, more important, the Government and our institutions have the aspiration and drive. As many members, including Jamie Hepburn, have recognised, the leadership that students and staff of our institutions show is as important as what we do at a national level. I fully support students' involvement in the go green week and I wish them every success.

I welcome the chance to debate the motion on young people in the workplace, particularly during trade union week. Elaine Smith mentioned workers who had experienced problems in the workplace because of their dyslexia, although she did not have time to discuss their experiences. On the subject of literacy and numeracy in the workplace, and referring to the previous debate on the OECD report, my colleague Keith Brown related some of the views and opinions that were expressed in the workplace session that he attended. I encourage all members to attend those sessions when they can. I agree with what Cathy Peattie said. I support her and I congratulate her on securing the debate, particularly in this week. Our young people make a significant contribution to the economic and social development of Scotland and they will continue to do so in the future. I agree that unions have a key role to play in helping us to deliver on our ambitions for Scotland. We have had quite a reflective debate. Jamie Stone introduced an international dimension. John Park is a very useful addition to the Parliament, bringing important insight from his experience and trade union background. When he was speaking about Prospect and football referees, I thought that he was going to touch on health and safety and frustrated, aggressive, partisan fans. He made a point about gender issues, which it is important for us to address, particularly in the workplace. Unions have a key role in the unions into schools project, which Margaret Mitchell and other members spoke about. The initiative is aimed at raising young people's awareness of their rights and responsibilities in the workplace. Throughout the project's pilot, the STUC's resource has proved to be a great success with pupils and schools. I am certain that, following its official launch in the spring, the schools pack will play an important part in developing a strong, skilled and fair-minded workforce for Scotland. That is consistent with the aims of determined to succeed, our strategy for enterprise in education, which has supported the development of the STUC resource. We recognise the real results that determined to succeed has achieved so far, so we have committed to retain its level of funding in the recent spending review. It is important that young people who are about to enter the world of work are made aware of the issues that they will face when they get there. I am sure that all members  will agree not only that having that resource in schools is a benefit today, but that it will continue to benefit young people in years to come. John Wilson stressed the importance of embedding knowledge of workplace rights from an early start. It is of course unfortunate that there are young people who need initiatives to help them become work ready. Futureskills Scotland was concerned that 34 per cent of employers believed that school leavers were poorly prepared for the workplace. That was one of the drivers for the Government developing a comprehensive skills strategy and producing the "Skills for Scotland" document. If we are to be more dynamic and if we are to have a vibrant workforce, we need to consider skills and learning as a whole, which is what the skills strategy does. Margaret Mitchell urged the Government to set targets for the number of apprenticeships. However, employer organisations, colleges, employers themselves and others have congratulated us for not setting such targets, which can distort policy. That said, we need to consider the quality range and the positive outcomes and completion rates for apprenticeships. Being work ready has as much to do with building confidence and aspiration among our young people as it does with gaining the technical skills that are needed for work. That is why we want to promote a range of opportunities to allow everyone to achieve their full potential. The curriculum for excellence is at the heart of that. It builds into its core the vocational and essential skills that are needed to deliver the competitive and responsive workforce of tomorrow. Giving more school pupils opportunities to experience vocational learning is one of the 12 specified commitments in our concordat with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, and our spending review settlement for local authorities and the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council reflects that. Cathy Peattie identified the importance of the health and safety issues that we will all have to address as vocational learning becomes part and parcel of our education system. I recognise the important role that unions at Grangemouth played in securing future employment at Ineos. Therefore, I will close the debate by saying something about the unions and their place in learning. The "Skills for Scotland" report clearly sets out the important role that the STUC and the unions will play in the delivery of a more skilled Scotland. We recognise that, for many people, their union acts as their main source of information and support when they undertake learning. The unions have provided an excellent opportunity for individuals to address their literacy  and numeracy problems, in a way that those individuals do not feel is open to them if they go directly to their employer. However, unions cannot address all those issues by themselves. If we are to get the most benefit from the role of unions in the workplace, it is vital that they work in close partnership with employers—there is a big obligation on employers in that regard. I fully support the work that unions are doing to embed the learning culture in the workplace. It is important to help individuals to raise their aspirations and to allow them to reach their full potential and to progress in the workplace. A large number of people need to improve their skills and training in the workplace—it is not only about new entrants into the workplace. That is why I announced, at the STUC's lifelong learning conference last November, that the Government has committed just under £4.25 million over the next three years to union learning in Scotland. That has ensured, for the first time, that the funding of the STUC skills and lifelong learning team has been baselined and that the Scottish union learning fund is secure for three more years. I am pleased to announce that that is the largest single investment in union learning under any Scottish Government, which demonstrates the value that we place on union learning. I am sure that members will welcome that and agree that the unprecedented level of funding shows that this Government is committed to Scotland's unions. There is a great deal more to do, and Cathy Peattie's motion alerts us to what that may be. I hope that, working together across the Parliament, we can give union learning in Scotland its rightful place. I would like to have come to the reception this evening, but unfortunately I have to be in Fife—John Park will no doubt tell me how long it takes to get to Fife at this time of night. I wish the reception well, and all those involved in the trade union week in the Parliament.  Meeting closed at 17:37.

The Government wanted to provide an opportunity for a thoughtful and informed debate that would be a credit to the stimulating and challenging OECD report and that reflected the importance to all members of Scotland's education system. By and large, we have achieved that. In a globalised world, Governments cannot operate in isolation. We all face many of the same economic and social challenges and are working towards finding the best answers. It is essential that Scotland continues to take an international perspective that develops to meet new challenges. I place on record my thanks to Peter Peacock for having the foresight to commission the report, which clearly managed to get under the skin of Scottish education in understanding it. I agree with many of Peter Peacock's comments, which I will come to later. I discussed the report and the new SNP Government's response and policies with the OECD experts at a full-day session on 11 December. I will reflect on some of our deliberations. The publication of the OECD report coincided with the latest PISA report and progress in international reading literacy study—PIRLS—report. Therefore, by necessity, the OECD report is informed by the 2003 PISA results, not the 2006 results, which were published at the end of last year. In the 2006 PISA study, our overall performance in science, mathematics and reading was still strong. In all three areas, Scotland scored well above the OECD average and was still among the highest scoring of the OECD countries, but in all three areas Scotland's relative standing in the international rankings has fallen since 2003. Scotland's mean score in science stayed the same, but the mean scores in reading and maths decreased. That happened under the previous Administration. More encouraging is the finding that Scotland has one of the lowest levels of poorly performing pupils among the OECD countries. Only Finland outperforms us significantly. The biggest single challenge in Scotland remains the impact of poverty as a key factor in underachievement, not least because of the number of children who live in poverty. I say to Mr Macintosh that 25 per cent is not something to be proud of. As page 77 of the OECD report notes, in Glasgow, every second child in S2 underachieves in reading.

I want to make progress. Many of us believe that education is a route out of poverty, but the OECD report is clear that, for too many children, poverty is the route into educational underachievement. In the period ahead, the Parliament will hear more about the Government's drive to tackle poverty. The OECD is clear that the difference between pupils in our schools is more striking than the difference between our schools. Peter Peacock is right: we have formal equity as identified in the report. The danger is that it masks social disadvantage. In my discussion with the expert panel, which was drawn from 14 countries, I asked for views on the new Government's emphasis on early intervention as a policy to tackle inequalities. As Jackson Carlaw said, we should bear it in mind that the panel noted that inequalities become manifest more at primary 5, when achievement differences become more obvious. As tackling poverty is key, the OECD appreciated that our efforts to provide more support in the early years to develop the resilience of families and children and to raise their self-esteem and ability to withstand the disadvantage that poverty brings could lead to resilience to the establishment of the poverty and attainment gap in primary 5.

The former minister makes an important point. We have to consider whether we are offering support by taking the child away from the family and parental support, or whether—as Mary Mulligan suggested—we have to offer collective support to families and mothers from the early years. The OECD recognised that our policy of early intervention is critical in identifying and dealing with poverty. We have to have universal access, but we have to target those in need. Peter Peacock rightly spoke about anticipatory support, which we could also call early intervention. The Government supports the early years. In the context of the OECD report, it makes sense to keep nursery teachers in areas of deprivation and to ensure more time for reading, writing and literacy in smaller class sizes in P1 to P3.

I am sorry, but I need to move on—[ Interruption. ]

The OECD report has much to say on vocational training. It makes some criticism of the previous Administration and is concerned about the "farming out" of vocational education away from the mainstream school experience, and suggests that that is one of the reasons why we do not have parity of esteem. The OECD report suggests that a two-tier system will not work. In "Skills for Scotland", the Government has clearly set out our commitment to, and our vision for, vocational learning. The OECD agrees with this Government that vocational learning should be available to all pupils as part of the curriculum and not as a separate experience perceived to be of lower value. That point was reflected in some of Elizabeth Smith's comments. I say to John Park that the OECD's advice is that vocational education should be mainstreamed and not put out to standalone skills academies that are just for academic underachievers. It is important to have vocational education in schools and in partnerships with local authorities. That has been identified in the concordat and resourced by this Government in our deal with local government. On decentralisation, the PISA results show no clearly and obviously successful system of educational organisation. For example, Finland has more than 430 local education authorities running education, whereas in New Zealand—another top performer—the Government runs the whole shebang itself and has control of 2,800 schools, the curriculum, and the employment of all its teachers. Both countries managed to score well. The Finnish expert reporter was very complimentary about the new Government's concordat, even if Jackson Carlaw is not. He was complimentary about our relationship with local government and stated that it had somewhat pre-empted his presentation and recommendations. I say to Rhona Brankin that the ending of ring fencing for additional support for learning does not mean the ending of the policy. I will meet the deans soon to discuss additional support for learning. It will be important to embed literacy and numeracy in the early years. Phonics is important and it is taught throughout Scotland. That experience can be shared, but we cannot have a policy that says decentralisation is important for education in local authorities and have a policy that wants to be prescriptive. We will consult on the qualifications system and standard grades in the spring. Bob Doris is a product of the first year of standard grades. Like others, I am not sure whether that is a good thing or a bad thing.  The challenge is to ensure that Scotland is renowned as a smart, learning nation. The OECD report will not sit on a shelf. Under this Government, it will continue to be a catalyst for change. It challenges us all, including the Government, about educational thinking. Scottish education has always been outward looking. Exchanging views and ideas is part of the character of our system. The OECD report is a welcome and invaluable contribution to that.

Margo MacDonald raises an important point about what the OECD says or does not say about the curriculum. She identifies the assessment and qualification aspects of standard grades and a kind of leaving certificate. However, she does not address—and Robin Harper did not acknowledge—that the four capacities in the curriculum for excellence are precisely about what education is for, which is not necessarily qualification, assessment and achievement. I suppose that she wants to put more emphasis on that, which is the right thing to do. Education is not all about qualifications; it is also about the experience and being a responsible citizen.

Will the member take an intervention?

Is the member aware that there has been an historical right to apprenticeship and training in Scotland, but that that right has not been properly exercised? The value of what he is suggesting might therefore be questioned.

The report contains strong evidence that that is exactly the  case. As Rhona Brankin said, a person's background determines their success. It should not, but unfortunately, as the report says, it does.

By maintaining a high level of support for universities, the Government will ensure that students will be able to develop the high-level skills that are required for them to succeed in the modern economy. By investing in world-class research, we will enable our universities to continue to develop cutting-edge products and services. By putting funding into knowledge transfer activity, we will ensure that our businesses can capitalise on the opportunities arising from our universities.

Sarah Boyack raises a number of issues. In its press release following the spending review announcement, Universities Scotland acknowledged that Scottish universities remain competitive. We will face challenges in the future—that is one reason why we have put together the joint future thinking task force. The settlement for universities represents a marginal increase on that which was provided by the  previous Government, so this Government has maintained and marginally increased in percentage terms the high level of investment that the previous Government made. Sarah Boyack asked about membership of the joint future thinking task force. We had a successful first meeting on 20 December, which was Parliament's last sitting day before the recess. The task force will be made up of members of Universities Scotland and will be jointly chaired by Sir Muir Russell and me. We have agreed our terms of reference and remit and will carry out work over the coming months. Sarah Boyack also asked what input the NUS, other student bodies and the teaching unions will have. In the summer, I had a useful and constructive discussion with UCU about its engagement in future thinking on our university sector. I will engage with it on the workings of the task force, but the remit and membership of the task force must remain fairly tight, as we want the key decision makers in the university sector—university principals and the Government—to deliberate and make decisions by the summer. That will be best achieved by ensuring that the remit and membership of the task force are tightly focused.

The member will have heard my reply to the previous question. It is important for Parliament to be aware that our thinking about what we want to do in the university sector is bold and radical. It will allow us to address some of the fundamental questions about obvious issues such as funding arrangements and organisation, and it will allow deliberations on what our universities are for, not just in the next three years, but on how the sector should be in the next 10 and 20 years.

Important decisions have to be made. Either we respect the autonomy and independence of Scotland's universities or we do not. If we respect universities' independence and autonomy, it is clear that they are external to Government, in which case I would not describe the task force as "internal".  I accept that there have been calls for an independent review. Had the university principals come to me and said that they wanted an independent review, we would have had to acknowledge that, but they have said clearly to me that they do not want an independent review. They want to be able to engage directly with Government about key decisions and perspectives that we take. I am pleased that we will be able to share the results of that thinking by the summer.

The details of single outcome agreements have still to be finalised. We expect, however, that they will reflect the commitments in the concordat, including progress on reducing primary 1 to primary 3 classes to a maximum of 18.

I stress that we are still in discussions about the nature of the single outcome agreements. However, there is extra cash for the class size reduction policy, which was a manifesto commitment, in the increased settlement for local government. That increased settlement is £1.3 billion. It is clear that local authorities will have the opportunity to implement the policy and have resources to spend on it. If Peter Peacock is arguing that the Government should have a ring-fencing policy for class size reduction, that is a different question and one that we and local government reject. On top of the £1.3 billion of extra investment for local government, the efficiency savings alone provide an extra £213 million for investment. The reduction in ring-fenced funds from £2.7 billion to £9 million provides additional flexibility that will release resources for front-line services in order to provide the  investment that is required to improve the education of our children and a host of other services that rely on capable and competent local councils for delivery.

The statutory requirements on consultation on proposals to close any school are set out in the Education (Publication and Consultation etc) (Scotland) Regulations 1981. There is also extensive Scottish Government guidance on the matter, which was first issued in 2004 and which I re-issued with a covering letter to local authority education conveners on 11 October 2007.

Responsibility for the school estate lies with the local authority—in this case, Inverclyde Council. However, the 1981 regulations to which I referred, as well as the Government guidance that was reissued recently, spell out the process that we expect to be followed by any local authority when it is considering decisions about a school closure. We expect that to be fully adhered to by local authorities. If any decisions are referred to ministers, we will take a strong look at them, bearing in mind the content of the current guidance and the regulations.

I am in active discussions with my officials about the drafting of such proposals, as set out in our manifesto. Our manifesto made it clear that there would be a legislative presumption against the closure of rural schools. It was stated by the First Minister that that would be part of our programme for Government. Clearly, the question of what is rural and what is not will sometimes be  touched upon. Any member will be able to respond to the consultation when it is published. It is open to Cathy Jamieson, who clearly has an interest in the matter, to suggest what the distinction might be, and we would welcome her suggestion.

I will meet Universities Scotland for the first meeting of the joint future thinking taskforce on 20 December 2007.

The joint statement issued by the Scottish Government and Universities Scotland indicated that Universities Scotland was committed to providing more detailed information to the Scottish Government on the issue. I expect to see that on 20 December. I do not recall the member complaining about the previous Administration's similar settlement, as a share of national spend. This Government is providing a slightly higher share of national spend for our universities.

I welcome the opportunity to make a statement on the Government's position on class sizes. To improve Scottish education, we need to achieve several things in relation to teacher professional development, school leadership, parental involvement, the school environment, discipline, the early years, and reducing class sizes. Leadership and continuing professional development for teachers are particularly important, which is why we are committed to publishing a leadership document in the new year to set out a Scottish perspective and direction on educational leadership. Teaching style and teacher quality are also important and, in part, come down to the quality of the teachers who are emerging from our training institutions, but are also influenced by the lead and direction that teachers receive in their schools. It is also why CPD for teachers will be a key foundation policy in driving up achievement and attainment. This is an appropriate time to make a statement on class sizes because a number of related key events have taken place in the past month or so. First, our concordat with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities sets out the terms of a new relationship between the Scottish Government and local government, based on mutual respect and partnership. That is a significant development and, as part of that historic deal, local government will deliver year-on-year progress in reducing class sizes in primary 1 to primary 3 to a maximum of 18 pupils; I will say more about that shortly. Secondly, the 2007 school census statistics, published on 20 November, show that 37 per cent of maths pupils and 21 per cent of English pupils at S1 and S2 were in classes of more than 20. We now know that the target that was set out in the previous Administration's partnership agreement was not met by some margin. Thirdly, on 23 October, the General Register Office for Scotland published positive but challenging population projections that show increasing birth rates. We are addressing the issue, and I will talk about those numbers and what they mean shortly.  Fourthly, I received the final report of the class size and resources working group on 12 November and it was subsequently published on 20 November. Its reference point was the previous Government's policies. Fifthly, we are still in the midst of this year's annual teacher workforce planning exercise, which will provide a clearer picture of future teacher supply. Sixthly, we have now seen the local government finance settlement, which contains an additional £1.3 billion for services and manifesto commitments, including a 15 per cent increase in capital for infrastructure, which can be used for school improvements. Seventhly, the progress in international reading literacy study—PIRLS—report was published on 28 November. It raises concerns that, in international comparisons, the literacy levels of our nine and 10-year-olds are slipping. Finally, only yesterday, the programme for international student assessment—PISA—report was published. It showed that Scotland's reading and maths scores have experience one of the highest drops of all the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries. Scotland also has one of the biggest gaps in performance, which can be identified as related to poverty and deprivation. That is the situation that this Government has inherited from the previous Administration. There is evidence to show that early intervention prevents later problems, such as violence, ill health or children not achieving their full potential. Early intervention will be the hallmark of our Government. Poverty and deprivation can impact on life chances and educational achievement from the earliest years and there is a convincing body of research evidence that supports smaller class sizes in early years, particularly for those who come from deprived backgrounds. The student teacher achievement ratio project—the STAR project—and the more recent class size and pupil ratio project in England also provide evidence that supports such a policy. Closer to home, we have no better example of successful early intervention than the initiative by West Dunbartonshire Council. The recently published final research report on the council's literacy initiative shows that impressive results were achieved in tackling illiteracy among pupils. The project identified the importance of early intervention in tackling the problems that children face. We want councils throughout Scotland to assess what lessons they can learn from the initiative.  Smaller classes can lead to more sustained interaction between teachers and pupils, more high-order questioning, more feedback on work, less time spent on routine supervision, less time spent exercising classroom control and less time given to housekeeping by teachers. The PIRLS report that was published last week shows that, in 2006, 19 countries had a mean score significantly higher than Scotland's, as compared with 12 in 2001. That means that our relative position in the international rankings fell under the previous Government. The report also shows that there are continuing links between deprivation and low educational achievement. In addition, the report shows that the gap between low and high achievers in Scotland is the third widest of countries within the OECD. According to the report, the literacy achievement of nine and 10-year-olds in Scotland is worse now than it was in 2001. The PISA results, which were published only yesterday, show a similar picture. In 2003, only three countries had significantly higher mean scores than Scotland for maths, reading and science. By 2006, Scotland was outscored by four countries in science, five in reading and eight in maths. We are determined to reverse that trend. If we are to tackle Scotland's challenges as identified in the international PISA survey and to climb back up the international tables, we must deal with poverty at its roots and tackle the impact that it can have on families. Our early years strategy can do that. We need to give more time, more attention and more access to a nursery teacher to our poorest children. We will also drive down class sizes in the early years, when literacy and numeracy are embedded. Scotland needs firm foundations for learning and the Government will provide them. We believe that the greatest impact can be made by improving early years education rather than by trying to take remedial action later in a child's schooling when, in many cases, it is too late. Our class size policy needs to be seen in the context of our whole early years strategy. We know that the standard of pre-school education in Scotland is generally good and that the highest standard of pre-school education tends to be found in settings that employ teachers. Overall, the presence of a nursery teacher in a nursery class tends to bring quality of provision. That is why the Government wants all children in pre-school education to have access to a qualified teacher. A recent report from Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education, which was published on 12 November, provides evidence to support the policy. The HMIE report found that, overall, the quality of children's experiences was of a higher standard in nursery schools and classes where,  traditionally, teachers were employed. The early years strategy will look at the broad range of service provision for young children and how that works to support families. We have already made the most significant enhancement to pre-school education since 2002. The entitlement to pre-school education was increased to 475 hours a year from the start of this academic year. In the budget, we announced that the entitlement will increase further, to 570 hours a year, from August 2010. We have made a commitment to deliver a 50 per cent increase in the level of entitlement in 2011. Members will also be pleased to note that the concordat that we agreed with COSLA makes specific reference to ensuring that there is access to a teacher for every pre-school child as soon as possible. Those are important steps forward for early years provision. Together, they provide a welcome boost for our constituents with young families. What does the concordat mean for class sizes? The concordat states "the Scottish Government and local government will each do what is required to ensure delivery of key government policies ... including ... as quickly as is possible, reducing class sizes in P1 to P3 to a maximum of 18". We need to examine three key areas: pupils, teachers and classrooms. Total pupil numbers are expected to drop from 703,000 in 2006 to 666,000 in 2011 and then to rise again to 680,000 in 2020. Those projections are higher than those used in last year's workforce planning exercise and show some 10,000 more pupils by 2011 and 60,000 more by 2020. Most of that change is due to revised population projections, following the GROS publication of 23 October, to allow for increased birth rates and inward migration. As a result of the revised population projections, an additional 450 primary teachers by 2011 and 2,100 primary teachers by 2020 will be required simply to meet those demographic demands. We do not underestimate the scale of the challenge—only 11 per cent of pupils in P1 to P3 are in classes of 18 or fewer—but we believe firmly that having smaller class sizes for all in the critical early years is the right policy and the best approach. That is why we are planning to train thousands more teachers than the previous Administration trained. We expect more than 20,000 people to have entered training by 2011. That is a huge investment, if we consider that the total number of teachers is currently around 53,000. For the period 2008-09 to 2010-11, the level of efficiency savings that all parts of the public sector will be expected to make has been set at 2 per cent per annum. Despite the tightest UK spending  settlement since devolution, we will provide sufficient resources to allow Government broadly to maintain teacher numbers as pupil numbers fall, as part of a package that has delivered an extra £1.3 billion for local government by 2010-11. There will be a reduction in ring-fenced funding streams from £2.7 billion in 2007-08 to less than £0.9 billion by 2010-11. On 2007-08 figures, the ability to retain all efficiency savings is worth £213 million each year—£639 million in total. Those measures will provide local government with the resources and flexibility to make real progress on bringing down class sizes in P1 to P3. The Government will fund training for thousands more teachers, but we will not compromise on teacher quality. We also need to take account of the pressures on the system—the capacity of higher education institutions and, just as important, the capacity of the school system to provide quality student placements. There must be a degree of consistency. I am aware that constantly chopping and changing class configurations can compromise the benefits of class size reductions, so a degree of common sense needs to be used in class formations. The Government has already—in its first 100 days—invested £40 million in capital infrastructure for schools to support the demands of class size reductions in future years. I contrast that with the performance of the previous Government, which provided £60 million for P1, S1 and S2 class size reductions that took three years. In the Scottish budget there is almost £3 billion over the three-year period from next April to secure investment in schools and other local government infrastructure, including an extra £115 million next year—in 2008-09—that can be invested in schools. The local government capital budget represents an average increase of 15 per cent, compared with 2007-08 figures, over the three years of the settlement, to help to meet the classroom requirements of our policy. There is widespread support for a policy of smaller class sizes in the early years of primary education. Most of the Opposition parties also planned to cut class sizes. In its manifesto, the Labour Party in Scotland said that it would reduce class sizes to below the OECD average, which is 21.4. Given the commitments that they made during the election campaign, I say to Liberal Democrat members that we could and should work together on smaller class sizes. Their manifesto said that they would deliver 1,000 more teachers to cut class sizes and that they would cut class sizes in P1 to P3 to a maximum of 25. We know that parents and teachers, too, want cuts in class sizes. Recently 80,000 Scots signed one of the largest petitions that has ever been submitted to the Parliament, urging that class  sizes be cut. We want real, year-on-year progress in reducing class sizes in P1 to P3. With local government, which is committed through the concordat to working with us on the issue, we will seek to deliver that. We are right to be ambitious for our young people, their parents and Scottish teachers—we are ambitious for Scotland. The Parliament should not divide to make party-political points about our agenda for the future educational improvement of our children. The international research that was published this week and last month shows the state that Scottish education is in following the previous Administration's guardianship of our education system. Many of us—indeed, a majority of MSPs—were elected on a platform of class size reductions. Uniting in support of efforts to reduce class sizes would give the children of Scotland the chance that they deserve. As we know, too many children in Scotland need a better chance to succeed in the early years. This Government will do everything that it can to help them.

It is important to remember that we have reached a different era in relations  between local and national Government with the signing of the concordat between COSLA and the Government. Rhona Brankin asked what targets we have—I will quote them exactly from the concordat: "the Scottish Government and local government will each do what is required to ensure delivery of key government policies and programmes including ... reducing class sizes in P1 to P3 to a maximum of 18". That wording expects year-on-year progress from local government over the spending review period and our period in office. There will be a marked improvement for many of our young people. The difference with our proposal is that we expect year-on-year progress. I acknowledge the class size reduction policies of the previous Administration, but its target was actually for after the date by which it had left office. The improvements for class size reduction in P1, S1 and S2 were actually after it had left office—our target is year-on-year progress. The member also asked about finance. I quoted the figure of the cash increase for local government of £1.3 billion. She asked for the figure after inflation. That is £500 million, but there are also the efficiency savings, which local government can now keep. As I said, that is the equivalent of £213 million every year for local authorities if they agree to the concordat. Resources are available to local government—the additional resources that are coming in, the figures that I just quoted, and the efficiency savings that local authorities will be able to keep for the first time. Of course, that does not take into account the efficiency that can be gained from not having ring-fenced funding. We are reducing ring-fenced funding from £2.7 billion to £900 million, and much of that is the police grant. That flexibility and extra resource for local government will be very welcome. The member referred to additional support for learning for children with additional support needs. Not only have we agreed in the concordat to specified manifesto commitments, including the class size reduction, we have agreed to outcomes and indicators. Part of the central provision of those outcomes relates to the learning experiences of all children in Scotland, including those with additional support needs. We want improvements for all children in Scotland.

This Government will deliver on our manifesto pledge on a year-on-year basis, and we will work with local government to make year-on-year progress on its delivery. This Administration faces major challenges with regard to teacher provision such as, for example, our plans for 20,000 new teachers for the cohort of 53,000. Not only will we meet that challenge, we will also deliver on our manifesto commitments. It is important to reflect on costs. I know that the member is very keen on business rates reduction and certain other aspects of our agreement with local government. However, none of the specified manifesto commitments comes with an individual price tag precisely because the package as a whole is being presented to local government for agreement. That includes the reductions in ring fencing, the additional £1.3 billion over the spending period to help finance policies such as class size reductions, and the efficiency savings that I am sure the member's party also supports. Those are all part of the package that will help to fund and support not only class size reductions but the policy on kinship carers that we introduced yesterday and which will make a big difference to so many people's lives. There is no individual price tag on each policy because the concordat that we have agreed with COSLA is about the package, which is about more than the 12 manifesto commitments listed in that document. It is about the national outcomes that we want to work with local government on achieving, central to many of which are opportunities for young people to succeed. We are funding this matter, and the resources in that respect have been identified not only by the COSLA presidential team that signed the concordat, but by the leadership of councils throughout Scotland, which have agreed to put forward this package as the best deal for local government.

Mr Purvis has asked a number of questions. First, I should say that although the Government is ambitious for Scotland, we are not suggesting by any means that the 20,000 teachers will somehow be on top of the current 53,000. I think that moving towards 73,000 teachers is perhaps beyond the ability even of this very ambitious Government. However, those 20,000 teachers will help to maintain numbers in view of the level of retirements. Indeed, it is clear that, because of those retirements, we will have to recruit a large number of teachers even to maintain the current number. That said, because we recognise that we will have to recruit even more to deliver class size reductions we can say that we will have in training thousands more teachers than would have been the case under the previous Administration. The First Minister was asked whether he was committed to the SNP's manifesto, which clearly stated that we want to reduce to 18 class sizes in P1 to P3. We are moving on that. In order to deliver that manifesto commitment, we are working in partnership with COSLA and Scotland's local authorities. Because the Government is responsive and recognises the challenges, the  concordat reflects the fact that some local authorities have the flexibility and opportunity to move faster than others. Jeremy Purvis may be interested to know that the share of the £40 million for the Scottish Borders is £1.237 million, which is one of the largest shares, because of the challenges that that area faces. I said that the £40 million will help. If he reads the guidance, he will see that it will contribute to the policy of reducing class sizes. We know that to deliver that policy, the capital that will be available—£115 million extra in the first year, and 15 per cent across the piece—will have to be directed appropriately. In order to ensure that capital investment to reduce class sizes can be made in future years, we agreed with local government that it might want to bring forward other capital investment projects so that investment in the spending review period can be dedicated to reducing class sizes. That guidance was given. I think that Jeremy Purvis also asked about efficiency savings. The concordat allows local government to decide where to put resources. It is clear that far more resources will need to be put into reducing class sizes in some local authorities, while the fall in school rolls in others means that, as long as teacher numbers are maintained, they can move quickly towards reducing class sizes to 18. I have heard that from several local authorities. The local government package as a whole—some £1.3 billion extra funding, the ending of ring fencing and being allowed to keep, for the first time, any efficiency savings—means that hundreds of millions of pounds extra will go to local authorities. The concordat specifies the commitments that they must adhere to and pages 46 and 47 of the spending review document set out the outcomes and indicators on which they have agreed to deliver. That means ensuring that we deliver on the education budgets. Many of the spending review outcomes are dedicated to young people, because, as I said, early intervention, whether in education, health or justice, is at the heart of this Government.

Class sizes are very important, although they are not the only aspect to consider if we want to improve educational attainment, as I said at the start of my statement. People are concerned by what they sense is the hostility of some members to the class size reduction policy. The interpretation of people outside Parliament is that some members have moved or shifted against class size reductions. I hope that members support reducing class sizes, because people outside Parliament want them to do so. The petition that was mentioned is evidence of that. Why is it important to reduce class sizes? We need to remind other parties why. Aspects of literacy and numeracy are embedded in the early years—indeed, there are clear recommendations on that in the research. Until the age of eight, a child learns to read; from eight onwards, children read to learn. We should pay attention to international surveys from recent weeks. The literacy survey was a sharp reminder that the attainment levels of our nine and 10-year-olds have reduced in recent years. In order to regain the position that they had and to improve the literacy levels of Scottish children in comparison with those of other countries, we will have to work to improve their literacy before they reach age nine to 10. That means that we must consider primary 1 to P3 classes and the nursery level, which is important and is where we should ensure that there is professional teacher involvement so that we get the basics right. If we get the basics and the foundation of literacy correct, we will ensure that there are improved opportunities for young children and, as important, ensure that we do not live in a country in which adult literacy and numeracy rates are shameful. It is not only about improving the life chances of individuals; it is about raising the skills of the nation.

I acknowledge that in the west of Scotland there are increasingly smaller class sizes, although not in all cases, and that the population is reducing at a faster rate than it is elsewhere. However, in West Lothian—where I live—and in East Lothian and other parts of the east of Scotland, although school rolls in general are falling, the rolls in the earliest years are rising, because some areas are experiencing an increase in population as a result of young families moving into new-build houses. That is one of the reasons why a statement on class sizes is timely. Murdo Fraser asked why we are having a statement on class sizes now. He might want to ask some of his colleagues on the Parliamentary Bureau that question—I think that Labour members in particular wanted such a statement. I tried to make its relevance clear to him by explaining that in the context of the past few weeks there are several reasons why it is appropriate to make a statement on class sizes. The population projections that were published on 23 October mean that we would, even if we did nothing, have to find an extra 450 teachers because of the increase in the birth rate in the past year. Karen Whitefield asked when we will achieve our manifesto commitment. We will be able to do so when there is year-on-year progress that delivers it. As I said, we must recognise that flexibility will be required for different parts of the country. We want to see year-on-year progress. I will outline how we will monitor that. We will ask for annual reports from each and every local authority. They will be making progress not only on the specified manifesto commitments but on the national outcomes in the spending review document. We will also have bi-monthly meetings with each and every local authority to assess their progress in achieving those goals. I expect each and every local authority to make significant progress in reducing class sizes over the four-year period, although the pace and scale of progress will vary. There are big challenges, but they do not mean that we will not make progress or that we will not recruit teachers. We will recruit 20,000 more teachers in order to deliver on our manifesto commitment. We could recruit tens of thousands more teachers on top of that, but the teacher training institutions have told us that that would compromise the quality of teaching. I am not prepared to compromise the quality of teaching just to deliver progress on class sizes. We will be able to have the year-on-year progress evidenced by local authorities, and it will continue and be monitored over the period of the spending review.

I agree that that is the right way forward. We must ensure that year-on-year progress is made by local government, and I want that to be evidenced. I expect every council to have made significant progress over the period. However, common sense and flexibility will be required. I have cited the research evidence because disruption caused by changes to class configurations can undermine any benefits from reductions in class sizes. Common sense and flexibility must prevail—each headteacher will know the circumstances of his or her school. The recent class census showed that the previous partnership agreement had failed to deliver on its target to have a maximum class size of 20 in maths and English. The previous Administration then realised that we should listen to headteachers and that averaging the targets might be better. Ministers at the time acknowledged that that was reasonable. We acknowledge it, too. Members might want to reflect on that before they criticise us for introducing a bit of common sense and flexibility to our policy on class sizes.

I was not polled by YouGov, but had I been, I would have supported the concordat—and the COSLA presidential team that was present when I signed the concordat would have been pleased. Of course I welcome such popular support for our policy. However, the YouGov poll is not the only show of fantastic support for the SNP's progressive policies in education; there has been a petition of 80,000 signatures lodged in Parliament.  It will be important for all of us to move this debate on. The people of Scotland must see that we are working together to reduce class sizes. I hope that we can work together here in Parliament, but we are also working with local government in a new relationship that will bring significant changes, not only to the life chances of young people, but to the face of governance. That will be very important.

Local government has supported the concordat at COSLA presidential level and council leader level. Mary Mulligan is a resident of West Lothian; I am too, and I understand the situation there very well. I have had constructive discussions about delivering the policy with the convener of education in West Lothian Council. West Lothian Council is an interesting local authority. One of the commitments in the concordat is to ensure that every child in nursery has access to a nursery teacher. Unlike, for example, Glasgow City Council, West Lothian Council has kept nursery teachers in nurseries. The council will therefore have more flexibility in deployment of teachers; it will not have to move more teachers into nurseries, because they are already there and are able to give of their time and attention. The council will not have to use those resources in order to reduce class sizes. That is an example of flexibility. The success of new build and the challenges of new population are putting pressures on areas such as West Lothian, and the SNP-led West Lothian Council is willing to work within the concordat to deliver class size reductions. I expect  every other local authority that signs up to the concordat to do likewise.

Evidence on class size reductions, particularly from the Tennessee STAR project, shows that the biggest impact is in areas of deprivation. There is also evidence from nursery teachers of improvement among three and four-year-olds in areas of deprivation. We can learn lessons from the PISA study that was published yesterday, which makes it clear that although there are issues in respect of leadership in schools, continual professional development, the school environment and discipline, if we want to make fundamental changes we have to address the barriers that poverty places on educational attainment. Part of the early years strategy that we are developing—and one of the first policy areas to be developed collectively with COSLA and local authorities—is to try to address the fundamental issue of poverty in this country. The gap between rich and poor has extended, which has held back children who should be able to perform better. Tackling of poverty is fundamentally related to education. I will be urging local authorities to make a start in delivering class size reductions in deprived areas because, according to the PISA study, they are the areas in which we can make the biggest difference. In international comparisons on performance, some of the best-performing pupils in this country do extremely well. We will ensure that we retain our position in international rankings if we close the gap between the top attaining pupils and the poorest attaining pupils. Yesterday's international research shows us the way forward. This is about tackling poverty: we can do that and help to improve life chances if we reduce class sizes, particularly in areas of deprivation.

We are keen to pump-prime investment in schools. The £40 million that was released this year was delivered promptly in order to address class size issues. More generally, there are issues about how capacity is interpreted—what was understood to be the appropriate capacity for schools in previous years may not be appropriate now. My ministerial colleague Maureen Watt is taking a keen interest in that. The local government settlement, as has been provided through the concordat, will not specify that funding streams from national Government follow a narrow track of ring fencing to address capacity. Local authorities will have to determine how they use resources they must determine capacity. There are major challenges, which we must address: for example, some new-build schools have open-plan arrangements, which will present different challenges to those in the traditional, Victorian-built schools that have different-sized classrooms. That has to be taken into account and is where common sense comes into play. We must also recognise that capital infrastructure will be needed, which is one of the reasons why I have managed to secure from my Cabinet colleagues such a healthy capital infrastructure provision within local government. The major challenges include reducing class sizes and ensuring that we have the classrooms available for those reductions, but they also include improving the fabric of our schools.

That will vary from local authority to local authority. The population trends in Falkirk, Stirling, North Lanarkshire and West Lothian are different from those in parts of Glasgow and other parts of the west of Scotland. I say to Hugh O'Donnell that 78 per cent of the public supports our policy of class size reduction. I would not call that "airy-fairy"—it is solid support for delivery.

The delivery schedule will vary from one local authority to another, as will provision for nursery teachers. As of tomorrow, some local authorities will be able to say that they have fulfilled the concordat because they already have nursery teachers in their schools: they never took them away in the first place. Some local authorities have started taking nursery teachers out of nurseries, so it will take them longer to provide nursery teachers because they have to start from a different position. Part of the single outcome agreements that we are agreeing with local authorities will include their commitments to delivering on specified manifesto promises. I look forward with enthusiasm to receiving their commitment to deliver them. I have spoken to councillors throughout Scotland who are pleased that the Government is finally giving them a responsible position and trusting them. My understanding is that the Liberal Democrats believe that local authorities should have the decentralised powers to make decisions themselves, which is what we will deliver by working with local government.

There are many local authorities and most of them use phonics already. They tend to use different reading techniques, including phonics. Individual children learn differently, as we know, so phonics has its place. It has been successful and will continue to be, but local authorities can decide how best to use it. Margo MacDonald's point about the need for high quality applicants was well made. I reassure her that our teacher training institutions are already turning away more than the number that she says is required. There is a great demand for people to be teachers in this country. The idea that they can improve the life chances of our young children is fantastic and it is a great advert. I am  sure that many of them will take up the challenge to become teachers in Scotland.

The Government is committed to the future of higher education in Scotland. By maintaining high levels of Government funding, putting significant additional investment into university infrastructure, introducing legislation to scrap the unfair graduate endowment fee and establishing a high-level joint future thinking task force with Universities Scotland, we are demonstrating that commitment.

That might have been in plain English, but it included quite a number of questions. I will try to address the substantive ones. I, too, celebrate the University of the West of Scotland receiving that title. It will be far easier for the Government and the country to support the universities as a result of the budget revision that the Parliament agreed to yesterday. The Liberal Democrat finance spokesperson spoke against providing, for example, £3 million to the University of the West of Scotland.

He spoke against providing £168,000 to Barony College and £368,000 to Dumfries and Galloway College. The development of those colleges and the Crichton campus will be supported by the provision of the additional £100 million in infrastructure investment to which the Parliament agreed yesterday evening.

The priorities for any additional resources will be determined by the Cabinet. In my discussions with university principals last week, which were positive and constructive, we recognised that there is an issue that must be addressed in the immediate short term. We are looking to see how we can work creatively with the universities to find support, particularly for the issues that they face in year 1 of the settlement. We also want to support universities over the longer term, particularly going into 2010, when issues will arise if the cap on tuition fees is taken off in England. In working towards that, the Cabinet will make its decisions collectively, mindful of the vote in Parliament last week. Perhaps the timing and distribution of any additional resources will be subject to discussion. We have a three-year period and, going into the next number of years, we must  decide what to do in the short term, the medium term and the long term. As I have said, we are particularly interested in supporting universities in the short term and the long term.

There is no evidence that English universities have secured a competitive advantage at this time. Indeed, the English settlement for universities has yet to be announced. If Richard Baker looks at the current proposals, he will see that we have increased the universities' share of Government spend—marginally, but it has gone up since the previous spending review—and that we have achieved a very good settlement that provides competitiveness. We agree that it is not what the universities asked for, which is one of the reasons why we have to think about how we develop and shape them. Rather than debate the past, why does Richard Baker not congratulate the university principals on joining us in a joint future thinking taskforce to take the country and our universities forward?

David Caldwell from Universities Scotland stated yesterday that it would be helpful if we moved on. I did not debate the different figures and, indeed, I agree with him on that point. If we do not take into account the impact of the £100 million, the real-terms increase is 2.9 per cent; if we take it into account, the real-terms increase is 4.4 per cent. As Roger McClure from the Scottish Further and Higher Education  Funding Council said yesterday, we must recognise that the valuable pump priming of capital this financial year will have a very important impact, not least because providing that capital releases revenue to support other projects that otherwise would not have been provided for. I think that the very healthy capital settlement, not just this year but over the spending review period—there is 20 per cent extra capital infrastructure for universities—is to be welcomed. I urge Jeremy Purvis and other members to join university principals in taking the university sector forward and looking towards where we can be not just in 10 years' time but in 20 years' time, with a university sector that is fit for purpose.

The Scottish Government set out its ambitions for workplace learning and skills development, in both the public and private sectors, in the skills strategy, which was published on 10 September. I refer the member to that publication for a complete answer. "Skills for Scotland" seeks to ensure that vocational skills and qualifications have parity of esteem with academic skills and qualifications, through, for example, coherence with the three-to-18 school curriculum. It highlights the need to encourage employer demand for skills by supporting employers as they develop ambitious strategies for growth. We set out our commitment to increasing the effectiveness of employer engagement through, for instance, the laying down of specific challenges to the sector skills councils and supporting learning in the workplace through trade union learning representatives. The skills strategy challenges and encourages learning providers and awarding bodies to support the transfer of skills by recognising the value of individuals' prior learning and wider achievement, which builds on the work of our world-leading Scottish credit and qualification framework. The strategy also spells out our plans for ensuring that our national training programmes continue to meet the needs of individuals and employers. The development of our combined skills body, skills development Scotland, which we aim to have up and running by April 2008, will make it easier for all employers to access the information, advice, guidance, training and support that they need to develop their workforce.

Many public service employers have good experience in quality education and training. NHS Education Scotland is a key employer in that regard. That is why it is singled out for special attention in the skills strategy. Officials from NHS Education Scotland were fully involved in the development of the document. It is important that we learn lessons that can be spread across the sector. That is something that the Government will encourage.

The fact that there is a lack of targets for the number of modern apprenticeships has been supported and applauded by many employers across the country, because we want to work on sustainability and retention in particular. However, I agree with John Park about the role of many public employers in taking on modern apprentices. I know that many councils are exemplar employers in that regard. We will do anything that we can do to encourage that.

No. The abolition of the graduate endowment fee will have no effect on the funding that is allocated to universities as the current law, if unaltered, stipulates that the income that is generated must be used for student support.

We are growing investment in universities. There is an increase over the period of the spending review, which has been welcomed by many. The member is incorrect to make accusations about EMAs—the budget line is decreasing because of population changes. On the central point, we cannot displace funding from the graduate endowment fee, because it was unreliable. The funding generated was not used by the previous Administration to fund student bursaries but was used to provide student loan subsidy. By abolishing the graduate endowment fee and replacing the funding stream for student bursaries from general taxation and the general block grant, we are providing a far more secure way of funding young students' bursaries in the future.

I welcome the opportunity to close the debate and emphasise once again how the Government will make its mark in delivering greater prosperity and opportunity for the people of Scotland. Together, the SNP Government's economic strategy and budget set out a programme for economic progress that will put Scotland on a course for long-term success. Our economic strategy speaks of our values and of our ambition. It is a strategy based around the key drivers of competitiveness, investment in learning and skills, the creation of a supportive business environment, and investment in infrastructure development. Economic success in Scotland is long overdue. Scotland's standing in the international league tables for prosperity is nowhere near where it should be, and the plain truth is that Scotland has been denied the success that was hoped for and expected because it was held back by a lack of ambition. The Government will deliver ambition and the decisiveness required to achieve it. As Keith Brown said, we have provided a fresh, positive vision. That is why we have set out such stretching growth and population targets and why we will work with the public, private and third sectors to monitor and drive the delivery of the targets each step of the way. In a considered speech, Jamie Hepburn was right to highlight social enterprise in that respect. Derek Brownlee, Jeremy Purvis and Liam McArthur all asked about the independent audit of targets. The Council of Economic Advisers and the establishment of the national economic forum will play an important role in assessing progress, but this is the first time that a Government has set time-bound economic targets for the country.

It is for the Council of Economic Advisers to judge how it will best monitor the progress of economic growth for the country.  Patrick Harvie asked an important question about strategic environmental assessments. The Government's economic strategy sets out a high-level framework for delivery of the Government's purpose of sustainable economic growth, and as such a strategic environmental assessment of it would involve everything the Government does. It is more appropriate to focus strategic environmental assessments on specific sub-strategies and policies. For example, the new version of the national planning framework is currently undergoing a strategic environmental assessment, and NPF 2 will reflect the physical development purposes in the components of the strategy.

The economic strategy is at such a high level that it would be extremely difficult and time consuming to do an environmental assessment of it at this stage, but that does not mean that we do not do strategic environmental assessments of all other Government policy. Learning and skills are central to achieving our economic strategy. They provide a powerful means of helping our people to realise their potential. Learning allows individuals, families and communities to prosper. It is a key driver of the Scottish economy.

We will create more than Labour—its figure was 30,000, but ours is about 50,000. In comparison with the 400,000 English apprenticeships, our share is greater. [ Interruption. ]

Last week, the Government produced a budget that will deliver world-class skills and learning for Scotland. Through our budget, we will invest in skills. Almost 50,000 people—mostly young—will be in training and  apprenticeships in Scotland; the relevant figure in England is 400,000. We will expand modern apprenticeships to SVQ level 2 and we will back that with a skills strategy for Scotland that will be financed by an additional £20 million for skills development.

That £20 million is extra and will be on top of anything that is provided for the skills body. The Government is investing in trade union workplace learning, with a permanent budget for the first time of £4.2 million. I say to John Park that that is more than was provided under the previous Government. We will deliver workplace learning that will tackle fundamental adult literacy and numeracy issues, which is vital to growing our economic prosperity. We are investing in better school-college links, so more school pupils will have more opportunities to experience vocational learning. It is regrettable that Labour attacked our councils' ability to deliver on the settlement, which councils agreed last week was the best settlement that they could achieve. We will invest to secure extra nursery provision for 100,000 three and four-year-olds. By 2010, each child will have 570 hours of nursery provision and we will be well on our way to achieving our commitment of 50 per cent more nursery provision by 2011. [ Interruption. ]

I tell Frank McAveety that we will increase capital infrastructure by 15 per cent. In year 1 of our budget, £115 million of capital investment will be made to provide smaller class sizes in schools. More than 20,000 new teachers are in training under the Government. We are investing £3.24 billion in our universities. We are providing more money for universities. The Government is giving universities a bigger share of the budget than they had under the previous Government's 2004 budget settlement. We will invest 20 per cent more in capital than did the previous Government for all-important research facilities and buildings for our universities. Universities asked for an increase by inflation plus 15 per cent from a Westminster settlement that grew by inflation plus 1.4 per cent. They bid for a funding settlement that was 10 times the percentage increase that everyone else had to share. If Opposition parties want to meet the universities' bid, they will have to find cuts of £263 million from elsewhere. Do the Liberal Democrats  seriously think that mutualisation of Scottish Water is the way to fund universities? Even if the process started now, not a penny would be available before 2011.

What cuts does Labour want? According to its education spokesperson, it wants to increase council taxes throughout Scotland to fund universities. Labour's amendment shows that it wants to settle for a growth rate that consistently lags behind those of others. The only thing that Labour wants to grow is council tax bills throughout Scotland. The Government is ambitious for Scotland. We are determined to invest in Scotland's human capital, from the early years right through to lifelong learning in the workplace. We are determined to make Scotland competitive and to achieve sustainable economic growth for Scotland. We invite the Parliament to share the ambition for Scotland in the Government's economic strategy.

Exactly.

Will the member give way?

The member has just said that he acknowledges that if the cap does not come off, it will leave our universities exposed. How on earth is that the case?

It is important to grasp the information that I gave to Marilyn Livingstone: that this Government will see 50,000 people in training. The Westminster Government's recent announcement of 120,000 apprenticeships brings its total to 400,000. Given Scotland's population share, 50,000 compares well with 400,000 and shows that we are extremely competitive when it comes to apprenticeships.

Is the member aware that Universities Scotland's press release in the past week states that the universities remain competitive? Is he aware that, certainly until 2010—it is not a foregone conclusion that the cap will come off fees in England—the budget provision maintains the competitiveness of the university sector?

Will the member acknowledge that the number of apprenticeships will increase under this Government? We will not set arbitrary targets, but we will increase the number of those in training to 50,000, compared with the 400,000 apprenticeships that have been announced recently by the Westminster Government. That puts Scotland in a very competitive position.

On the basis that the Government is providing a bigger share of a bigger budget for higher education—

It has increased by 1.4 per cent, not the 15 per cent on top of inflation that universities are asking for, for the Liberal Democrats' proposals. If we are providing a bigger share of the budget than the previous Government did, what on earth does that say about that Government?

The member calls for an independent review of the higher education system. I am meeting with university principals tomorrow to work together with the sector to achieve rapid progress towards where we think the sector should be. If the university principals share that view, will he support it?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

We are fully committed to reducing class sizes in primary 1 to primary 3 to a maximum of 18. However, it would be counterproductive to increase teacher numbers without maintaining quality. We are discussing with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and others the scale and pace of change that, without extensive disruption to class configurations, will allow teacher quality to be maintained while driving down class sizes. Advice from educationists is that such a year-on-year staged process will be the most effective.

The only astonishing point is that parents, teachers and pupils support class size reductions but the Labour Party does not. We are committed to class size reductions, as specified in our manifesto, and we are in negotiations with COSLA on the matter. As a minister, Rhona Brankin had an unfortunate experience while negotiating on fishing issues; I suggest that it is helpful that she is not the one who is currently negotiating with COSLA.

I think that the question was about whether the Government will be flexible in its response to councils. The answer is yes. We know that different parts of the country have different experiences; some areas are experiencing falling school rolls, while in others the rolls are increasing. Our job is to deliver on our manifesto commitments but to do so responsibly and with common sense in responding to the  individual needs of councils, some of which have made similar representations to those that the member has just made.

We have always said that we will deal with the matter flexibly and with common sense. We must reflect on the fact that some older schools are not open plan, whereas some modern schools—including many in Lanarkshire—are open plan but may present other issues and challenges. Our job, and duty, is to be responsible in doing that. I recognise the challenges that are involved. That is why the Government has invested £40 million to help to support the capital requirements that, in future years, will deliver our manifesto commitment of driving down class sizes to 18 in P1 to P3.

I cannot comment on proposals to do with the City of Edinburgh Council that I understand have not been published. The member should not believe everything that he reads in the Edinburgh Evening News . All local authorities face challenges. As Lothians MSPs, Gavin Brown and I know about the changing demography of the area. West Lothian and Midlothian have very full schools, but school rolls are falling in Edinburgh, perhaps because of housing challenges. That situation has been addressed by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, which means that we can tackle some of the issues that are involved in housing problems and falling school rolls in places such as the city of Edinburgh.

The aim of the debate was to focus time and attention on children who are in need of support. I am encouraged by the constructive tone of most, if not all, of the contributions to it. The needs of children will be first, foremost and always in the early years strategy. Across the chamber, there is recognition of the importance of early years policy. There is also a lot of support for the themes that Adam Ingram set out in his opening speech. I assure members that we will look constructively at the many suggestions that they have made; we want to engage the Parliament in the shaping of the policy.

If the member does not mind, I will move on. I want to respond to some of the points that have been made and say a little about how the  Government will move forward from here. I put on record my recognition of the previous two Administrations' work in developing integrated children's services. The Liberal Democrat amendment makes specific points about play for two-year-olds and the transition into primary. There is plenty of scope to examine the strategic issues that surround children's play, as mentioned by Robert Brown and Jeremy Purvis, and to consider the mix of support for younger children in the work on the strategy. Similarly, there is scope to consider a range of issues on the transition to primary. Members will be aware that moves are already being developed to pursue more play-based and less formal learning in primary 1, through the curriculum for excellence. There are also interesting developments such as nurture groups, which Karen Whitefield mentioned, that aim to support vulnerable children during that transition. I can tell Karen Whitefield that I have visited nurture groups in North Lanarkshire—they have an important role. Although I am happy to support the Liberal Democrat amendment and to consider those policy areas in developing the strategy, our work has not reached the stage at which we can guarantee to adopt the specific proposals in the amendment. I cannot do so for one specific reason, which I want to share with members. If we can secure agreement on a new relationship with local government, the development of the early years strategy will be the first policy area of co-ownership between councils and the Government. We cannot prejudice that or commit local government on it, but local authorities will be vital in producing successful policy for the early years. We will pursue the points in the Liberal Democrat amendment. The Conservative amendment talks about supporting the institution of marriage. I support that institution, but I am not convinced that it should be a central theme of an early years strategy for children who are already born and whose parents may not have been married at the time of their birth. The strategy must address the needs of children and families whatever their circumstances. I stress that the theme of building parental and family capacity will aim to address some of the stresses that parents face. It should have the dual benefit of supporting parents in meeting their children's needs and reducing the stresses that can lead to relationship breakdown, but let us put the needs of the child, not the relationship of adults, centre stage in policy and, importantly, in decisions on resources. The Labour amendment refers to a request on 13 September for a statement. In response to that request, Maureen Watt wrote to 12 Labour  members, including the front-bench team, on 21 September. Last week, the second-largest petition ever was presented to Parliament. In it, more than 80,000 people call for cuts in class sizes. Parents, teachers and pupils want those cuts, but Labour does not—it is content for us to have the largest class sizes in Europe.

The pace and scale of delivery will vary, depending on council area, the school population and teacher retirals. Other important factors will be class configuration and the need to maintain the quality of probationers and ensure quality teaching in our classrooms. We are committed to reduce to 18 class sizes in primaries 1 to 3 and we will work to deliver that. We will look for support from other parties in the Parliament, along with support from the 80,000 people in Scotland who want class sizes to be reduced. Labour is out of touch; no wonder it is out of office. Adam Ingram spoke about supporting parents and families. Aileen Campbell, in a considered speech, talked about the emotional security that is needed in children's development. David Whitton raised an important point about the need to examine the dates on which funding is provided for access to nursery education. That relates to our commitment to deliver 50 per cent more nursery provision. We will consider the issue as part of the strategy. Mary Mulligan seemed to have missed Adam Ingram's speech: he did talk about support for families and kinship care and he mentioned delivering a statement on that later this year. Within eight months, the new Government wants to deliver for families and kinship care providers, whereas we had eight years of Mary Mulligan's Government ignoring the needs of those people.

No, I will not. On the need for a positive environment, it is critical to the agenda that we tackle poverty and inequalities. Gil Paterson talked eloquently about the need to address poverty, and Robin Harper referred to nature kindergartens, which was one of the positive proposals that were made during the debate. Jamie Stone referred to the Highland region. The Government acknowledges the important work of the pathfinder project on integrated services. Perhaps contrary to what Murdo Fraser thought, Robin Harper was absolutely right to talk about the health agenda as part of the early years agenda. We are talking about integrated  services—about children's education, care, development and health and about other provision. Another theme on the early years workforce developed—Robert Brown talked about play and the communications strategy, which are critical issues and a constructive development in our policy. He also talked about staffed play centres, which is an issue that we can consider.  We will have to consider an integrated training and qualifications framework. We are committed to that and we will deliver it. The previous Government was perhaps a little slow in providing it.

We will deliver on our policy of class sizes, but we will do so in discussion with local authorities, who have a key role to play. While we are on the subject of promises, in 2003 the Labour Party promised an early years strategy. Did it deliver? No, it did not.

The Labour Party talks about providing for kinship carers. Did it deliver? No, it did not. Within eight months of this Government we will deliver for kinship carers; in eight years, the Labour Party did not.

Presiding Officer, there is a loud noise in my ear. I wonder whether you can do something. I will finish by saying a few words on how we want to make progress. What our strategy is trying to achieve is on a groundbreaking scale. It is ambitious. [ Interruption. ]

As I was saying, our strategy is on a groundbreaking scale and it is ambitious. We are shifting from policy that was geared to crisis management to policy that is geared to intervention and prevention. That will not be easy, but academics across the world—including the economist Professor Heckman—have called for  early intervention. We will be able to deliver on our ambitions and to make our strategy last in the long term only if we approach the issue in an open and inclusive manner that harnesses the wide range of expertise that exists.

I am afraid that I will have to move on. Foremost in—

Foremost in our thinking are children themselves. We are determined to base our work firmly on analysis of their needs and aspirations. We will develop processes that give children and parents a voice in the strategy. We will also work with the early years sector and with the adult services that play such a crucial role in supporting families with young children. In particular, we will engage with local authorities, health boards and other providers, all of which make such a big contribution. The work of the health inequalities task force will be crucial, as will the constructive work with justice colleagues. That work has already started. From today's debate, it is clear that members of all parties share our ambition to provide a better experience of early years for Scotland's children and families. I have listened carefully to the points that have been made. We will reflect on them as we work to make progress with the strategy. I look forward to returning to the chamber to debate more detailed proposals in due course. A few years of neglect in the early years of a child's life can lead to a lifetime of disadvantage. Together, we can help to support lifetimes of opportunities, and positive futures, for all Scotland's children.

Will the member give way?

We are in continuing discussions with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. The member must decide whether or not she agrees with the reduction in class sizes, because many local authorities want to know whether the Labour Party supports a reduction in class sizes. So far, I think that the answer is no.

Improving the health and education of our young people lies at the heart of our priorities. Our young people should have every opportunity to learn from their early years onwards and to develop skills to help them to fulfil their ambitions and potential as citizens of Scotland. Early intervention will be a hallmark policy of the Government, particularly when young people may be vulnerable or at risk.

I think that the member asks about additional support for learning funding. I have concerns about that, because it is important that the funds are released and reach front-line services. I raised concerns with the previous Administration about whether the £10 million of funding was for delivering the administration of the additional support for learning legislation. That is a concern, so I am more than happy to investigate how we can ensure that more resources reach the front line for classroom assistants and teachers who support young pupils who have additional support needs, rather than just backing up the administration of the legislation, which was the funding requirement of the previous Government.

We are discussing the Government's policy of class-size reduction with COSLA, including a productive meeting this morning, and how that can be delivered in the context of proposed outcome agreements with councils. We also recognise that the pace and delivery for the City of Edinburgh Council will, in part, need to be determined by its circumstances as partners in that delivery.

I think that there were half a dozen, if not 10 questions, in that. I will try to address as many as I can. The SNP Government is committed to supporting the City of Edinburgh Council and has found funding in recent months to provide £600,000 for investment in additional teachers and the equivalent of £2.9 million for investment in capital. We will be funding six new secondary schools over the coming years, at Holy Rood Roman Catholic high school, Broughton high school, Craigroyston community high school, Tynecastle high school, Forrester high school and  St Augustine's. We will also be funding two new primary schools at Bonaly and Juniper Green. At lunch time I met the leader of the City of Edinburgh Council to address the flexibilities and requirements of the council. The Government is committed to class-size reduction. We are absolutely convinced that it is better for young people, particularly those from deprived areas, to be taught in classes of 18. We are getting support from the teachers, the parents and the pupils, so I seek support and a more constructive approach from Parliament. The City of Edinburgh Council is seeking to turn around a financial deficit of £25 million. Finding creative solutions to the financial difficulties that were caused by the previous Labour administration is a challenge indeed. Some of us are prepared to face up to that challenge and some of us are not.

The figure that I mentioned is £2.3 million in capital which, if added to the City of Edinburgh Council's share of the £9 million that we made available for teachers, makes a total of £2.9 million to the council. I find it surprising that the member knows more about the council's finances, funding and budget than I do. The allocation of that funding was precisely to start early preparation for class-size reduction. Class sizes will be reduced by employing more teachers, which is why this Government, within the first few months of its coming into power, has given local authorities £9 million. We are increasing the teacher intake in our colleges of education in order to ensure that we have continuing provision of quality teachers. In addition, this Government is committed to school buildings and to matching brick for brick the commitments to provision of the previous Government. That is the scenario, and that is the atmosphere in which we can have children well educated to achieve the smarter Scotland to which we all aspire.

The unfair and inefficient graduate endowment fee does not fund university places in Scotland and the proposed abolition of the fee is not intended to fund additional university places. The cost of abolition will be met within the current baseline budget. The creation of additional funded places at higher education institutions depends on the outcome of the comprehensive spending review.

I am not sure whether that question is consequential to the first one, which was on access to universities. However, it is important that we provide access and opportunity for all young people. Those who are not in education, employment or training need opportunities, but waiting until they are 16, 17 or 18 and making them stay in education until then will not make the difference. If we want those young people to go to university, we need earlier intervention and support, which is why we have our early intervention strategy and our important wider access programmes. The greater opportunity of access and learning with schools—GOALS—project works with schools to give earlier opportunities to children and young people from backgrounds that might lead them to being not in education, employment or training. If Helen Eadie supports the wider access agenda, I certainly agree with her. It is of concern that participation at universities in Scotland reduced from 117,000 in 2001 to 109,000 in 2005-06. There is a lot of good work to widen participation and to reach more young people. Unfortunately, the previous Government was not able to deliver to the level that Helen Eadie and I seek for our young people, but the SNP Government will pursue a wider participation agenda to reach the people that she mentioned.

I hear what Murdo Fraser says and I have listened to the evidence that has been put forward for a long-term review of higher education. However, we are within days of the release of the Westminster spending review and within weeks of this Parliament deciding its spending review, so I do not think that this is an appropriate time for any of us to call for a review of higher education. However, I recognise the arguments that are made.  Murdo Fraser suggested that abolition of the graduate endowment fee will somehow take money out of the sector, but it will not take funding for teaching and research from universities because the funding that is being found for abolition of the graduate endowment fee comes from baseline budgets that were otherwise being used for student support. As he knows, the terms of the legislation on the graduate endowment fee determine where the funding should go. It is a misrepresentation to say that the policy will remove money from the university sector if, by saying that, he means that it will take money from teaching and research. Abolition of the graduate endowment fee has been strongly welcomed by all those who responded to the consultation. It is a big stride towards ensuring that we have an education system that provides education without the barrier of the fear of debt. The figures to which I referred earlier indicate that, in this country and at this time, we are seeing a reduction in participation in higher education when other competitive countries are seeing an increase. We must address that. I look forward to not just debating and discussing abolition of the graduate endowment fee but, in the longer term, to considering how we can ensure that Scotland has a first-class, world-class education system.

I thank Margo MacDonald for raising those points, which also indicate why it is important to get early intervention right so that we do not have to deal with a remedial situation and help adults who did not have the opportunity to develop their skills when they were younger. Yesterday, I met the national workforce plus partnership board to discuss employability issues relating to the Government's skills strategy. If we are to improve employability, adult literacy and numeracy must be at the heart of that effort. We had a productive discussion about different avenues and ways to help to improve adult literacy and numeracy, not least in the workplace. I will  take a keen personal interest in the agenda and will welcome any suggestions that Margo MacDonald or others make on that.

Local authorities have responsibility for managing their school estates and for implementing national education priorities. Local authorities are sensitive to population shifts and increases or decreases in school rolls in different communities and are therefore best placed to make decisions about school-estate management. The patterns of school provision and occupancy levels vary from council to council, as will whether fewer primary schools could still deliver smaller class sizes.

My understanding is that Aberdeen City Council has not made proposals for closures but has in fact a three Rs programme of rebuilding, renewing and refurbishing. The fact that the member could cite a precise number of school closures perhaps reflects the plans of the previous council administration. However, the member makes a valuable point about the need for capital investment and additional teacher provision to meet our policy to reduce class sizes. I am confident that, when we have the opportunity to discuss pace and flexibility and—following the comprehensive spending review—when we know  what resources are available to us, councils such as Aberdeen City Council will be able to provide a creative and positive agenda for class-size reduction.

Does the member share my shock and disbelief that the previous Government signed the Parliament up to £65 million a year of uncosted PPP expenditure? That money could have serviced the debt.

Is it not typical that on a morning when Scotland is basking in the glow of achievement and possibilities following a fantastic football result last night, we have such a negative, carping motion from the Labour party? The motion reflects an old Scotland, which was all about anticipating defeat, rather than a new, modern Scotland that believes in what can be done. In the classroom or under the stars in Paris, the contrast between the old Scotland and the new Scotland is stark. Let us consider the debate on early years education and why it is important. Parents and professionals agree that reduced class sizes can make a difference, particularly for children from disadvantaged backgrounds. The Tennessee student teacher achievement ratio—STAR—project provided evidence of the benefit of small class sizes. Ronnie Smith from the Educational Institute of Scotland has said: "All current research evidence points to what teachers and pupils already know—that class sizes do make a difference." Professor Lindsay Paterson from the University of Edinburgh has said: "There is no doubt that the evidence shows reductions of one or two don't make any great difference. Classes of under 20 make a difference." A report in the "Harvard Journal on Legislation" that used data from more than 800 districts, which contained more than 2.4 million students, concluded that "student achievement fell as the student/teacher ratio increased for every student above an 18 to 1 ratio." Giving more time and attention to children in their early years helps literacy and numeracy. Why has  the Labour Party, in a week in which its soon-to-be leader says that class sizes do not matter, suddenly decided that class sizes do matter by lodging the motion?

We will deliver reductions in class sizes when we have discussed with local authorities the pace, scale and delivery of those reductions and the financial settlement in the CSR. I believe in parliamentary accountability and the scrutiny of the Government's actions, but it is unreasonable of Labour to demand urgent and detailed assurances within a few months of a new Government coming into power and within weeks of a comprehensive spending review. Christina McKelvie made the salient point that the previous Government did not set out details before its Budget (Scotland) Bill. I remind members that the census that will tell us whether the previous Government met its pledges on class sizes from four years ago will take place only this month. Parliamentary colleagues from other parties who gave good grace for a full four years for Labour to deliver are being suckered into a double standard of accountability. The First Minister has set out the Government's position in response to Wendy Alexander. She may think that class sizes do not matter, but we think that an early grounding in literacy does matter. The fact that she does not know how to use apostrophes and made a basic grammatical mistake in the first line of her first letter to the First Minister shows how much we have to do to tackle basic literacy. Labour's approach is to let children fall behind and then try to help them later with tutors who act as teachers on the cheap. Smaller class sizes will help to stop children falling behind in the first place. The motion is not a proper parliamentary motion; rather, it is a derogatory comment and a series of written parliamentary questions. It is not the stuff of real, constructive opposition.

Are we going to get real, constructive opposition?

Murdo Fraser has made an important point. That is why the discussion with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities is critical to delivering our policy to reduce class sizes. The Labour Party has asked a series of parliamentary written questions that are dressed up as a motion. I will answer the first question. The funding for higher and further education will be announced following the comprehensive spending review. The scale of what is required—which I acknowledge from what members have said—and a tight CSR make such an approach sensible. On the second question, there are different ways in which to tackle student debt. We do not think that primary legislation is needed to tackle the broader debt issue, so we will consult on the options of what can be done. In the meantime, the details of the bill to abolish the graduate endowment debt will be published soon.

I am answering the questions that Mr Henry included in his motion. On the third question, we have always said that we will need to discuss the pace and scale of delivery with local government as our partners. We will have meaningful discussions with local government when we know how much funding councils will get from the comprehensive spending review. We will provide funding for the extra teachers and classes that are required.

I want to move on. Bill Butler mentioned Glasgow City Council. Glasgow faces some of the biggest child poverty challenges, and it would be a serious matter if children in poverty were deprived of funding for smaller class sizes. Councils throughout Scotland want an end to ring fencing, but Glasgow City Council's arguments are setting things back. Councils throughout Scotland will be concerned about that. The fourth question is how we will provide teachers for all nursery-age children. I will respond to the point that Jeremy Purvis made. We will recruit and fund teachers—that is how that is done. We have always said that we will focus first on deprived areas. This autumn, there will be some 250 training places and 300 new jobs. On the fifth question, I have already spoken about indiscipline. Smaller classes can help. If Elizabeth Smith has any evidence of councils  exerting undue pressure on head teachers, I ask her to supply it. Finally, the motion calls for "an early statement on how funding will be provided to improve the school estate in Scotland." We could start to answer that question by telling members how the previous Government signed up to PPP deals without having the wherewithal within baseline budgets to fund them—to the tune of £65 million a year from 2010-11. Before we see the CSR allocations to Scotland and deliver our manifesto commitments, we must honour deals to the tune of £65 million a year that were approved on the never-never by Hugh Henry, Peter Peacock, Robert Brown and others. Labour Party members have asked for an early statement. They have got it, but they might not like it. Probationary teachers, who are important, have been mentioned. I say to the Labour Party that giving late excuses for not properly planning for teachers' jobs when it was in power is lame and unbelievable. The Labour Party created probationary teacher problems, whereas we sought to solve them. If money was available, why was it not pledged in Labour's manifesto? Several former Labour members of the Scottish Parliament who lost their seats will be asking that question in disbelief. In our first 100 days, we delivered £40 million for capital to support smaller class sizes and 300 new teachers. Anybody who knows anything about early years provision knows that the subject is complex and that there are particular challenges in certain parts of Scotland. We will transform early years provision in a way that responds to needs. Unlike Labour, we are not so arrogant as to doubt the commitment of other parties to education, but we all have different policies. I ask members to be patient and to await the outcome of the COSLA discussions and the CSR. I am impatient for Scotland's children. Under the previous Government, one in five children consistently and persistently underperformed. Scotland's children deserve the opportunity to learn in smaller classes, and the Government is determined to deliver on that.

If we are trading figures, I can tell the member that North Lanarkshire Council received £3.468 million in the first 100 days of this Executive. Hugh O'Donnell says that it needs £15 million—I think that delivering a fifth of that in 100 days of Government is a fairly major achievement.

Gavin Brown makes an important point. I am pleased to say that in at least three local authorities, including Falkirk Council and West Lothian Council, school building projects are progressing to plan. We always said that we would match brick for brick the school building plans of the previous Government. In my recent visit to Dumfries, I raised with Dumfries and Galloway Council the point that Gavin Brown makes about classroom sizes in new-build schools.

Will Des McNulty give way?

The member makes a very good case for early intervention. That case is exactly why this Government, unlike the previous one, will put far greater emphasis on greater early intervention. In the West Dunbartonshire example, of which we are very supportive, the issue is pre-school support. That is very important. I am talking about access to nursery education and nursery teachers. The previous Government was quite happy for nursery teachers to be removed from nurseries.

As part of the Government's pledge, Edinburgh has just received £2.3 million for capital and £400,000 for teachers. Glasgow has received £2 million for capital, and will receive £650,000 this autumn. Does the member not recognise that the "likely funding" he mentioned is exactly why we need the information from Westminster for the comprehensive spending review? That is the "likely" information.

Will the member take an intervention?

The member has previously raised a point about Perth and Kinross Council requiring 19 extra classrooms for the policy. Does she acknowledge that the council welcomed the extra £2 million that it has received in recent weeks to help with such capital projects, and that it has also received £156,000 to employ more teachers from this autumn?

I remind the member that it was his former minister, Robert Brown, and his colleague Peter Peacock who stopped collecting and publishing such data.

Will the member give way?

Can you tell us that, as of now, you have met the target of having classes of 25 in primary 1 and, I think, 20 in—

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. Is it not the case that, as of today, we still do not know whether those pledges—made not a few months ago but four years ago—have been met?

Ken Macintosh and John Park have made good points about part-time students. We will shortly make an announcement about their position.

In my speech, I talked about the expansion of modern apprenticeships. We need to consider where we can target resources. We made an age-specific manifesto commitment, which we can develop. However, strategy is about the vision of where we want to go; detailed policy is about delivery. The member should not confuse the detail with the strategy.

Is the member aware of the consultations that have taken place on modern apprenticeships, lifelong learning and Careers Scotland, all of which involved training providers, colleges and trade unions?

Will the member take an intervention?

When I visited Inverness recently, I met representatives of UHI. I put on record the Government's support for the institute. It has great prospects and we look forward to its receiving university status when the due diligence that the Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education must embark on is complete.

Does the member remember the Duffner report and the fact that Wendy Alexander, who is soon to be the leader of the Labour Party, took the careers service away from local authority control? Did she disagree with Wendy Alexander at the time?

Does the member acknowledge the early action that we have taken on early intervention and support for children, and does he support my announcements today about the modern apprenticeships scheme?

The member is almost five minutes into his speech. His amendment refers to the Leitch review of skills and its recommendations. Will he explain the Liberal Democrats' position? Which parts of the Leitch review should we be taking forward and which parts are we not pursuing? Will the member address his amendment?

I welcome this opportunity to set out to the Parliament how the Government will assist Scotland in stepping up to the mark in skills—skills for life and skills for an economic prosperity that is shared fairly. During the education debate in June, I announced that the Government would develop its skills strategy as part of our first 100 days commitments. "Skills for Scotland: A Lifelong Skills Strategy" was launched on Monday, and it sets out our ambitions for skills in a lifelong learning context. It is our response to the Leitch review of skills, but it not our programme for its implementation. That is deliberate. Liz Cameron of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce was "delighted" with our skills strategy, and commented that we need a "high-skill economy that makes the best productive use of these skills". That is where the approach in Scotland differs significantly from the Leitch review of skills. Whereas Leitch's focus was on growing the number of qualifications, the focus in Scotland has to be on supply and, importantly, the use of skills. The skills strategy is our vision of what we need to develop. As for how to develop that vision, we are issuing a call to action to all the players who are involved in the skills agenda at every level. The intention is to work together with all our partners to focus on how to deliver, developing policies that are focused and relevant and which will make an impact. The how of local delivery will be determined with all key partners in skills development. We will take forward our policies on skills development by weaving them closely with our policies on economic development, business improvement and innovation. On cohesion, we need to overhaul and simplify the organisation of support for skills and training development by doing two things: first, by creating a national focus on skills by bringing into one organisation those public agencies that support skills and learning; and, secondly, by bringing greater cohesion and support to the local delivery of skills development. We will merge Careers Scotland with learndirect Scotland. That is an initial step to form the nucleus of a body that is focused on skills, with a much  greater focus on the needs of the individual. I note Murdo Fraser's amendment and I indicate to him and to the Parliament that a further announcement on skills and training will be made when my finance colleagues make a statement in the coming weeks about the reform of Scottish Enterprise.

I will respond positively to the member. I was discussing exactly those points with representatives of Highlands and Islands Enterprise during my visit to Inverness only a few weeks ago. There is an important recognition that local delivery mechanisms might be a bit bigger and wider in some parts of Scotland compared with some of the local delivery mechanisms that we might expect to find in the central belt. Elsewhere in Scotland, we want to build on the very synergies that have developed in the Highlands and Islands. I hope that the member will acknowledge the supportive comments and the positive response to our proposals that I have received from colleagues in Highlands and Islands Enterprise—particularly from those who are involved in skills and training. I spoke to Willie Roe about the matter only this week. For the first time, our strategy spells out clearly that every one of our partners who is involved in the delivery of skills development is part of one lifelong learning system. We will develop a more focused, streamlined and flexible system that will be better suited to developing the needs of Scotland today and tomorrow. The system will be joined up; it will combine national and local delivery while focusing on the needs of the individual; it will be built on good practice; and it will focus increasingly on the individual's needs, aspirations and potential, as well as on the needs of business and the economy. Our second principle is individual development. We will balance the skill needs of employers with the skill needs of individuals; we will develop coherent support systems that increase individual control and choice over learning; we will promote equal access to, and participation in, skills and  learning, recognising that different people have different needs, are in different situations and have different goals; and we will focus on the individual at each stage of their journey through lifelong learning. "Skills for Scotland" acknowledges that the foundations for skills development are laid during the early years. That means core skills: reading and writing; encouraging positive attitudes to skills development and the world of work; and embedding the knowledge and skills that will equip children to continue to learn and develop throughout their lives. The curriculum for excellence programme will make skills development all the more visible for teachers, young people, parents and prospective employers. It is right that we focus on the development of high levels of skills in literacy, numeracy and information technology. Without those core skills, the development of other skills is compromised. The Confederation of British Industry, the Scottish Trades Union Congress and the Federation of Small Businesses have all supported that emphasis in our strategy. We are committed to giving young people greater access to vocational education from the age of 14 and the opportunity to build up a wide variety of skills—skills to which the young people are suited and which employers will value and use.

I accept that colleges in particular—and, increasingly, universities—have a central role. It is irresponsible, however, to start spending a vast amount—hundreds of millions of pounds of taxpayers' money—without knowing the outcome of the comprehensive spending review and the results of the budget allocation from Westminster. We intend to achieve parity of esteem between vocational and academic learning—there is a crucial and strengthened role for colleges there. Skills development goes hand in hand with an enterprising and entrepreneurial outlook. We need more young people to be able to create ideas and have the confidence, determination and skills to translate those ideas into positive action for economic and social benefit. Scotland's employers will continue to play a crucial part in that effort, and we will continue to encourage them to work in partnership with our schools and teachers in order  to give young people meaningful experience of the world of work. We are committed to developing Scotland's worldwide reputation for excellence in enterprise education. We acknowledge that those furthest from the labour market live in a variety of circumstances and need to be supported through flexible provision towards sustained work and further skills development in the workplace. Our strategy therefore outlines our intention to integrate employment and skills services to help individuals move from long-term unemployment to sustained employment and in-work progression—perhaps it has greater similarities with the Leitch review in that respect. We acknowledge that closer working with Jobcentre Plus must be included to ensure that we are delivering a system for the benefit of all, and we intend to pursue that with determination and vigour.

Let me explain to Jeremy Purvis, who I think is a former finance spokesperson for the Liberal Democrats, that there is a difference between longer-term funding and baseline funding. The capital funding for schools, which is an important part of our commitment to the early years, is from this year's funding. If one is looking at the uplift of hundreds of millions of pounds of investment—

Of course the announcement is new: it is about money that we have. The problem that we had with the previous Executive was that it was not sure what funding was available. I will make further comments on that tomorrow morning. We have to have responsible finances. I will deliver improvements for and investment in colleges and universities, but that has to be done responsibly as part of the comprehensive spending review. We are committing this Government to supporting young people aged 16 to 19 who need more choices and chances so that they can improve and make a positive contribution to Scotland. Unlike Labour members, I do not think that raising the school leaving age to 18, which is implicit in the Labour amendment, is the way to do  that. I hope that my commitment to continue to prioritise those young people will command support from members. Our skills strategy recognises that people, especially those who continue to face multiple barriers to participation in learning and work, are looking for targeted advice that is specifically for them and those whom they support. The Scottish credit and qualifications framework is central to the strategy. It is one of the few frameworks worldwide that embraces both academic and vocational achievements and the potential to recognise prior learning. It is important that we recognise and value the skills that individuals acquire at work, whether through informal on-the-job learning or more formal learning. The SCQF helps to achieve that and provides an enviably strong launch pad to further achievements. I recently met Commissioner Ján Figel' from the European Commission, who was impressed by the SCQF. The Commission launched its e-skills strategy—e-skills for the 21 st century—last Friday and we will ensure that Scotland participates fully in it. A week ago, I met David Lammy MP to discuss the skills agenda. We commit to refreshing modern apprenticeships and will embed fully the SCQF in that programme. We believe that, in the past, too much emphasis was placed on achieving volume targets. We are committed to ensuring that modern apprenticeships meet employers' current and future needs, providing security of employment for individuals to earn while they learn new skills that are directly relevant to their job. That is why we have announced in our strategy that we will implement the conclusions of the recent modern apprenticeship consultation. In particular, we will extend modern apprenticeships to level 2 Scottish vocational qualifications and phase out the current skillseekers programme. That will substantially increase the number of apprentices, help participants to progress to other qualifications such as higher national diplomas and degrees, and further help to achieve parity between vocational and academic qualifications.

I have already taken an intervention from Mr Rumbles. Working and learning are often seen as two distinct and separate entities, with the learning to be completed before the working can start. In practice, however, we never stop learning, and the changing workplace demands that we keep learning if we are to continue to be effective contributors. I am determined that the SCQF will  help us to achieve that. We have called the third guiding principle "economic pull". Scotland has a proud history of investment in skills. However, although our skills and qualification levels are higher than those of the rest of the United Kingdom, our productivity lags behind. We agree with Lord Leitch's analysis that we need to improve levels of skills in order to unlock our economic potential, but we do not agree that simply injecting more skills into the labour market will have the economic effect that we seek. Also, Leitch wants to subsidise employers to badge skills that people already have and to charge employers a levy for training, whereas, in Scotland, we need to focus on developing further skills and, more important, the use of skills, as the Scottish Chambers of Commerce reminded us. That is widely recognised as a desirable key difference. Our problem in Scotland is not characterised by the supply of skills but by employer demand for skills and how those skills are utilised in the workplace. The extent to which skills utilisation happens in practice depends on a range of factors. Our strategy goes further than Leitch and is designed to suit Scotland's needs and ambitions. Our approach will ensure that Scotland contributes as fully as possible to the newly established UK commission for employment and skills. We need to understand that employers who face challenges in shaping their future will demand the very best from our education and training providers. This Government's skills strategy is, above all, a challenge to ourselves and to all our partners to develop the detail of delivery and achieve a smarter Scotland with a globally competitive economy. We want a Scotland where people can work in teams and are confident, creative and hungry continually to learn new skills; a Scotland where employers are able to access a skilled workforce that is increasingly literate and numerate, where small businesses are encouraged to grow and where there is strong, coherent support for businesses of all sizes; and a Scotland where migrant workers and overseas students play a valuable role in an expanded workforce and economy and where learning and training providers work in one system. We want a smarter Scotland that is built on the firm foundations of the talent that each and every person has the right to develop—a Scotland of opportunity and fulfilment. I move, That the Parliament believes that to equip the Scottish economy for the 21st century it will require its people to be  skilled; notes the publication of Skills for Scotland , the Scottish Government's strategy to help deliver the skills needed for the 21st century, and the call to action that it contains for individuals, employers, national and local government, trade unions, colleges, universities and schools, community learning and development providers, training providers, public agencies and the third sector, and urges all those involved in the delivery of skills in Scotland to actively engage in its implementation.

The member makes a very important point: the demographic challenges of the south-west are considerable. Does she acknowledge that we have to provide access for mature students so that they can provide the professional services that will be needed in the area, and does she also acknowledge that the  staff that will be needed in the campus, and the students that will be attracted to it, can help to provide a lifeline so that the demographic challenge in the south-west can be met?

It is important that we, collectively, provide leadership to those in the south-west of Scotland and assert to them the long-term nature of the commitments that I have received from the institutions concerned. An institution does not embark on a four-year initial  teacher training programme unless it is in there for the long haul.

It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to ask the Parliament to join me in welcoming the successful outcome that has been achieved to secure the future of the Crichton university campus. The outcome not only protects, but significantly expands, existing provision. It was achieved through the concerted efforts of a wide range of parties and it is being supported by the Scottish Government through additional funding. The outcome actually exceeds the original objectives of the local campaigners. We have secured existing provision from all existing partners, including the University of Glasgow's liberal arts provision, we have provided innovative primary teacher education options for the south-west and we will support the postgraduate provision in the exciting new carbon centre. The Government has achieved this outcome by addressing the issue with drive, determination and creativity. We dealt with the problem in the early days of the new Government because we heard the people of the south-west when they expressed their needs, aspirations and expectations. We see Crichton as a thriving and diverse centre of higher education that will contribute to the economy, culture and life of the region. We have equipped the academic partners to deliver that in the long term. [ Interruption. ]

I commend the way in which the academic partners at Crichton and local stakeholders have worked together with the Scottish Funding Council to produce a shared vision for the future of the campus. The development of the academic strategy for the region is a key milestone. The Scottish Government has committed £1.5 million a year, at full roll-out, to cover the additional costs of new provision and to secure existing provision. Additional funding will secure undergraduate liberal arts provision, with student  intake to recommence from 2008-09; the development and delivery of broad-ranging four-year primary teacher training degrees; and postgraduate provision in climate change and environmental studies as part of the development of the new carbon centre. It will also cover unique infrastructure costs, which currently fall to the partners that operate at the campus. I am particularly pleased that we will be able to deliver new provision of initial teacher training at Crichton. That will build on our aspiration to give students the opportunity to combine specialist primary teaching studies with a more broadly based degree. The fact that 20 per cent of probationer teachers withdrew from Dumfries and Galloway this year shows that we have particular circumstances to contend with in the south-west. The solution has made long-term participation at Crichton financially sustainable for the University of Glasgow and the University of Paisley. The University of Glasgow has confirmed that, at full roll-out, it will break even on its Crichton operation and that it is committed to the campus in the long term. I turn to the comments in Hugh Henry's amendment. I say to him that the funding will be maintained and is guaranteed and that funding for other institutions will not be cut to deliver it. On asking for guarantees, he, as a former minister, should surely know that ministers cannot direct or provide guarantees in relation to independent institutions. Indeed, Labour ministers regularly told us that on this very issue. What we can do, which the Government of which Hugh Henry was a member failed to do, is work with independent institutions to seek creative solutions. We have done that in this case. We have no powers to direct, which demonstrates just how remarkable the consensus solution is. The present Government seeks consensus; Hugh Henry's sought conflict.

It is important to remember that the funded places are for Crichton campus. We are keen to ensure that the University of Glasgow  maintains its position. It is essential that we encourage people to take part in the proposals for initial teacher training. One exciting measure that we can take in the south-west is to have the University of Glasgow work with Dumfries and Galloway College to consider possible articulation routes, particularly from the Stranraer campus. We can start to have a reach-out and to provide access to higher education in liberal arts and initial teacher training, which otherwise would not be available. That is a creative solution.

I want to continue, because I have an important message to put across to the partners at Crichton. I expect the academic partners to make their commitment clear to their students, staff and the people of the south-west. I want to see evidence of collective, shared and collaborative leadership that respects individual institutions but gives the Crichton campus a united sense of purpose. I will monitor the success of the partners in attracting students, not only from Dumfries, but from the rest of the region. I will also look to the Crichton Development Company to work closely with the University of Paisley to improve facilities for students and staff at the campus. I will take a close interest in the demand for the new concurrent initial teacher education degrees and in the success of the new carbon centre. The high regard and enthusiasm for and the loyalty to the unique and innovative campus were highlighted throughout the campaign to secure its future and shone through once again during my visit to the campus last week. The visit was an excellent opportunity for me to meet representatives from the academic partners, local stakeholders, staff and students and to hear at first hand their views on the future for the campus. I also had the opportunity to meet founding members of the carbon centre and was impressed with their aims and ambitions for it. In particular, I was pleased to learn that the first postgraduate students at the centre will enrol this autumn on a course that is unique in the United Kingdom.

I am very pleased that Elaine Murray, Alex Fergusson, Alasdair Morgan and others congratulated the Government on providing a solution, but if Mr Foulkes wants to consider what is ungracious, perhaps he should consider the Labour Party's amendment to our motion. I visited Dumfries and Galloway College last week. Work has begun on a new college campus adjacent to Crichton, and I believe that the relocation will help to deliver the potential to expand articulation routes with the colleges working across the south-west. I hope that that initiative, and others around Scotland, will help to deliver new models that will allow our students to access a rounded and high-quality education in their own localities. This is an excellent example of what can be achieved in rural Scotland through imaginative and committed approaches. We must focus on the needs and expectations of people in our rural and island communities, and we must work with delivery partners to respond effectively. The Crichton model will not necessarily work in other parts of Scotland; different solutions will be required for particular challenges, but what we have demonstrated is what can be achieved through a shared vision. I believe that we also have other examples in other areas of what can be achieved when people work collaboratively. The UHI Millennium Institute is a very different model from Crichton, but I would argue that it can be made to work for the diverse and diffuse communities it serves. I recently met senior representatives of UHI and Inverness College, and I visited Lews Castle College on Lewis. On both visits, I discussed the expectations and aspirations of local people for UHI and its partners. I made it clear that this Government shares those expectations and aspirations. Let me reiterate the importance of Crichton to the south-west of Scotland. For the economic development of the region, it is important that opportunities to develop high-level skills are available at the heart of the region. That will be possible only if a higher education structure that works for the region is in place. I believe that Crichton can offer that to the south-west through an innovative and responsive model. In social terms, it is critical that everyone can access and benefit from the opportunities available in modern Scotland. We must work hard to remove geographic barriers so that we can meet the needs of people in rural areas and respond to their expectations. By adopting flexible approaches such as the Crichton model, I believe that we can work with rural communities to achieve that. In cultural terms, it is important that the south-west develops as a vibrant part of Scotland,  making its unique contribution to the cultural development of the country, and drawing the benefits of that development back in. The campus sits at the centre of that vision for the region. For economic, social and cultural reasons, it is crucial that all partners can move forwards with a long-term vision and on a firm financial footing. The development of the academic strategy and the additional support from the Government that I announced will ensure that those conditions are met. There is a fresh wind blowing in Scotland. It carries with it hope, confidence and optimism. People want to respond positively to a can-do culture in Scotland. Hugh Henry and his Labour colleagues may want to skulk in the shadows of a can't-do culture in Scotland, but they will be left behind. The motion is about what can be done in Scotland with a will, with co-operation and with a vision of the Scotland that we want and can have. I move, That the Parliament congratulates local campaigners, including MSPs from all parties, on effectively highlighting the issues surrounding the future of Crichton University Campus in Dumfries, leading to a successful outcome; commends the work of the local stakeholders, academic partners and the Scottish Funding Council in developing an academic strategy for the campus; welcomes the allocation of additional resources by the Scottish Government to protect existing provision, help deliver the strategy and widen the range of higher education opportunities delivered in the south west of Scotland on a long-term sustainable basis, and recognises the importance of the ability of students in rural and island communities to access higher and further education.

I support the work to develop the academic strategy, which will inform future actions to achieve sustainable provision that meets the academic and economic needs of the area. The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council and the Scottish Executive continue to work closely and urgently with all the academic partners who are involved in developing the strategy, including the University of Glasgow. I met the Scottish funding council and the principal of the University of Glasgow on 4 June to progress the interests of students and potential students at the Crichton campus. In developing the strategy, a number of options are being explored to build on existing provision at the campus and to develop new provision.

I am sure that, like me, the member respects the independence of academic institutions such as universities. The Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 2005 makes it clear that it is not within the gift of ministers to direct universities, which are independent institutions, to carry out particular academic strategies. However, we are contributing to the strategy and I am committed to ensuring that we provide the best opportunities that we can provide at the Crichton campus. I will use my influence as much as I can to get the best result. I ask the member to bear with me; I am pursuing the case vigorously.

Yes, significant progress has been made but I am not at liberty to talk about the detail at this stage. When I can, I will. I know that Elaine Murray, the Presiding Officer and many others in the chamber have an interest in the issue. There is an issue that involves the other partners in the Crichton campus and progressing the funding of additional places. It is essential for the overall development of the Crichton campus that we move on the academic strategy, which has several strands. We are all aware of other issues, particularly that involving the University of Glasgow. I ask members to be patient; I reiterate that I am actively pursuing those issues.

Members are free to express their views on that, and from the petition that was received this week, I know that what Mr Morgan said is true. We can try to ensure that the strategic direction of higher education, as steered and led by the Executive, reflects the opportunities that should be provided to people in all parts of Scotland, regardless of geography or deprivation, so that current and future students can access the type of course that they deserve.

Yes.

Yesterday's announcement made it quite clear that, within weeks of coming to power, our injection of 550 new teachers into the system is an early step towards ensuring that we deliver. Obviously, we need to spend capital as well, which is why we have released an additional £40 million into the school fund. Considerable progress will have to be made year on year if we are to deliver, which is why elements of the budget following the comprehensive spending review will indicate how far and fast we can deliver. We are absolutely determined to ensure that our young people in primary 1, 2 and 3 benefit from receiving their teaching in classes of 18.

We will have to engage proactively with councils on classrooms, because local authorities—not the Executive—are the owners, employers and providers of the schools that can deliver. We have already started the process to deliver on the classroom agenda. As far as resources are concerned, we are undertaking a modelling exercise that bears in  mind falling school rolls and retirements. We envisage that far more than the 1,000 teachers pledged by Labour and the Liberal Democrats are needed and that the number could at least double if not treble. Our proposal of having 550 new teachers this autumn will go a good way towards delivering the numbers. However, it is a big commitment, which means that we have to act wisely and look at future budgets—not just in the week ahead but in the year ahead, following the comprehensive spending review.

Perhaps Hugh Henry does not recall that, when he was Minister for Education and Young People and I was Opposition spokesperson, I commented that flexibility was needed when class sizes were reduced from 33 to 30 in the first session of the Scottish Parliament, and I recommended that flexibility would be needed to achieve class sizes of 20. Of course we need to take a commonsense, flexible approach. We will deliver on our commitment, but it is important that we engage with and listen to councils to make sure that we can deliver what they need and not take the top-down approach that was adopted by the previous Government.

The Scottish Government is committed to helping schools create and maintain a peaceful and positive learning environment for all. That includes smaller class sizes, which teachers say will be a significant factor in tackling indiscipline. We will also develop new guidelines on approaches that promote positive behaviour and on dealing with more serious indiscipline.

It is important that we have robust and accurate statistics on which people can be held to account. There has been some reflection on the point because I have concerns about the robustness of the statistics that were produced annually. There is no point collecting statistics if they are of no use to Government because there are different interpretations of them from teacher to teacher, school to school and local authority to local authority.  I want robust information. As I have said, I am happy to engage with the Conservatives on how we move forward. I quote from my letter to Elizabeth Smith: "Once I have obtained the cost and impact of instituting a new national collation of data on indiscipline on an annual basis in addition to or instead of more in depth studies, I would like to discuss options with you as well as educational professionals in deciding the best way forward." That is the best way forward.

The Scottish Government distributes the bulk of funding to councils through the core local government finance settlement, on a basis that is agreed between the Executive and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. Local authorities then set their own budgets for services, including education, and have discretion to allocate moneys as they judge those moneys are needed to deliver service priorities in their areas.

I appreciate headteachers' concerns, but we must reflect the accountability and democratic responsibility of individual local authorities for governing their educational provision and their schools. I acknowledge that we must have a fair, open and accountable system for funding schools, to ensure that schools that are in particular need because of deprivation or rurality, for example, have the resources that they require. We must also ensure that schools that deploy their funds successfully are not unnecessarily penalised for that.

It is regrettable that previous Governments' management of the economy has left the Scottish Borders as one of the lowest-income areas in the country. That is why, as we are to deploy 300 new teachers in the system in August—in a matter of weeks—it is important that Scottish Borders Council makes representations to our officials as soon as possible, so that they can ensure that the Scottish Borders benefits from the 300 new teachers who will be provided. Information on areas of deprivation suggests that the Scottish Borders has a strong case for early receipt of the new teachers.

I appreciate the member's raising that issue, which I have asked officials to consider. However, my letter to her said: "Once I have obtained the cost and impact of instituting a new national collection of data on indiscipline on an annual basis in addition to or instead of more in depth studies, I would like to discuss options with you as well as educational professionals in deciding the best way forward." As a new member, Elizabeth Smith may want to consider negatives, but I gave a positive message of encouragement to make progress on the matter.

I very much welcome what the member says and I agree with the concerns about having to change and turn round what has been a difficult situation in the past. Pupils who are not enthused about taking science at standard grade will be less likely to take more than one science subject at higher level and therefore less likely to go on to university. Does the member agree that we have to enthuse children at primary level and at early secondary level? The real target is to get more pupils to take science standard grades, so that more of them are likely to take science highers and to pursue science and engineering at degree level.

I appreciate the member's points on early intervention; indeed the first Labour-Liberal Administration made significant progress on early years issues. Does she agree with the findings of the previous Education Committee's early years inquiry that some of the impetus for that early intervention strategy may have been lost in the second session?

Back in 2000, I asked the then minister, Nicol Stephen, whether there were any plans to carry out research into composite classes. He said no, and that only a review of the international literature had been done. I do not think that anything was done to develop such research in the following seven years. The member's point is well made.

One of the problems with the previous Government was that it had a big bang solution for class sizes of 25 after four years, and that was an end to the process instead of a start being made year by year. We are trying to avoid  that problem and to ensure that we can deliver properly.

It is clear that to deliver class sizes of 18 we will have to employ thousands more new teachers. However, a great number of teachers are retiring and we will need to ensure that we balance the number of new and quality-educated teachers who are going into the system with the number of those who are leaving through retirement. We must reflect on that balance.

We are keen to learn from experience of some of the issues around reducing class sizes to 25 in primary 1. Can I count on Hugh Henry's support in amending future regulations to help protect and promote future provision in limiting class sizes to the current proposal of 25, to which he alludes, or 18, which is the policy that we intend to deliver?

I welcome the opportunity to set out for the Parliament how the Government will make its mark to deliver a smarter Scotland. The Government's shared objective is to expand opportunities for Scots to succeed from nurture through to lifelong learning and to ensure higher and more widely shared achievements. People and their potential lie at the heart of creating a smarter Scotland. The Government will support learning for life, guided by the following key principles: giving children the best start, which is an early start with early intervention; promoting an international perspective that develops self-confident, outward-looking Scots and self-reliant communities; championing an aspirational approach, because learning should stretch and foster ambition; taking an egalitarian approach that embraces the Scottish tradition of the democratic intellect and a belief that education should be based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay; and creating a sense of community, as education, learning and schools should be at the heart of the community. The final principle is that a child and learner focus in policy is key to responding to individual need and potential. In my first few weeks in post I have pursued that agenda vigorously, delivering action to nurture children in their early years by trialling free school meals for all primary 1 to primary 3 children in selected schools; action to develop a lifelong skills strategy for Scotland, which will outline our aims, ambitions and plans for making Scotland's skills base truly world class; and action to remove barriers that prevent individuals from accessing higher education, as signalled by our proposal—which is dependent on the agreement of Parliament—to abolish the inefficient graduate endowment fee. Our education policies will focus on the following: early intervention; supporting vulnerable children and families; improving the learning experience in school; developing skills and lifelong learning; and promoting excellence and innovation in higher education. In connection with that final point, I want to make Scotland a magnet for learners, academics and business and to bring about a step change in translating the output of research into sustainable wealth creation by  tackling both business demand and research supply. I turn to areas in which the Government can and will make early commitments to progress our education and lifelong learning agenda. On the Government's commitment to early intervention, there was broad agreement during the election campaign on the merits of extending free pre-school education. As a first step towards our manifesto commitment of increasing entitlement by 50 per cent, I am delighted to announce that from autumn 2007, the entitlement for all three and four-year-olds will be increased to 475 hours a year. That will create a solid platform for further expansion by putting provision that covers the school year on a proper statutory and financial footing. It will create a level playing field for children who attend private and voluntary sector centres as partner providers for state nursery provision. In order to capitalise on that potential and maximise the benefits from investment, I am today launching a process to develop a long-term early years strategy covering child care, development and education that will be published in the summer or autumn of 2008. The strategy will reflect the Government's view that by building self-confidence, social skills and an awareness of one's impact on others, our investment in the early years will create the foundations for good health and positive economic and civic engagement later in life. Supporting vulnerable children and families will also be at the heart of a smarter Scotland. Providing help when it is needed is both the right thing to do and an investment in our future. The personal, social and economic waste of young people who cannot fulfil their potential and miss out on work, education or training can be resolved for the long term only if we tackle the root causes. Our children have the right to experience relevant, exciting and inspirational learning. We have to improve the learning experience in schools. To do that, we will build on the curriculum reform programme that was put in place by the previous Administration. Children need the time and attention to flourish. A key policy of the Government is to cut class sizes to 18 in primary 1 to primary 3. We are delivering early steps to drive down class sizes, which is why I am pleased to announce that the Government is providing local authorities with funding to employ from August 2007 an additional 300 teachers—300 new jobs for new teachers after the summer holidays. I know that those extra posts will be welcomed by probationers who are completing their induction year. Those 300 additional posts mean that capable and enthusiastic professionals will stay in  teaching rather than be forced into non-teaching work. A week ago, Hugh Henry stated on the radio that he would give our proposals to abolish the graduate endowment fee a "fair wind" if we employed extra probationers this year and in future years. Given our good news on both the graduate endowment fee and probationer teachers, I look forward to Hugh Henry's continued constructive support. We are sorting out the problems caused by the previous Government and are happy to do so.

At the end of the term, we will ensure that we have in place the resources to drive forward that agenda. Smaller class sizes are most important for children from deprived areas, which is why we will ensure that our intention to deliver classes of 18 concentrates on children from deprived areas first. I will explain more about our new job announcements. We can target the 300 new posts first on pre-school education and then on reducing class sizes in P1 to P3. We want councils to focus the additional resources on deprived areas, where international research evidence indicates that they will produce the greatest benefits. We want the resources that are freed up by declining school rolls to be redeployed in schools to reduce class sizes for younger children. We must deliver that major undertaking while continuing to improve the preparedness and quality of new teachers and while addressing the rising retirement levels that we will shortly see in Scottish schools.

I will address those points later in my speech. However, like Mary Mulligan, I know the issues in West Lothian very well indeed. Particular time and attention must be paid to such areas. I spoke to West Lothian Council's director of education on precisely that point only yesterday. As well as providing 300 extra teachers this August, we are setting out our ambitious programme to increase radically the numbers who go through teacher training. Today—this is the first  step—I can announce two additional measures: an immediate increase of at least 250 places in postgraduate teacher training next session, which starts this autumn; and an increase in this year's intakes to the bachelor of education degree, increasing BEd intakes to their highest level in at least a decade. The universities will respond positively and enthusiastically. With 300 new teachers in jobs and 250 additional student teachers, we will inject 550 additional teachers into our education system. After only a month in office, we are already working to meet other parties' demands for 1,000 new teachers. The increases in the number entering teacher training are only the beginning of the progress that we need to make. Following the autumn workforce planning exercise, I will announce still further increases in intakes for the one-year teacher training programme.

I am sorry, but I need to move on. We will also announce significant growth for the first time in recent years in the number of primary teachers who will qualify via the BEd. For two decades or more, changes to initial teacher education for primary teachers have come through the one-year route. However, the teaching profession is clear that the four-year route allows newly qualifying teachers to make a more confident start in the profession. In truth, the one-year and four-year routes attract different types of high-quality teacher and it is important that each is kept as a healthy and stimulating route into the profession. However, we need to return them to a better balance than they have had over the past few years. Therefore, we will look to increase significantly the number of places on BEd courses throughout Scotland from 2008-09, building on the more modest increases that we will be able to achieve in a few weeks, when the next academic session begins. Alongside innovations in degree content—such as those developed by the University of Aberdeen in its Scottish teachers for a new era programme—I want provision in initial teacher education to diversify, with more specialisms in science, expressive arts and early years learning. To deliver smaller class sizes, we need not only more teachers but more space. That is why, last week, I released an extra £40 million of capital to enable councils to bring forward spending, creating space in later years for the necessary changes to accommodation to meet class-size reductions—a point that was raised earlier.  The cost of the early years package, the additional nursery hours, the 300 extra teachers and the 250 extra student teachers that I announced today is £25 million this year. We are making those investments because we believe that education has the power to transform life chances and that creating a smarter Scotland has the power to transform the country's prospects. If we get it right, we will energise an entire generation to care about healthy lifestyles, to be proud of its heritage, to be outward looking, ambitious and able to contribute economically, to think about its impact on the environment and, overall, to increase its chances of making a positive contribution to a modern Scotland. At nursery or school, in community-based education or in further and higher education, learning must give people the skills that they need for life and work. The modern Scottish workforce must be dynamic, responsive, creative and innovative. All our young people should have the opportunity to develop an awareness of the world of work and of the practical and attitudinal skills that they will need to succeed in it. I plan to ensure that all children have opportunities in school to learn and develop those skills, and I plan to release the great potential of school and college links to make those opportunities a reality. We will ensure that it is never too late to help people gain the skills and receive the high-quality advice and guidance that are needed to unlock their potential, through supporting opportunities for adults to re-engage with education in colleges and universities and through community and work-based learning. As our skills strategy will set out, the lifelong learning agenda is key to achieving a smarter, wealthier, greener, healthier and safer Scotland. A smarter Scotland will promote excellence and innovation. We want to make a step change in translating our research ideas into economic output. We need to make more of the excellence in our colleges and universities, creating connections and incentives that will turn highly skilled people and innovative research into economic productivity for Scotland. We will maintain a competitive learning system that generates ideas in education, science and research that will make Scotland a magnet for economic growth, putting science to work to underpin our health, wealth and well-being as a nation. Learning is a powerful good in its own right, and it is a necessary driver of self-development. It is also a powerful enabler of much of what the Government wants to achieve. Learning allows individuals, families and communities to prosper. It can help to reduce inequalities and to enhance responsible and active citizenship. Learning will create a smarter Scotland. That means training the public sector and the wider workforce to  support a fairer and safer Scotland, meeting green challenges and developing a healthier and safer Scotland where people take responsibility for their own and one another's health and well-being. The Government's smarter Scotland objective is about making the most of Scotland's great people potential. The challenges are significant, but so is the prize. I relish the opportunity that the Government has to ensure that Scotland is renowned as a smart, learning nation that is built on firm foundations, that is freeing up its talent and ambition and that is creating opportunities for all its people to flourish and excel.

Answer.

We are currently considering various options to trial the extension of free nutritious school meals. We will set out details of our plans in due course. As the First Minister said last week, we hope that our plans will be supported by all members of the Parliament. We want Scotland to be healthier and, by targeting our youngest pupils, we hope to make a big difference. That will bring benefits not only in terms of health and nutrition, but in terms of the social skills that come with sitting down to eat with friends.

When we consider which areas to include in the pilot, we will of course take into account a number of factors, not least deprivation. Although I cannot speak for local authorities such as Glasgow City Council—I must seek their agreement to hold the pilot—the highly concerning deprivation indicators that Bob Doris mentioned make a strong case for the inclusion in the scheme of the area to which he refers. I cannot yet specify where the trials will be held, but we will listen with interest to representatives of the areas that want to take part in them.

I am delighted to be given this opportunity to announce to the Parliament details of a proposal from the new Scottish Government that will benefit graduates, their prospective employers and the Scottish economy in the widest sense. As Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, I am committed to taking an holistic approach to lifelong learning, focusing on education in our children's earliest years; on supporting children and families; on improving learning in schools; on developing skills for, and in, work; and on promoting excellent teaching and research in our colleges and universities. Together, those policies will contribute to ensuring that learning will be lifelong for everyone. This Government's pledge is to create a more successful country that will flourish through increasing sustainable economic growth. That is the overriding purpose towards which we will work in government. To do so, we must ensure that a modern Scotland is one where everyone can fulfil their economic, social and personal potential to the fullest possible extent and that any barriers that prevent them from doing so are removed. That is why I announce our determination to honour our manifesto commitment to abolish the graduate endowment fee. Subject to other parties in the Parliament agreeing to legislate, students who are about to graduate this summer, students who are currently at university, students who are about to enter university this autumn and all subsequent students will no longer have to pay the graduate endowment fee. The fact that around 50,000 students will no longer be asked to pay a graduate endowment fee of more than £2,000 is good news for them, for their families and for Scotland, but it will happen only if other parties who already have commitments in that area support us. I am hopeful of persuading others that our proposal is in not only the national interest, but the interest of the public purse. Although the cost of abolishing the graduate endowment fee is approximately £15 million net, after allowing for administration and accounting charges, I can still guarantee that the amount of  money that is distributed to students through bursaries and grants this year will not be adversely affected by our proposal—we will continue to fund them directly. Some 10,000 people a year are liable to pay the graduate endowment fee, which is set at the beginning of a student's course and which stands at just under £2,300. The background to it is well known. It was introduced by a previous Government in 2001 as part of a new system of student support, which was based on the principles established by the Cubie committee that student support should promote social inclusion and enhance civic society, and that barriers to widening access and participation should be removed. Those are sound principles, which apply just as much today as they did when Dr Cubie published his work. However, the graduate endowment fee is a tool that has failed to deliver those aims in a modern Scotland. I believe that the basic principle of Scottish education is that it should be based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. My announcement is a critical step towards achieving that vision not just for today's students, but for tomorrow's, as well as for their families, for our society and for the whole of Scotland. Opening up access to higher education for everyone, regardless of their location, background or personal situation, is a key component of fully releasing the potential of Scotland's people. Our country's demographic challenges over the next 20 years mean that we must make the most of the opportunities for all our people and must give everyone the chance to make the fullest possible contribution to economic and civic life. Our vision of a smarter Scotland is one in which the benefits of education are spread widely and equitably. That will be possible in the context of higher education only if access to it is driven by ability alone. For some people who have the ability to succeed, the existing structures act as barriers to their future success. The graduate endowment fee is one such barrier. We cannot let it stand in any young Scot's way. The graduate endowment fee is an example of a policy that was formed when parties with different views adopted a compromise that has benefited no one and which has clearly failed. It has failed our graduates and their families by burdening them with excessive debt; it has failed our most vulnerable youngsters by creating financial barriers to accessing higher education; and it has failed the Scottish taxpayer by not raising the level of income that was initially projected. The graduate endowment fee is clearly an inefficient way of raising income. In the three years in which it has been in operation, two thirds of the students who were due to pay the fee have not  paid it back directly, but have simply added it to their student loan. The costs associated with the resulting interest rate subsidy mean that the taxpayer loses around one third of the income collected. In fact, the taxpayer recoups the income in real monetary terms only after 13 years—that is how long it takes for the money to be repaid in full to the Government. As well as being inefficient, the graduate endowment fee is difficult to collect. More than 1,400 of the graduates who were liable in April this year have yet to respond to payment letters from the Student Awards Agency for Scotland. That is equivalent to almost £3 million in potential income. Three cohorts of graduates are liable to pay the graduate endowment fee, their liability having arisen on 1 April in 2005, 2006 and 2007. At the very most, £12.7m has been paid back in cash, with more than twice as much—£26.3m—having been added to student loans. In three years, the princely sum of only £47,000 of that £26.3m has been returned to the taxpayer. It is clear to me that the graduate endowment fee is a complicated and inefficient way of generating money for student support. Not only does it impact on graduates as a back-end tuition fee, but the law on the matter states that not one penny of the fee can go towards paying for learning or teaching at university. That is the worst of both worlds. With the taxpayer, graduates and Scotland losing out, it is difficult to see whom the arrangement has ever benefited. Abolishing the complicated and inefficient graduate endowment fee is the smart thing to do. Fear of debt is a real and growing concern for many prospective students. The average amount of debt has increased to around £13,000. Many people who have benefited from access to higher education, including members of the Parliament, may not have participated if faced with the fear of such debt, particularly at a young age. The age participation index, which measures the proportion of young Scots who are engaged in higher education, has fallen since the graduate endowment fee was introduced from 51.5 per cent in 2001-02 to 47.1 per cent in 2005-06. Believe it or not, for the first time since the reformation, there has been a drop in the share of the population studying in higher education in Scotland. Given that participation had previously risen each year, it is clear that the fear of debt is real and is a factor in the choices that young people make when they leave school. Evidence also shows that young people from low-income backgrounds are the most debt averse. Our system should contain the widest possible incentives so that as many people as possible with the ability to enjoy and participate in the higher education experience can do so. Young  people from areas of multiple deprivation should have wider access to higher education and, although efforts on this have increased recently, the proportion of entrants to university who come from deprived areas of Scotland has still not changed significantly over the past five years. Fear of debt can and does act as a brake on the aspirations of people from our poorest and most disadvantaged communities and moves us away from a Scottish education system that should be based on ability to learn. Therefore, it must be wrong to burden our graduates with debt and deny them every possible opportunity to contribute to a wealthier and fairer Scotland. It is wrong that they should begin their working lives encumbered by financial pressures, and that is a wrong that the new Scottish Government intends to put right. If we reduce the burden of debt, graduates will start to gain the full benefits of employment as soon as they leave university, get on with their lives freely, make the ambitious career decisions that will help to power Scotland's economy and make personal choices that will allow them to lead a fulfilling life in this country. Is it not much better that a graduate's money should go towards buying their first home or starting their first business than that it be lost and spent instead on the first of many debt repayments? I will now set out how and when we plan to deliver the abolition of the graduate endowment fee. The fee was introduced by the Education (Graduate Endowment and Student Support) (Scotland) Act 2001, and we will introduce primary legislation to repeal the relevant parts of the act. We want as many people as possible to benefit from the change as soon as possible. That is why I am announcing that with, and only with, parliamentary approval, students who are about to graduate this summer, students who are currently at university, students who are about to enter university this autumn and all subsequent students will no longer have to pay the graduate endowment fee. That will relieve all those who become liable to pay the fee on 1 April 2008 and all students who graduate in subsequent years. To achieve that, we will introduce legislation that we hope will come into force by 1 April 2008. I am aware that that is a tight timescale but it is the most effective way of abolishing the graduate endowment fee. It will give the Student Awards Agency for Scotland enough time to notify students who graduate this summer and notify people who will enter university this autumn of our plans, subject to parliamentary approval. I look forward to support from across the chamber for what I have announced. I ask parties who may not have called for abolition previously to consider the compelling public finance arguments in favour of our proposals.  I intend to consult on the principle of abolishing the graduate endowment fee this summer—I will seek the views of all those involved on the benefits that that will bring. Following that consultation, and subject to the views that are expressed to me, my intention is to introduce a bill in the autumn. With parliamentary support, we have an opportunity to make an important difference for students currently at university—many of whom are sitting their final exams now or are waiting on their results as we speak. I have no doubt that student loans and the graduate endowment fee act as a disincentive to our youngsters when they consider going into higher education. This Government has three central proposals to reform the current student support arrangements: the abolition of the graduate endowment fee; replacement of student loans with means-tested grants; and relieving the burden of debt repayments by Scottish students. In my first few days as cabinet secretary I began working with my officials on the options for the second and third of those proposals. That work is continuing actively and detailed proposals will be considered as part of the spending review. Abolishing the graduate endowment fee is an important first step for us in delivering those commitments and I am pleased to announce our intention to do so today. I look forward to working with parties across the chamber to deliver a package of student support that delivers the smarter, wealthier and fairer Scotland that this Government seeks. We live in a global economy and our key economic resource is our people. Graduates from Scottish universities are among the brightest and the best in the global pool of talent and they contribute enormously to the economic and social lifeblood of our country and other countries across the world. Reducing graduate debt is therefore an investment in our future, in our people and in our economy. It is a statement of belief in Scotland's people and it acknowledges that, in order to compete, we need to remove obstacles that hold people back. We need to take active steps to ensure that in the future the Scottish economy is supplied with the graduates that it needs in order to prosper and that everyone who has the ability has the opportunity to be involved in the higher education experience. We made it clear in our manifesto that we would cut student indebtedness. I believe that abolishing the graduate endowment fee will show the people of Scotland that we are committed to that and that we are making progress in the early days of this Government.  Abolishing the graduate endowment fee as soon as possible is an integral part of realising our vision of a smarter Scotland; a Scotland in which educational and academic achievement throughout life are possible; a Scotland—renowned through the years as a "learning nation"—where people learn for their and our future. That will inspire a competitive, sustainable economy for a wealthier and fairer Scotland. That is why we want to move quickly, and why I call for the support of the Parliament. We need that support to do what we know will make a measurable difference to our people, our society, our economy and the future of Scotland.

Did he listen to the statement?

Hugh Henry's praise for the announcement reflected his usual generosity. This Government will deliver on its manifesto commitments, unlike other Governments. Within three and a half weeks, we have made proposals to tackle student indebtedness and abolish tuition fees. I seem to recall a certain other Government that promised, before 1997, to get of top-up fees and not introduce them, but three months later it did indeed decide to introduce top-up fees. We need to study the issues to do with university funding very closely indeed. That is why I met the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council and university principals last week, to discuss with them the need for more detailed information. They want to supply that information so that we can make progress. On Friday, I will meet the principals of the Scottish  colleges to discuss the same issues. That is what this responsible Government will do. Mr Henry talks about the problems facing probationary teachers. Responsibility for those problems lies with Mr Henry's Government, which caused the difficulties when it was in power. If he wants reassurance, I say to him that I hope to come to Parliament before the recess to make announcements on what I will do to help to tackle the problems that Mr Henry's party caused in education. Had Mr Henry been listening to my statement, he would have realised that this is the first step of our progress. Our proposals are ambitious because we believe in an ambitious Scotland. We want all the people of Scotland to be involved, which will mean ensuring that children and young people from deprived areas have access to higher education and are not prevented from gaining such access, as they were under Mr Henry's Administration.

Many students and parents will be deeply disappointed that the member does not think that student hardship and £13,000 of debt on graduation is a real issue. It is a very real issue for many families. The member talks about responsible government. It is responsible to introduce the proposals that we have introduced. He calls for an independent review. It would be hasty and inappropriate to conduct an independent review a matter of weeks before decisions have to be made on the delivery of the spending review. England will not review the cap on variable fees until 2009, with implementation expected thereafter. The situation in England is certainly a case for a spending review, but for the next spending review after this. That is a responsible way forward to ensure that we reach the right decisions for universities with regard to investment and teaching, in order—as I said in my answer to Hugh Henry—to maximise the potential not just of our people, but of our institutions.

Yes. I ask members to bear with me; I will be pleased to answer questions subsequently if I miss any now and if the member wishes to write to me. I welcome support from the Liberal Democrats on the proposal. Together, we can abolish the graduate endowment fee, as is our intention. The member asked an important question about what we can do for students who have already paid the graduate endowment fee—a point that Hugh Henry also raised. We have great sympathy for graduates who have had to pay the graduate endowment fee. We voted against the fee while we were in opposition, but unfortunately the previous Administration introduced it. As a general rule, law is applied retrospectively only in exceptional cases and only with the consent of the law officers. In this case, the operational burden of such a move would be prohibitive. We would like to move forward quickly, but the issue of retrospectivity would pose a problem. The member asked whether we would continue with the young student bursaries. The answer is yes. The problem is that the young student bursaries cost an estimated £65 million. As the member heard me say, the graduate endowment brings in only £15 million, so it meets only a proportion of the cost of the bursaries. We will continue to pay the bursary directly.  The member spoke about our manifesto commitments. The people of Scotland will be delighted that, over a period of just weeks, the Scottish National Party has said not only that it will do things, but that it will introduce legislation to deliver on its manifesto commitments. That is a bit different from the experience that we have had to date. On the importance of university funding, I agree with the member that we must protect and promote our universities as world-class institutions. That is what I said when I met university principals at a Scottish funding council meeting only last week. I will pursue that in government. With the support of colleagues, I am sure that we will come to a solution that helps everyone.

I cannot give the member an immediate answer on that point, but I will come back to him. I would have thought that the member, as a former leader of the National Union of Students Scotland, would recognise the importance of tackling the fear of debt, particularly for people from more deprived areas, to allow them to participate in education. The member is concerned about other aspects of our manifesto—we are quite happy to implement our commitments. Labour included a number of commitments, not least on class sizes, in its previous manifesto but, four years later, the Government had not implemented them. Introducing manifesto commitments in three and a half weeks is pretty good going.

The member addresses the central point. If we want a well-educated graduate economy, we must at least maintain the number of graduates in that economy. Under the previous Administration, that number went down. Another interesting point about that survey concerns the percentage of students from areas of multiple deprivation who are accessing university. Good work is being done to improve the situation, but that percentage has remained static over the past five years, at only 12 per cent.

The member raises a serious issue, which I am already addressing with officials—indeed, it is one of the issues that I addressed when I spoke to the university principals last week. When we provide the detail of what we will require going into the comprehensive spending review, the geographical needs of Scotland, the articulation between colleges and universities and provision, particularly in the Highlands and Islands—and, indeed, abroad—are areas that I, as cabinet secretary with responsibility for lifelong learning, will be keen to progress. I would be happy to meet the member if he has any suggestions that he would like the Government to bring forward in that regard.

The member refers to the situation whereby English medical students were being charged more to try to deter them. Of course, we saw from the figures that that policy did not work. We think that there should be equity and fairness. Our issue, as the Government, is that we have to prioritise the most important issue to address, which, at the moment, is abolition of the graduate endowment fee. To those who complain, as the member's colleague Boris Johnson does, about English students having to pay fees when  they come to Scotland, I say that we have to reflect that independence would mean that English students would be treated exactly the same as French and German students. The member therefore makes a very good case as to why Scotland should be independent.

The member will acknowledge that the Government will look to Ireland for many examples of good practice. Abolishing fees and increasing levels of participation, which he cited, form one such example. We have to have responsibility in how we increase participation among those from more deprived areas in Scotland, and that will be a priority of this Government.

On the issue of investment in teachers, I have indicated that the legacy left to us by the previous Administration—of probationers who are trained but who have no jobs in our classrooms—is very sad indeed and is causing difficulty and heartache for many individuals. However, I have taken early action to see what we can do about that, and I intend to make an announcement to Parliament. On higher education funding in Scotland compared with other areas, I think that our universities are well funded. The argument that is being put forward is about what happens when the tuition fee cap is lifted in England. As I said in answer to a previous question, that is not due to be reviewed until 2009 and implementation would follow thereafter. We must ensure that we have a good deal for universities in this comprehensive spending review, but it would be a mistake to indicate that universities are somehow cash strapped, because universities do not want to be given that description at this stage. They want a good, fair deal that takes them forward.  I say to Murdo Fraser that the issue is that we have to make decisions in the weeks ahead in the comprehensive spending review for this session, but we also have to look forward. It is not just about competing with England; universities have to compete abroad, so we have to consider what is happening in Asia, America and other places. We will not have a successful Scotland if we have a well-resourced university base but students who cannot afford to study there. That is why we have to have a twin-track approach that involves supporting our universities in terms of research and teaching and also ensuring that our students are not encumbered with excess debt that holds back them and their families and puts a millstone of debt around their necks. Today, we have shown how an inventive, creative Government with a will to deliver on its manifesto can produce a result that not only works for individuals, but makes better use of public finances.

On the latter point, I would be reluctant to give any commitments without looking at the details of the books, as I am sure the member will appreciate. I have not been able to visit the hundreds and thousands of civil servants who are located across Scotland but I know, from some of the papers that I have received, that there is a unit that deals with widening-access priorities. I am not sure of the name of that policy team, but I will find out its name and write to the member so that he knows what it is called. I am familiar to some extent with the GOALS project, which has been successful in Lanarkshire and gives young people an opportunity to find out where they want to go after school and opportunities while they are in school. One of the debates about widening access concerns whether it is the responsibility of schools or universities. However, it is the responsibility of schools and universities. Much can be done in schools to inspire young people and to widen their aspirations and enable them to understand that they can achieve their goals, whether or not those goals relate to higher education. I will be pleased  to find out more about the GOALS project, should I ever visit Lanarkshire.

We will monitor the impact of that policy. We think that fear of debt is one of the biggest barriers that prevents those from the more deprived backgrounds from entering higher education. Alex Neil mentioned the Conservatives. I was trying to be gentle to Murdo Fraser and not remind him of his party's past policies. He was quite keen to quote the SNP's 2003 manifesto, but I was being rather gallant—perhaps the fact that I was being gallant tells us something about this Parliament's equal opportunities policies—and did not remind him of his party's previous manifesto commitments. We have heard arguments about responsible Government. We know that the Conservatives want to ensure that we have astute public finances. I ask members to reflect on the inefficiencies that arise through the policy of delivering student support via the graduate endowment fee. We might as well cut out the middle man and give people the money directly, which will ensure that students are not burdened by current levels of debt.

I am concerned that the member might be getting overexcited at the pace of the SNP's announcements in recent weeks. As I said, I am working with my officials and drawing up the plans that are required. We want to implement those. As the member is new to the Parliament—I welcome him and I think that he will bring flavour and colour to the Parliament—I suggest that he reads the Official Reports from the summer of 1999 and the summer of 2003. He should count the number of manifesto commitments that the Labour and Liberal Democrat Scottish Executives actually delivered.

I do not know whether the member was in the chamber when we debated the Government's wealthier and fairer objective, but if he was he would know that every speech in the open debate, and my closing speech, addressed exactly the points that he raises. We have put the education and lifelong learning portfolios together because we want a lifelong learning approach to skills, which, unfortunately, we have not had in the past. We want to build on the previous Executive's work. If we believe genuinely in the new politics, let us embrace it and have the Labour Party's contribution to the Scottish skills strategy.

He must be a clairvoyant.

I welcome the opportunity that the Labour Party has provided to discuss skills and vocational education, following the many speeches—including my own—that have been made on education as part of the Government's debate on the objective of a wealthier and fairer Scotland. I also welcome the support for the terms of our amendment, if not necessarily for the amendment itself. The Government will support learning for life and learning throughout life—from early education to supporting children, families and communities; improving learning in schools; developing skills for and in work; and promoting excellence, innovation, science and research. We know that our teaching and learning are world class and that people can and do take advantage of them to improve their life chances, but there are key challenges that we must address. We must make it clear that learning truly is for everyone. We must demonstrate how it can have a lasting and positive impact on many areas of life and we must develop policies and processes that make things easy for everyone to understand and make use of Scotland's learning systems to improve their contribution to people's work, lives and communities. We intend to start the process by developing a Scottish skills strategy that covers early years provision, schools, further and higher education, work-related learning and informal learning opportunities. The new strategy will outline our aims, ambitions and plans for making Scotland's skills base truly world class. I hope that it will be warmly received not only in the chamber but outside it.

I recognise that the Liberal Democrats have spent the money in the comprehensive spending review before it has taken place, but responsible government means that we must have processes. This morning, I will  invite the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council to provide more detailed proposals from the universities for the comprehensive spending review bid. We have started work on the Scottish skills strategy. We intend to have a draft strategy available to take forward by the end of our Administration's first 100 days. It is important to us that we develop the strategy co-operatively, using structures such as the skills committee of the Scottish funding council and working with employers and trade unions so that the strategy becomes a vision that we can all champion for the benefit of Scotland. The review of skills that was led by Lord Leitch was published in December 2006. That review sought to make the United Kingdom a world leader in skills by 2020. The Scottish skills strategy will be our response to that review. Scotland has distinct institutions, qualifications and experience and how we achieve our vision for skills will necessarily reflect that. With the exception of London, Scotland has fewer lower-skilled people and more higher-skilled people than anywhere else in the UK. However, there are productivity challenges that we must address. We will focus on Scottish approaches to Scottish issues—that will drive our strategy. The modern Scottish workforce must be dynamic, responsive, creative and innovative. A wider learning culture is the foundation on which our future prosperity and success must be built. All learning must be relevant, exciting and inspirational. Learning is about more than teaching content and subjects. We must ensure that it develops young people who are excited by it to be creative, ambitious and conscious of their own health and well-being, and that it equips them with the core skills that they need—not only literacy and numeracy but team-working, communication and adaptability skills. All our young people should have the opportunity to develop awareness of the world of work and the practical skills that they may need to succeed in it. I do not agree that there should be a segregated approach to skills for work, as presented in the motion.

I am conscious of the time and must move on. We will place science, modern languages and technology at the heart of education. We must enthuse young people about science from the earliest ages and not deal with the matter post-16, as the motion suggests. It is not a matter of making structural changes through creating skills academies or science centres of excellence—it is  about challenging the perception that vocational qualifications are for the less able or that there should be only a post-16 focus on science. I do not want a two-tier education system. I believe in vocational opportunities and active choices for all, based on individual aspirations and abilities. Everyone needs vocational skills, regardless of the industry in which they work or their occupation. There should be parity of esteem for all qualifications. Learning does not stop when we leave school; every stage of life brings opportunities to participate in it. College learning opportunities in particular can help to tackle the biggest challenge that we face in education, which is improving the experience and performance of the lowest-attaining young people in our society. We must harness the energies of our learning and education partners better so that we can become more adept at providing effective and relevant opportunities. That is why improved school-college links are the way forward. The Opposition parties must not underrate the ability of colleges or sideline them in the skills agenda. In conclusion, our vision of a smarter Scotland is one in which educational and academic achievements throughout life make a real and measurable difference to the lives of all our people. We believe that skills are the key to unlocking the potential of all our people. The Scottish skills strategy that the Government has announced today will help us to do that. We look forward to developing the strategy with the Parliament. I move amendment S3M-126.3, to leave out from "recognises" to end and insert: "notes the concerns raised by the business community about the shortage of school leavers proficient in science and technical subjects; believes that there is a need for more vocational skills experience for 14 to 18-year-olds, including improvements in school/college links and increased focus on the teaching of science in schools, and notes the Scottish Government's decision to develop a Scottish skills strategy to help deliver the skills needed for 21st century Scotland."

There is a genuine shared concern to improve skills opportunities. What the rest of us would like to hear about is where the skills academies would be sited. If they involve enhanced technical departments in schools and better use of links between schools and colleges, we can agree, but if they involve 100 separate and segregated institutions, we cannot.

I, too, congratulate all those who have made their first speeches in the chamber today—like Iain Gray, I counted nine. Without exception, each of them was thoughtful and sincere. I wish all our new MSPs well. Each of them will bring a new flavour and tone to the work of the Parliament, together with their range of different experiences. The Government's central purpose is to focus public services on creating a more successful country, with opportunities for all Scotland to flourish through increasing sustainable economic growth. Scotland can be wealthier and fairer; it can also be smarter. Both those Government objectives need to be championed and they both need to be developed in their own right, with their connections promoted, too. Those objectives are shared among all the cabinet secretaries.  As Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, I will take an holistic approach to early education, supporting children and families, improving learning in schools, developing skills for work and promoting excellent innovation, science and research in our colleges and universities. It is about learning for life and learning throughout life. I would say in response to John Park that my role is to support the people who will deliver the competitiveness that we seek for a wealthier, fairer country: the pupils, researchers, teachers, academics, apprentices, trainees, investors, innovators and scientists.

I ask the member to let me continue. I will comment now on the wealthier agenda. As many members have done, I endorse John Swinney's vision of a new economic approach. Lower business tax, deregulation, improved infrastructure and a more focused enterprise strategy are key building blocks for a more successful Scotland.

I acknowledge that Johann Lamont and other women MSPs have championed equal opportunities, which have been at the heart of the Parliament. As a woman in the new Government, I pledge to continue that work. I turn to some of the issues that were raised in the debate. Elizabeth Smith and others mentioned vocational education. The debate is about how we drive it forward for all and whether it is just for some or whether we have a two-tier system. The Parliament will hear that debate, on which I certainly have views. Wendy Alexander said in her contradictory speech that enterprise policy was not about structure but about strategy. Iain Gray then said that it was not about strategy but about structure. Wendy Alexander proceeded to focus on the SNP structure of Government, whereby we have given lead responsibility for lifelong learning to a cabinet secretary, while the previous Executive gave it to a deputy minister—the late lamented Allan Wilson. We heard Labour and Conservative support for cutting business rates. We heard from Derek  Brownlee about the impact on town centres. Iain Gray might want to ask the former First Minister to reflect on Labour's achievements in promoting the town centres of Lanarkshire. I was at the Bathgate traders forum last night, which supported and applauded the prospect of business rate reductions to help the town centres of West Lothian. Many members mentioned the education agenda. There is increasing evidence of the importance of the contribution that early years services can make in improving outcomes in later life. The best start is an early start. This Administration is committed to making early years provision and early intervention a key plank in our wealthier and fairer Scotland. Economic growth is a critical objective, but it is the characteristics of growth that will underpin success. On the fairness agenda, we heard from members throughout the chamber about what the characteristics of growth should be. For this Government, Scottish economic growth will have the characteristic of solidarity, with overall wealth to increase the proportion of national wealth for the poorest in our society. We heard about that from Bob Doris and David Whitton. There has to be cohesion for the wealth of every region to increase and for the 10 per cent GDP disparity per head between the richest and poorest parts of Scotland to be addressed and reduced. Those points were made by John Lamont and Hugh O'Donnell. We will also have the measure of sustainability. I return to the role of lifelong learning. Learning has to reflect an increasingly complex world. It has to be relevant, exciting and inspirational throughout the journey that children make from the age of three to 18. We want to improve the opportunities for education, employment and training for all young people, which is the point that Alex Neil made. We want all young people to become responsible citizens, effective contributors, successful learners and confident individuals. That is one of the policies that Peter Peacock promoted when he was Minister for Education and Young People. I pledge to continue with it and in doing so I hope that I will receive the support of many members. Jeremy Purvis talked about science, research, excellence and innovation. We need to continue our investment in further and higher education institutions to continue to deliver a highly skilled workforce for the future. Investment decisions are part of the comprehensive spending review and the importance of the continued excellence and competitiveness of Scottish universities will be reflected in those discussions.

I need to move on. I am conscious of time. We need to encourage science graduates and embrace a research base that attracts world-class scientists from around the world. We have a particularly vibrant life science and medical science research community, which we need to support. We need to make a step change in translating the output of research into sustainable wealth creation by tackling both the business demand and research supply aspects. Scotland is and has historically been a learning nation. That is exemplified by our long-established commitment to universal school provision, our ancient universities and our disproportionately large contribution to industry, invention, literature, philosophy, commerce, philanthropy and politics, all of which have shaped the world that we know today. We need to maintain that for the future. Scotland, the learning nation of the past, will develop into a learning nation for the future, inspiring a competitive, sustainable economy for a wealthier and fairer Scotland.

Will the member give way?

Perhaps Mr Rumbles might want to itemise the individual policies that the Labour Party has prevented his party from introducing over the past four years.

On behalf of my constituents in the Lothians, I thank the committee for its diligence. It has served the people of West Lothian and Lanarkshire well in its deliberations. I also thank the clerks for their diligence. The parliamentary clerks are very dedicated to their work—none more so than those who serve private bill committees, as private bills are among the most difficult bills to steer through Parliament. I thank Fergus Cochrane, in particular, for his work on the bill. When I was growing up in Ayr, George Younger was the local member of Parliament. Phil Gallie, his successor, had a hard act to follow. However, regardless of whether people voted for Phil, the people of Ayr always knew that they had an MP who fought for them. I thank Phil Gallie for taking on that role. It is interesting that, for somebody who opposed the establishment of the Scottish Parliament, he has been a vocal, diligent and effective member of the Parliament. He will be missed by members of all parties. This is an important bill. In reminiscing about my childhood in Ayr, I reflect on the fact that, a few weeks ago, I attended an event for two West Lothian councillors—Jim Sibbald of Armadale and Audrey Gordon of Boghall in Bathgate—who will retire in a few weeks' time and who have served as councillors for 20 or 30 years. However, it was Councillor David Ramsey who was instrumental in getting the Bathgate to Edinburgh line opened and it was Robert Kerr, a West Lothian county  councillor in the 1960s, who was behind the petition to reopen it. In the 1980s, we managed to get the successful Bathgate to Edinburgh line opened; in the future, the Airdrie to Bathgate line, too, will be effective and will be well used. It was extremely good that the committee made Network Rail, North Lanarkshire Council and West Lothian Council return to explain further points and pursue particular issues. I pay tribute to the people of West Lothian Council, who have worked hard to respond to some of the issues that the committee raised—especially the housing issue. The benefit cost ratio of the line was originally estimated at 1.81. Network Rail has said that the station at Blackridge, which has been a point of contention, will reduce the benefit cost ratio to 1.71. It was interesting that, when the responses came back from the councils regarding what the future housing developments would be, the benefit cost ratio was revised. In Armadale, 2,000 houses are planned. In Blackridge, there are currently 750 houses and another 750 are planned. In Whitburn, on the Polkemmet site, which is very near the line, 2,000 houses are planned, although there will perhaps be another 1,000 and the developer is hopeful of building up to 5,000—that will be a major development in the area. The revised benefit cost ratio was 1.92, and that was without the Blackridge station. If the Blackridge station is included—and it is recognised that there may be some footfall issues—the benefit cost ratio, with the proposals for housing development, might be the same as it would have been for the original proposals without the Blackridge station. So, things can move on. In that spirit, I want to look forward. Fergus Ewing gives his apologies for having to leave the chamber for a moment. He was characteristically modest in failing to mention that he visited Blackridge. He went to the old station house and saw where the lines would go. I am delighted that the SNP has made a public commitment to legislate for and fund the building of the Blackridge station. We look forward to seeing the Scottish transport appraisal guidance appraisal for the Plains station, to ensure that we have a proposal that fits both stations.

I am sorry. I did not quite catch what the member said. It is important that we recognise—

Sorry. I will give way.

I think that there is an outstanding invitation. I represent the Lothians. Not only did Fergus Ewing visit Blackridge, he visited the Avon gorge, which has one of the most difficult stretches of road—it has a 15 per cent gradient—and is a problematic area for the people of West Lothian. I look forward to Fergus Ewing as transport minister delivering on the Avon gorge road as well as the Blackridge station. Interestingly, I looked at one of Mary Mulligan's 2003 election addresses, when she said that she looked forward to the Bathgate to Airdrie line being open by 2007. Perhaps that was a hope rather than an expectation. Under the current proposals, the line will be reopened in 2010, when it will make a constructive contribution to the local economy. We have to look forward. The bill committee, the minister, the civil service and everyone who has been involved in the project so far are, in many ways, handing over a baton. The MSPs in the next session of Parliament will have to drive the project forward and ensure that Network Rail delivers on time, that Transport Scotland delivers on its recommendations and that the project is monitored effectively. This is an important job for the Parliament. It is fitting that this bill should be one of the final bills that will be passed in this session. The objective now is to proceed with the job so that the line can reopen for the benefit of the people of West Lothian and Lanarkshire.

Is the member aware of the SNP's policy to introduce a Scottish futures trust, which would be able to issue the required bonds? Is he aware that every contract will be continued and that PPP will be squeezed out for a better, not-for-profit, alternative?

I agree with the member. The SNP amendment identifies the need for a more rounded education system. We recognise all the points that he raises.

I greatly appreciated the minister's list of visits to schools in marginal constituencies with Labour members who are in their final days in office. The SNP is pleased to congratulate teachers, other staff and pupils on their role in contributing to excellent teaching and learning in the Scottish education system. Government can provide stewardship, leadership and direction, but the heart and dynamo of Scottish education are the teachers, other staff and pupils, and it is they who should receive plaudits from the Parliament for their efforts in delivering teaching and improving learning. Since this is likely to be his last debate in the Scottish Parliament, I would like to give the best wishes of the Scottish National Party to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton. [ Applause. ] We may not have agreed with all of his policies as a former education minister, but we should put on record our recognition of his public service, and in particular his role in steering the important Children (Scotland) Act 1995, which holds the interests of children as paramount in Scots law. The duty of politicians is to look to the future, and to offer fresh thinking and a new approach. The SNP will do that today. The Executive's claims for success go so far back that its motion looks like a tribute to Sam Galbraith. Indeed, many of the points in the motion reflect the McCrone agreement, with its genesis in the previous century. Indeed, its content and disposition could be characterised as so last century. The Executive may look backwards, but we will look forwards. Our education system must match and draw out every child's potential. Early intervention and support is critical for success. We would, for example, increase nursery provision by 50 per cent, to give every child access to a nursery teacher, starting with provision for those from the most deprived backgrounds. It is such a pity that the Government has failed to expand nursery provision, despite promising to do so in 2005. Children with additional support needs should have those needs identified early if possible, and services from agencies should be provided promptly. Initial teacher training needs to be revamped to give training in supporting special needs. Teachers' co-ordinated continuous professional development programmes on additional support needs must be driven forward. Class sizes matter in the delivery of one-to-one attention to deliver firm foundations for life. Labour and the Liberal Democrats have dropped their  pledge and changed the goalposts on class size reductions. There are too few teachers and they cannot get permanent jobs, and there are too many pupils in classes that are too big. The reality in Scottish schools is that 41 per cent of primary 1 pupils are in classes of more than 25, and 48 per cent of new teachers are unable to find permanent positions. Scotland should be cutting class sizes to 18 in the first three years of primary and delivering firm foundations for learning and more one-to-one support from teachers for reading and writing.

Margo MacDonald makes a good point. Indeed, in the debate on the Crichton campus at lunch time, the issue was raised in relation to Dumfries and Galloway. Perhaps one of the ways in which we can ensure that teachers are not only on the register but employed in classrooms is to work on that with the Crichton campus, the University of Glasgow and others. Up until the age of eight, a child learns to read. From then on, they should be reading to learn. Let us help them get the best start in that lifelong learning. Minister, that means recruiting and employing teachers sooner rather than later in a term of Government. In the face of falling school rolls, we should be maintaining teacher numbers to deliver smaller class sizes. Decisions should be made locally to take account of local circumstances. Our schools should be fit for purpose and open for use by all in the community, with playing fields, pitches and halls for use by youngsters.

I want to move on. We should be introducing a baccalaureate as a group award in highers for top performance, first in languages and then in science, to encourage pupils to take those subjects in school, college and university. We should be making available vocational education opportunities for all pupils over 14, to encourage them to excel where they can. Vocational learning should have parity of esteem with academic learning. All the parties signed up to that in 2003, but no progress has been made by the Executive, and its promises now look hollow.

The SNP plans to maintain teacher numbers in the face of falling school rolls. We will encourage people to become teachers, particularly early years, science and language teachers. To encourage them to become science teachers, we have to get pupils to take more than one science—that is what universities are telling us. If we can get them to take more than one science subject at higher level, they will be more likely to take a science course later on. Thinking ahead in that way is part of the SNP's approach to education. We want to ensure that pupils have a sense of themselves and of their country, which is why Scottish history, culture and heritage should be at the heart of the curriculum. We should teach through the Scottish prism and from the Scottish perspective on the world. There is a desperate need to renew the school estate, which deteriorated through lack of investment under Conservative stewardship. Its renewal needs to continue apace. An SNP Government will match the planned school building and refurbishment programme brick for brick. Our not-for-profit trusts will give resources back to teachers, instead of lining bankers' pockets with excess profits. Public-private partnership is Labour's school tax. The cost of Labour's PPPs is almost £1 million for every school in Scotland over 30 years. PPP finance brings with it an opportunity cost that will hold back education in Scotland.

I am in my last minute. The extra cost of PPP finance means that schools will lose at least £900,000 that could be spent on more books, better equipment and more teachers—and that is just a conservative estimate. Leadership in education is about not just technocratic management—as produced by the Executive—but the drive for self-improvement of the individual, society and the nation. Renewing the sense of purpose of all those who are involved in education must be the lodestar of leadership. Opportunity, achievement, progress and confidence are what our children deserve and what our nation needs. The SNP will be delighted to rise to the challenge of driving Scottish education forward to a new era of excellence. I move amendment S2M-5775.3, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "congratulates staff, teachers and pupils in schools and centres across Scotland for the contribution that they are making to the delivery of excellent learning and teaching; recognises that it is the duty of government to provide stewardship to drive standards forward, providing leadership and direction for a strong Scottish education  system for the purpose of self-improvement and a healthier, wealthier and socially and environmentally more responsible Scotland, and notes that the following can all contribute to this aim: early intervention to increase nursery provision and identify and serve additional support needs at an early stage, cutting class sizes in primary 1-3 to 18 and maintaining teacher numbers in the face of falling school rolls to cut class sizes in secondary so that every child gets the attention they deserve and to ensure that essential literacy and numeracy skills are developed, embedding Scottish history, culture and heritage in school life, offering vocational courses from S3 onwards with parity of esteem for academic courses, introducing a new languages and science baccalaureate recognising top performance at Higher level to encourage take-up of these subjects, focussing on support for those pupils particularly from families living in poverty who are currently left behind in society and continuing the planned school building and refurbishment programme but providing councils with an alternative funding scheme to provide better value for money and access to communities and clubs to schools at evenings and weekends."

Does the member agree that a constructive way forward might be to focus on Dumfries and Galloway's teacher recruitment problems? Perhaps ministerial guidance on how the retention of arts and humanities courses can provide people with a route into teaching might help to influence the funding council in its search for a positive outcome.

Will the member give way?

Does the minister think that the Labour Government's approval of the removal of qualified nursery teachers from nursery classes by a Labour council is a backward step in improving the educational attainment of children of nursery age?

The Scottish National Party will support the bill at decision time, but it is interesting to reflect on our long and perhaps tortuous journey to reach where we are now. I agree with the minister that this is not the end of the journey; there is a long way to go. Members will make different policy pronouncements on where the bill takes us, but we must all recognise that the nation must address our eating habits. From a health perspective, if we want to save health service money, it is essential that we change people's behaviour now. As I have done previously, I acknowledge the work of Shona Robison, who has kick-started consideration of issues such as the advertising of junk food and fizzy drinks in schools, but things have gone beyond that. Our debate in the first parliamentary session focused on the content of free school meals and so on, but the word "nutrition" is essential. We must address not only the poverty agenda but the nutrition agenda. We should recognise the good work that is already being done in schools. There is a question about whether we need to legislate to ensure that  schools take the responsibility of promoting themselves as health-promoting schools. In my visits to schools, I have seen the extremely good work that is already being done without the bill having been passed, and I want to put on record that good examples have been developed throughout the country. In particular, I recall from the stage 1 debate the good example of Hurlford primary school, which members of the Communities Committee visited. When we discussed the final amendments to the bill, we talked about global education and understanding where our food comes from internationally, but it is just as important to know where food comes from locally. We must understand the choices that we have. At the end of the day, this is a lifestyle issue, and lifestyle is about our behaviour and personal choices. The more informed young people are about where their food comes from, the more they will be able to make informed choices. Progress is being made. After a health promotion week at my children's school last week, I saw my daughter putting raw spinach into her sandwiches. That is certainly progress. Such things are happening in homes throughout Scotland—things that people might not have expected to happen are happening. We should recognise the good work that is being done in schools. Obviously, I am disappointed that the ministers have not progressed the school meals agenda, as doing so could make a huge difference to the lives of many people. I respect those who argued for universal free school meals in both primary and secondary schools, but the most pragmatic way forward would have been to allow regulations to be produced that would allow ministers to pilot a scheme before rolling it out. Commencement orders would still have been needed for universal free school meals, as schools do not yet have the capacity to deliver in that respect, but they will have under an SNP Government. We should ensure that the right palates are created in the early years. The provision of meals in nurseries is important, but we must remember that many youngsters are not in nursery schools for long enough to get the benefits of meals there. Extending children's hours at nurseries to ensure that that provision exists is an issue. Socialisation is also an issue. Encouraging people to eat and break bread together is one of the best ways of tackling behavioural issues. We should reflect on the lessons from Finland and elsewhere about the socialisation aspects of food and what we should do to encourage such socialisation. The bill is based on the Education (Scotland) Act 1980, which states that an education authority "must charge" for anything that is provided under  section 53(1)(a) of the act. Under the bill, it will still be illegal for councils or authorities to provide free school meals if they choose to do so. That is clearly wrong. The Executive has been flexible about everything else: it has been flexible about milk, fruit and school breakfasts. Surely to goodness, even if it did not want to fund free school meals, the Executive should have provided local authorities with flexibility and the choice to deliver such meals if it believes that local authorities should have the flexibility to deliver health-promoting education in their areas. That is a disappointment. Ministers have missed a great opportunity to move forward. Many pupils who started at secondary school when Labour came to power have gone right through their secondary education in poverty without an opportunity to get free school meals because the Executive set its face against the idea. We will remind the Executive that in the Parliament today, Jack McConnell, the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats voted against extending the provision of free school meals to those whose parents receive working tax credit. People will judge the Executive by what it has done. It has had opportunities aplenty to bridge the gap between those who receive school meals and those who live in poverty. The Government has failed to bridge that gap, but the next Government will ensure that it is bridged.

Amendment 27 is reasonable. The Executive was right to produce measures on anonymity and protecting the identity of those who receive free school meals. However, the measures have raised concerns about the type of information that can be captured and how it will be used. It is therefore appropriate that a code of conduct is produced. The issue could usefully be discussed by the new parent forums in schools. It is exactly the sort of item that the forums should have on their agendas, to allow parents to discuss what they find acceptable or unacceptable in relation to the information that is kept about their children and how it is captured. Patrick Harvie makes a reasonable request. I am interested in the minister's response to Patrick Harvie's question about what work the Government is doing to produce guidance on biometric information issues generally. Amendment 27 would provide a reasonable compromise, as we need an understanding of what is acceptable and unacceptable and of the reasons why information is kept and how it is kept. In that spirit, I hope that the minister will agree to amendment 27.

Will the minister take an intervention?

No, I will not. Let us take a bold step now and say that we want universal provision of school meals in this country. However, let us take a pragmatic approach and pilot that to see what works and where. In particular, we should look at the nutrition and learning aspects, as the bill already goes some way towards addressing the obesity agenda. I think that the next agenda that the Parliament should address is what we are feeding our children and how it affects their ability to learn. This is an opportunity for us to tackle those issues and to tackle poverty by extending provision to children whose families are in receipt of passported benefits. This is also an opportunity to tackle obesity by developing children's palates so that they favour nutritious meals in their early years, with universal provision piloted in the first three years of nursery. Although we have some way to go, we should not be feeble but should take a bold step and vote for the SNP amendments.

There are three arguments for free school meals: the need to tackle poverty; the need to tackle obesity, which is a health issue; and the need to address nutrition and learning. In order to cover those three areas, the SNP wants to exempt more families from having to pay for school meals. Tricia Marwick's amendments will allow flexibility for local authorities; Christine Grahame's amendments will tackle the issue of poverty and passported benefits; and my amendments 25 and 26 will allow for national pilots, to enable local authorities in certain areas to run free school meal pilot schemes. The SNP is committed to piloting the universal provision of free school meals in primary 1 to primary 3. The arguments are clear. If we are to tackle our obesity time bomb, we must ensure that our young people develop their palates in their early years—at nursery and primary school—to get a taste for good food that will lead them to take up school meals later in life. We know that, because of the problems of public-private partnership schemes, many schools do not have kitchens to enable free, nutritious school meals to be produced on site. That is why we must have pilot schemes. A good Government is one that does the right thing when it starts its period in government, not one that, at the tail end or last gasp of its period in government, suddenly decides to extend the provision of free school meals to tackle poverty. Liberal Democrat and Labour members should hang their heads in shame for refusing to support, when they had the chance in 2003, the extension of free school meals to children whose families are in receipt of passported benefits.

I pay tribute to my colleague Shona Robison, whose proposal for a member's bill to remove junk food and fizzy drinks from schools was a precursor to the drive towards health-promoting schools, which has received cross-party support. Amendment 21 makes the point that schools must not send out mixed messages and that we should not say to children, "Do as I say, not as I do." We must tackle the sending out of mixed messages in schools. The minister might be able to tell us whether the proposal on advertising could be effected by regulation rather than by being incorporated in the bill, but I am sympathetic to the idea of ensuring that we send out a clear message to young people about what is healthy and what is unhealthy. We expect a great deal of our schools. We want them to promote the eco-school agenda that we all support and to be health promoting, but we also want them to deal with basic numeracy and literacy. We know that some schools complain that Government initiatives from on high consistently interfere with basic education. When we promote health-promoting schools, we should remember that we must ensure that teachers have the time to teach and are supported in doing so. They cannot always be called on to compensate for bad parenting. I support amendment 21.

I declare an interest. I am the mother of one of the many children who have been born at St John's hospital. Will the minister reassure members that the Executive wants St John's to maintain a full obstetric service in the future? Senior consultants in the Lothians have told me about their concerns about future rotas for junior doctors, particularly in respect of anaesthetics, and the ability to supply full obstetric services at both the Edinburgh royal infirmary and St John's in the future. Will he confirm that in its forward planning strategy, the Executive aims to ensure that both St John's and the ERI can provide full obstetric services in the future?

The SNP will support amendment 20.  The minister will be aware that, as far back as stage 1, I raised issues about young people aged 16 and 17 who are volunteering with people who may be vulnerable adults or who may have other difficulties and need support. There may be issues about police records for any one of those people. I welcomed the stage 2 amendments that recognised that many young people volunteer. We should not create extra bureaucracy that may prevent people from encouraging young people aged 16 and 17 to work with them. We may reflect on the debate about the position of the young person who volunteers to take minutes for a community council, the main purpose of which is not necessarily to provide services to children, but we cannot get into the ridiculous situation in which young people are prevented from volunteering because of the legislation. I therefore welcome the spirit of amendment 20 and the amendments that were lodged at stage 2 to address the issue. Common sense and practical considerations must have a role in our approach to child protection. We must also acknowledge that another issue is setting the age of majority at 16. Indeed, Iain Smith lodged amendments at stage 2 that suggested that we should consider a child to be someone under 16, but at that point we accepted the minister's arguments for keeping the age bar at 18. Amendment 20 goes some way towards recognising the particular responsibilities of young people aged 16 and 17 who are volunteering and it addresses the need not to introduce unnecessary bureaucracy for those who provide volunteering opportunities or paid employment opportunities for young people aged 16 and 17.

Amendment 5 is important because so much of the operation of the bill will come down to interpretation and reflecting on  previous legislation. The understanding of what is or is not meant in certain areas of the bill is very important. Some definitions have to be clarified. The extent to which terms had to be defined in the bill or in guidance was considered at stage 2. We accepted in good faith the minister's understanding that the most commonsense and reasonable approach was to put much of the definition in guidance. Amendment 5 is a technical amendment, but it will be fundamental to the successful operation of the legislation.

We might reflect that the future education committee will have its work cut out, given how many regulations it will have to consider, as well as the annual report. The current Education Committee has used its scrutiny and accountability powers for the annual reports of other organisations and, as Lord James Douglas-Hamilton has said, that will be a key role for the future committee in this case. I thank Lord James for bringing the matter to the committee in the first place, and I thank the minister for responding positively with amendment 17. We might reflect, however, that we have not given great consideration to Disclosure Scotland becoming an Executive agency. The minister might wish to take the opportunity now to say what progress has been made in preparing for that and whether there are any issues that Parliament should be aware of. That clearly gives ministers more responsibility—in the sense of accountability—but it might be helpful if the minister could give us some indication of what the plans are.

The member may recall a discussion that the Education Committee had with witnesses from the voluntary sector, who said that they expected to receive increased funding from the commissioning body in the statutory sector to cover the fees. However, the financial memorandum to the bill does not cover that. Will the member comment on that?

Bearing in mind that, for the reasons that have been stated by Dr Murray, retrospection and fees are inextricably linked, does not it make sense for retrospection and the fee level to be dealt with under the affirmative procedure?

I welcome the minister's comments, which have clarified the Executive's policy intention. Further consideration of the matter will take place when the guidance is issued, which will deal with the prescribed circumstances in which such a request would be made. We will have to wait and see what comes out of that. The minister has clarified the policy intention. The voluntary sector cannot be seen as one amorphous body, because in addition to small organisations that are about volunteering, it includes very large organisations that are commissioned by local authorities and health boards to provide services to children and to vulnerable adults. In that context, issues about the contract and servicing come into question, especially given that all the criminal sanctions in the bill relate to the responsibility of employers. In the circumstances that we are considering, the voluntary sector organisations are the employers and the statutory sector organisations are the commissioners. We must recognise that the thrust of the bill is to place on voluntary organisations the responsibility to ensure that they have their own records in place. I suspect that, in commissioning services from the voluntary sector, the statutory sector would include as part of the service requirements that the voluntary sector organisation concerned should have robust child protection arrangements. However, again the issue comes back to trusting independent organisations in the voluntary sector not only to have robust recruitment procedures in place, but to have the vigilance, when providing services, to identify when an individual might pose a risk to a child or to a vulnerable adult.  The minister's comments will go some way to alleviating the concerns of the voluntary sector. He is right to say that the attempt to see off a specific concern about school transport—in relation to which child protection or support for vulnerable adults is not the prime aim of the organisations that provide such services—has kicked off another concern. The guidance on the subject will be vital and, again, the consultation on it will be imperative.

Amendment 1 is a key amendment in today's stage 3 proceedings as it cuts to the heart of the concerns that have been raised about the bill from the start. The bulk of those who work with children are already in post, but many of the provisions in the bill will affect only those who enter new positions. Clearly, the issue of retrospective checking has been key to everybody who has been involved with the bill. In particular, the voluntary sector had severe concerns that the retrospection burden could be counterproductive to the needs of child protection and children's services, which are much needed throughout the country. I welcome the fact that the minister has responded to the committee's concerns about the issue. The Scottish National Party's view was that the bill should have been kept back until the consultation on retrospection had been completed, so that we could see the matter in the round and would know exactly what we were legislating for. However, given that we are at the tail-end of the parliamentary session, we recognise that some of the provisions in the bill as it stands should be introduced. A key issue regarding amendment 1 is that we expect the consultation to clarify what the costs will be on voluntary sector capacity. It is clear from  the evidence that we received that the statutory sector is geared up and ready to implement retrospection, so I suspect that the regulations should allow the statutory sector to move forward on retrospection more quickly than the voluntary sector. That cuts to the heart of the issue about what constitutes a proportionate response. The issue is how we ensure that we do not allow loopholes for people who are already in post while ensuring that we have a manageable child protection system. I reiterate that the establishment of a central barring unit for disclosure checks will not, of itself, stop people harming children, but it will prevent those who seek to do so from trying to exploit children in their workplace. It is important, however, that we recognise the concerns about retrospective checking that were expressed by voluntary sector organisations such as the WRVS. I look forward to a very robust consultation process. The use of the affirmative resolution procedure will place a burden and responsibility on future committees, which will need to deal with the secondary legislation on retrospection as seriously as they deal with primary legislation. I welcome the minister's response to the committee's concerns on the issue, but it is regrettable that we are in this situation. We know from the implementation of the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003—which was passed at the tail-end of the previous parliamentary session—that retrospection is a problematic issue that needs to be resolved. However, we need to resolve it on an informed basis. The committee asked the minister not to proceed to stage 2 until information on regulations and a further consultation had been provided. Although that was not possible, I believe that any future consultation should be informed by the experience of those organisations, such as Fife Council, that have embarked on retrospection. We should look at the statistics on how many people such organisations have found, as a result of retrospection, who should have been prevented from working with children. We need to consider such issues if we are to come up with a proportionate response. In that spirit, the SNP will support amendment 1. The amendment provides a positive way forward by ensuring that the Parliament is allowed to conduct proper scrutiny of retrospection when the regulations are laid before the Parliament.

Is the minister aware that the extra costs of 2.5 per cent over the contract term, as projected by Audit Scotland, mean that the four new primary schools and the new Nicolson institute will cost £30 million more than the original £40 million capital contract costs under PPP? That is enough to build a new Nicolson institute twice over. Does the minister really think that PPP is value for money? Is it not about time that we had a Scottish futures trust to build schools for pupils in Scotland?

The First Minister clearly recalls my advice of five years ago that he should listen to head teachers and  implement class size reductions. Is it not a shame that it has taken him five years to do so? Had he heeded an SNP pledge to cut class sizes to 18 in P1 to P3, is it not the case that he would not now have to take remedial action in S1 and S2? Is it not also the case that the gap between the top-performing and bottom-performing pupils in Scotland is getting wider? In which case, will he give us an idea of how many pupils are being left behind because of Labour's education policy?

I thank Elaine Murray for bringing this important subject to the chamber. As the first non-South of Scotland MSP to speak in the debate, I will discuss the national importance of the Crichton and consider how we can make progress and find solutions. The debate so far may have been blighted by a number of negative factors. I think that an impasse has been reached in relation to the funding council and that there has been some brinkmanship by the University of Glasgow. I also think that there has been a degree of abdication of responsibility  by the Executive. I do not expect the minister to deliver instructions to independent universities—I do not think that he can do so, but he can reflect leadership in Scotland by bringing all the partners together to consider possible solutions to an important problem. We must start to look at whether institutions and universities in Scotland should only be centrally based. We will have a desperate need in the future: 40 per cent of teachers are due to retire in ten years, a similar situation will arise in respect of social workers and we have an aging population in general, but particularly in Dumfries and Galloway. We must find a national solution, not only for education but for social provision and for the economy. That is ministers' responsibility. In that context, the minister could easily intervene to bring all the partners together. We must also consider the issue of wider access and participation. One of the current shortcomings in Scotland is that education is seen as individually and institutionally driven. I know that provision is co-ordinated in the east and west of Scotland, but if we saw wider access and participation in a national context—as the funding council can and should do—we could provide solutions. What is striking about the Crichton campus, with its liberal arts degree, is that it aims to provide broadly based, interdisciplinary education. We want our future teachers, social workers and so on, who have been talked about in the debate, to have a broad-based degree that they studied for in their locality. If they do not have such an education, we cannot expect to have an appropriate workforce in the future, given that we will have an aging population and fewer graduates under the age of 25. Perhaps Crichton is leading the way in providing what could be a national solution. The approach that has been taken to the supply of Gaelic teachers has involved outreach and part-time work, for example. People in the peripheral and rural parts of Scotland deserve the same education, and access to education, as anyone else, but that will not be achieved through distance learning. I feel passionately that we should see the issue in the round. The minister can bring people together, and that is the responsibility that we want him to take up. We want creative solutions, and the solutions are in our hands. We need to nurture and develop the Crichton because it is a precious stone in the landscape of Scottish higher education that should be burnished. However, it is being allowed to fade because a variety of partners will not take responsibility for it. We in this Parliament must have the political will to say that we will not allow the situation to continue. The University of Glasgow should maintain access and  take responsibility, and we should co-operate with it. We should look at the university's access and retention role as it relates to Scotland more widely. The funding council should not be so narrow in its view of funding solely vocational education in the south-west of Scotland. If we are to have the teachers and social workers of tomorrow that were mentioned earlier, people in the south-west need access to a rounded education. The Scottish Government needs to start thinking of the periphery as the centre of Scotland. If it does not, it will treat Scotland as only parts, rather than as a whole nation. If we were to treat the peripheral and rural parts of Scotland as though they were at the centre of the country, we might have a different perspective on what is important and start providing solutions for Scotland as a whole, rather than as parts. In that spirit, I hope that all parties will come together to intervene under the strategic leadership of the Executive. It is not over by any means; the Crichton is not going. Let us make it the best that it can be, rather than all that it has to be in the current circumstances.

The Minister for Education and Young People, in a personal capacity as a Labour candidate, may have written to me, but I have not received any such letter. The minister has continued to talk about such a letter in committees in the Parliament, so I took the trouble to write to him not only at John Smith House but at Victoria Quay, and to e-mail him, to explain the Scottish futures trust as proposed by the SNP. If the minister had any courtesy or respect, he would acknowledge that.  It is essential that we replace the school estate in Scotland. Under the SNP, the school building programme will progress—but we will introduce a not-for-profit Scottish futures trust. Is the minister aware that in his constituency, if a better interest rate had been achieved from the market for procurement, it is probable that two extra secondary schools, like Gleniffer high school, would have been built? That could not happen because of the excess profits that the minister's Administration is wasting because of PPP finance.

I, too, support the motion and welcome its terms. We place on record our recognition of HMIE's valuable work in Scotland's education system. I am pleased, however, that the minister has burst Brian Monteith's bubble. In many respects, Brian Monteith is out of date and out of time about what is happening in inspections, HMIE's role in relation to the Parliament and the Education Committee's scrutiny of HMIE. It is interesting that in the six years between 2002 and 2008 all secondary schools in Scotland will have been inspected. That is what I think Brian Monteith is looking for, but it is already happening. Between 2002 and 2009, all primary schools in Scotland will also have been inspected.

Far be it from me to defend a Labour-Liberal Democrat Executive, but there were 14 years of Conservative Government between 1983 and 1997. I understand that the member was a member of the Conservative Party during that time, so he must take some responsibility and blame for what happened in that period. We should move on and look to the future. We have to move towards a culture of continuous improvement in schools, including self-assessment. Schools should not live in fear of the dreaded HMIE visit. Peer-assessment and self-assessment should be part of the culture in education, not just at school level but at pupil level. If we look forward to the types of assessment and inspection that we want, I think that we are moving in that direction. I record my gratitude to Graham Donaldson for his regular appearances before the Education Committee in the past four years, not least to speak about additional support for learning. I  commend the approach in an amendment to the motion that was unfortunately not accepted: there are particular issues to do with additional support for learning that HMIE could rightly address on its regular inspections. I would like that to happen in the future—it is an area in which there could be improvement.

I am sorry, but I will continue if I may. There is a big agenda issue with HMIE's role in the curriculum for excellence. If we are to change the culture of Scottish education and ensure that teachers have ownership, that they regain and retain their professionalism and that they have control of what goes into their teaching, they must have HMIE's support and know that they will not be criticised for making developmental use of their professionalism to try different things and ensure that more time is spent on the curriculum and less on assessment. The silent partner in any such change would be the Scottish Qualifications Authority. We have to ensure that the SQA and HMIE serve the curriculum for excellence and that the curriculum serves the pupils. It is sometimes possible to change the route of a Titanic, but if we are to change the route of Scottish education, we have to start seeing progress for pupils. If I have one criticism of Brian Monteith's motion, it is that he does not mention that we must ensure that any improvements in Scottish education are, first and foremost, pupil centred. He will have realised the importance of that from the Audit Committee and Education Committee inquiries and from some of the issues to do with McCrone. In that spirit, I commend the motion and thank the member for bringing it to the chamber.

The member will be aware of the Education Committee's keen interest in school transport. We considered a petition on the very matter, and we took responsibility for writing to the UK Government about it.

Will the member give way?

Can we get real here? Does the member think that the Westminster Government's plan to deliver 20 hours of nursery education by 2010 is implausible? That is more hours than we are promising to deliver. Why is the Westminster policy plausible?

Does the member share my belief that we should debate early intervention and support for two-year-olds and focus on the need to support families and parents? Does he agree that  we might need to debate further the idea of removing children from their parents at the age of two?

The SNP is using this debating opportunity to propose constructive policies on early years education. We are keen to put the subject of the youngest children in our society firmly on the policy road map of a future SNP Administration. Firm foundations that are laid in the early years of life by quality, accessible care, development and education reap many dividends. In a society of pressure and pain for so many children, a stable environment where they can learn social, cognitive, motor and interpersonal skills means so much to those in need. In Scotland, far too many youngsters are in that category for Government to ignore them. Self-esteem, self-worth and the capacity to grow and develop are stimulated by well-trained early years educators—including nursery nurses and teachers as a team and in partnership—who are a powerful influence on children. As a country, we need those early years educators to ensure that we have well-adjusted and receptive young people and citizens of tomorrow, and to identify through early intervention those who might have additional support needs, and those who might be in danger of living a childhood that leads them straight into the not in education, employment or training category. The current Government has chosen not to drive forward the early years agenda. Its education policies are about dealing with failure after the event and coping with extraordinarily high levels of 16 to 19-year-olds who are not in education, employment, or training. We are dealing with persistent young offenders who started out in the system because they needed care and who are involved in antisocial behaviour because self-esteem and self-worth were denied them in their upbringing and no one was there to intervene early enough to identify and solve problems. The current Government is coping with failure and compensating for the inadequacies of people at 16 and 18. A future SNP Government will try to change the country fundamentally for the better, with imagination and commitment to early intervention for young people who are at the stage when changes can properly be made to their  ability to learn, to socialise and to develop a positive sense of self. Our country has one of the biggest prison populations, made up of young men from identifiable and predictable postcode areas, many of whom have social and additional needs. What an expensive way Scotland has of coping with a country that did not care enough at the right time to make a difference. We should look to America and the Perry pre-school model of the savings that quality early education can provide. Abecedarian research shows what can be gained. The SNP's early education policies are about long-term vision and perspective. Children need early years support, not just because they are the citizens and workers of tomorrow, but because they are the children of today. They deserve safe, stimulating experiences now. It is with disappointment that I reflect that, from a good start in 1997, the Labour and then the Labour-Liberal Democrat Administrations have lost pace and focus on, and vision for, the early years. The Executive amendment refers to achievements since 1999 as hardly anything to speak of has happened since 2003. The early years strategy has been shelved and the workforce review—however welcome—was delayed and has only recently been published. The nursery education for three and four-year-olds that we all called for in the 1990s and that came in between 1999 and 2003 is welcome, but in many places, including in this city, it came in 10 years ago, in 1997, before devolution. Meanwhile, in England we have seen the announcement of a 10-year child care strategy and promises of increased hours in nursery education being rolled out from April last year, while Scotland treads water with no increase in hours delivered. The First Minister has reneged on his promise; that is another example of Labour leaving a generation behind. On 17 April 2005, his spokesperson said that a fully costed plan for 15 hours of nursery education a week would be produced before the end of summer 2005, and we are still waiting. The sure start in 1999 that saw Scotland gaining a head start over England has rapidly descended into inertia and catch-up for the current Government and too many children are being left behind The SNP wants a 50 per cent increase in the hours that children can access nursery education—a longer day and a longer term. That would make possible the sharing of nutritious lunchtime meals in nurseries as part of the valuable socialisation and health promotion that so impressed those of us from the Education Committee who visited kindergartens in Finland. The Government seems to support that concept in  the Schools (Health Promotion and Nutrition) (Scotland) Bill; I hope that it is not on the basis that the bulk of pre-school children are only there for 12.5 hours a week—2.5 hours a day—and so would not be in school to benefit. That would be very short-sighted indeed.

The increase is from the average of 400 hours, which is the current statutory requirement, to more than 600 hours. It can be funded from the Barnett consequentials from which we would benefit because the system is already being rolled out in England. Why do our young people have to fall behind those in England instead of getting the nursery education that they need? The increase in hours, combined with smaller class sizes in primary 1 to primary 3 means that we can develop an early years agenda that gives quality early years experience to all our young children. We are disturbed when councils such as Glasgow remove nursery teachers from classes and we support calls from the Educational Institute of Scotland and others to retain nursery teachers in the early years setting. Support for the early years should not be about just fire-fighting poor decisions. Scotland needs a 10-year early education, care and development strategy for all aspects of child care, development and education to drive forward the agenda in an ambitious and child-focused manner. We have a dedicated workforce that is committed to providing that support, but they also need support in training, status and career progression. A 10-year strategy would provide policy leadership as to what the workforce review could achieve, with the possibility of a specific early years education and development teaching degree, with a flexibility of delivery to tap into the talents and abilities of people across Scotland, particularly those in rural areas or those with caring responsibilities, so that we can grow the number of professionals delivering in this area and scale up early years education to deliver those extra hours. The role of quality nursery education must not be underestimated. The status and position of the early years must be recognised as a touchstone to show how we can and will change the Scotland of tomorrow for the children of today. I move, That the Parliament believes that early years education, care and development support for our youngest children can provide firm foundations for later life and that there needs to be an increase in pace and attention in terms of delivery for the early years in Scotland; further believes that  Scotland needs a 10-year strategy for care, development and education in the early years; recognises the vital role that nursery nurses play in delivery of this service as part of a team approach to early years services; calls for a 50% increase in free nursery education with access to a nursery teacher for all children; condemns the Scottish Executive for falling two years behind England and Wales in the provision of nursery education despite the fact that resources have been made available through the Barnett formula, and calls on ministers to offer an explanation

Does the minister recognise the inconsistency in the Executive's position? We are regularly told that we must respect the rights of local authorities to make decisions about education in their areas, yet the Executive is setting its face against giving powers to local authorities to decide whether or not to fund free school meals, regardless of whether or not the Executive supports their position.

Will the minister confirm on the record that NHS Lanarkshire could have chosen not to invite a tender from a non-GP company limited by shares? The 2004 act says that such tenders "may" be invited, not that they must be invited. If it is difficult for the minister to answer that question now, will he send a letter to interested members that provides an interpretation of the law?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

The SNP supports the general principles of the Schools (Health Promotion and Nutrition) (Scotland) Bill, which contains a great deal that we have called for over the years. It is essential that we tackle nutrition in schools and reinforce the responsibility and duty of ministers and local authorities to promote health in our schools. At this morning's meeting of the Education Committee, we heard from several representatives  of head teachers and teachers, who said that the changes that have been made under the McCrone agreement in relation to non-contact time and the curriculum for excellence were opening doors, ensuring that schools can pursue even further the promoting health agenda. I welcome proposals that have been made to tackle chip vans outside school premises, because the trail of chip papers across towns throughout Scotland has exercised communities long and hard. The aim of tackling nutrition in schools is also involved, but the real issue, which is contentious and on which many of the debates that have taken place have centred, is the choice agenda for young people. I am disappointed that the Education Committee did not consider the bill, but perhaps that was the result of the rush to legislate at the end of the parliamentary session. We should reflect on that rush to legislate. I emphasise the argument that we must take a whole-school approach, which has been made by the Communities Committee and the Executive. The debate is not about one solution or one issue—it is not simply about the provision of free school meals being the silver bullet that will solve obesity. Things must be thought through under a wider agenda. The whole-school approach is absolutely essential. We have heard about Hurlford primary school's agenda of working with local farmers and communities. We must ensure that the old adage "you are what you eat" is central to this issue. If young people understand where their food comes from, what it is and why it might harm them, they will be far better equipped to make decisions about what food they want to eat. There are other issues. We want to teach young people more about the food that they eat, but who will teach them that when there is a recruitment crisis among home economics teachers? Perhaps that has been to do with the age profile in the past, but it is also about connections between policy areas, and it is important that we address that issue. We should look long and hard at the agenda of classroom assistants helping and supporting—perhaps with grandparents or mothers—health promotion in home economics. That would also require home economics teachers on the ground. The Scottish National Party has always taken a joined-up approach, and our action plan for fit, healthy young Scots addresses a load of issues to do with fitness, health and education. Essentially, we have to take an early intervention position in relation to policy on education and young people generally. The SNP's proposals for the early years are to have 50 per cent more nursery provision for  three and four-year-olds and nursery teachers for all nursery pupils. We also want to cut class sizes in primary 1 to primary 3. As part of our package of early support and firm foundations for life, we want to pilot the provision of free school meals in the early years. I support the extension of such provision into the nursery sector—that proposal is also supported by the committee—but we must also consider the number of hours from which pupils benefit from state nursery education in the first place. By extending those hours, we would have an obligation to consider the provision of support. We want the provision of free school meals for many reasons, covering different areas. Obesity is one reason. Does the minister really think that Scotland's obesity problem is a class issue? Having read his biography, I understand that he is a former class warrior, so does he recognise that obesity is not isolated to one class in Scotland?

I agree. The minister misled us on two points, one of which the member has just raised. The other is that the issue has been considered by the Scottish Parliament previously. That is right, but it was considered during the previous parliamentary session, not during this one, and it is right that the current Parliament should be able to make a decision about whether it wants to pilot and proceed with free school meals. The minister has set his face against universality as a general principle, but I have two points to make on that. Why is it okay that child benefit is universal? If he is so against universality, why did he not reject completely and out of hand the Education Committee's report of its inquiry into the early years, in which the point was made that if we really want to reach those who need support and early intervention most, we have to have a universal system? That report recognised that not everyone would receive the same—that is fair enough—but the point of free school meals is that if everyone got the same, there would be economies of scale. One of the interesting things about nursery, kindergarten and other schools in Helsinki is that every class in every school has the same meal every day over a six-week rotation. There is no choice; there is only one meal. That brings me back to my point about trying to break through the choice agenda, which has to be about forming  habits early: if young people's palates are formed at an early stage, their habits are more likely to last them a lifetime. The biggest choices that young people have to make are not made in school. Those choices are about what they do out of and after school. That is why early intervention and piloting schemes in the early years is the right way forward. The minister needs to expand his horizons. He should not close the door to our ideas but should consider being flexible enough to allow a future Parliament or Government to be able to choose to proceed with free school meals. That would be a bold step forward, and the right one. It would benefit not just the pupils and children of Scotland but the health of the nation. I move amendment S2M-5339.3, to insert at end: "but, in so doing, regrets that provision for the piloting of free and nutritious school meals on a universal basis in public sector nurseries and the early years of primary school has not been included in the Bill, nor the flexibility to introduce this at a later date, as a key element in tackling health and nutrition of children and improving the uptake of school meals in the longer term."

Does the member acknowledge that computer systems are only as good as the information that goes into them? Obviously, John  Reid's experience at the Home Office and the concerns about people who have committed offences coming into the country also have implications. We need robust computer systems, but it can be the actions of individuals that make the difference rather than whether the system is in place.

This is the latest in a number of pieces of child protection legislation that have been put before Parliament. The Scottish National Party has consistently offered constructive support, in a non-partisan way, to the Government in this complex and sensitive area, and it is in that spirit that I make my remarks. We have heard from the minister about the background to the bill. I add that I have some concerns that the English legislation, which is similar, was not subject to the same level of scrutiny as the Scottish legislation was. That probably reflects the fact that the Scottish system is more developed in its thinking, as recognised in the Bichard report. That means that we are perhaps more up front, critical and prepared to express doubt where it exists. The Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Bill is a complex bill. As a member of the committee that examined the bill at stage 1, I was interested to note the spectrum of concern about this area of policy. Given that so many organisations that work to support and protect children are calling on the minister to delay or withdraw the bill, it is clear that there is a real problem. Even today, Scotland's commissioner for children and young people is saying that the minister should withdraw the bill and do further work on it. Other organisations state that it should be delayed until the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003 is reviewed. They make a strong case. The minister himself said that there  are gaps in the POCSA legislation, and it is clear that it is not as robust as it should be. In the end, the decision on how to handle and manage the process of making law is a political decision. The minister would have our support if he decided to take the bold decision to withdraw the bill and make a fresh start, knowing that whoever is in charge of the Executive after the election in May will be in the same boat and will need to improve the law on the protection of vulnerable groups. Given that the commencement of much of the bill will have to be delayed while secondary legislation is drafted, withdrawing the bill would not make much difference to when the new law will take effect. However, the SNP agrees that the proposed scheme could be a better approach to vetting and barring than the problematic POCSA regime. Many voluntary organisations support the proposed scheme, which will streamline bureaucracy and reduce the number of requests for repeat and multiple disclosure checks from small organisations. We recognise that those aspects should be progressed now. We have a real problem in this country with the way in which we manage relationships between adults and children. We desperately need a public debate about the risks to children in our society. That debate should consider what the risks are; how we can minimise them, given that we can never eliminate them; how our society can live with risk and deal with it proportionately; and how we educate our children to assess risk. It should also consider how we make sure that everyone is equipped with common sense about how to be vigilant to risk and to take action when risk is likely to become a threat. The SNP is prepared to support such a debate, which should be held in the media and in our schools. It is also a prime candidate as a topic for our new parent forums. That debate is not about legislation but about policy and practice. Laws do not protect children—adults do. I welcome the minister's willingness to drop part 3 of the bill and deal with the matter in future legislation on children's hearings and related matters. Again, it is policy, culture, change and practice that are important. Part 3 might have been counterproductive because it might have driven vulnerable children away from seeking advice and support. Given that the vast majority of abuse is by family and friends, we have to judge risk proportionately. I trust that the minister has Mr McConnell's support for dropping part 3. All parties are committed to improving the provisions on people's duties and responsibilities, but the desire to create criminal offences in the area could be counterproductive because it might create a back- watching charter for professionals at the expense of children's welfare. That would turn the bill into a protection of vulnerable organisations bill. A witness who is involved in child protection told the committee in evidence that that is an alternative interpretation of the bill. None of us wants that to become the case, so the minister's approach and his willingness to drop part 3 are welcome. I support the committee's strong view that the bill should not proceed to stage 2 until the committee is satisfied that information on the subordinate legislation has been provided. I thank the minister—and the deputy minister, in particular—for promising to provide that information. We look forward to seeing the substance of the promise. I hope that the minister appreciates that the committee must reserve judgment until we read the information. I have some specific areas to cover. We need training, and we most definitely need clear definitions. What about 16 and 17-year-olds? How should they be covered? Vulnerable adults are in danger of becoming a Cinderella group under the legislation because of the controversy about the other aspects. That must be addressed. I am also concerned about retrospection, which is a double-edged sword. We do not want to penalise voluntary organisations, but if we do not have retrospection, we will take a risk in relation to people who are already in the system. That would call into question the system's validity. There are questions about costs and information technology systems. The Finance Committee's criticisms are well made, but I recognise that the new, simpler vetting and barring system should reduce the number of disclosures—and particularly the number of multiple disclosures—in the long term. We should bear that in mind. The bill is a small, technical part of child protection. It should not be treated as the key, fundamental part of child protection. It is necessary, but it is not an absolute guarantee of child safety. It provides the means to record whether somebody has a history of activity that makes it inappropriate to employ them to work with children and vulnerable adults, but it will not predict whether people with no such history who are members of the scheme will harm children in the future. The bill is about adults' past. Our main child protection measures must be about children's present and future, which means that we must be vigilant and use common sense and that there must be support. We want adults to work enthusiastically with children, and we want a society in which relationships between adults and children are healthy, honest and positive. In that spirit, the SNP will support the general principles of the bill.

The Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003 was passed at the tail end of the previous session of Parliament, before dissolution in 2003. Does the minister share people's concerns that if the Protection of Vulnerable Groups (Scotland) Bill is rushed through at the tail end of this parliamentary session, it might not be as robust as it should be?

In a note of positive unity, I echo Bristow Muldoon's emphasis that rezoning is vital for St John's. I want also to point out that the SNP has never indicated that the hospital would close. I seek reassurance from the minister that some of the rezoning and reallocation of emergency cases from the Western general hospital to Edinburgh royal infirmary at the beginning and end of the day should not compromise any decision to rezone areas of west Edinburgh when deciding on rezoning for St John's.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will Ken Macintosh give way?

I thank the Conservatives for bringing this important subject for debate to the chamber. I want to concentrate on some of the things that we can all agree on. We all agree that skills and vocational training for post-14 pupils is essential. The issue that we face is how to make progress on that aim and whether we have done enough to make progress. We also all agree that the school-college review was important in identifying the links between colleges and schools and that the skills for work programme and the qualifications that it provides are welcome. However, there are concerns about the new pronouncements on skills academies. The absence of any reference to them in the minister's speech or amendment says more about the internal divisions in the Executive than anything else. Perhaps what has been placed before us is a diplomatic coalition fudge. However, let us leave the Executive to its internal divisions and address how we can improve skills, training, experience and opportunities for young people. From the Education Committee's inquiry into pupil motivation, we know that pupils are telling us that they will not be motivated if the skills academies and vocational opportunities are just for those who do not have academic ability. What  do employers and people in the trade organisations tell us? The Conservatives are fond of talking about plumbers, so let me tell them what Robert Burgon, the director and secretary of the Scottish and Northern Ireland Plumbing Employers Federation, said about the First Minister's announcement: "It appears that our First Minister has decided that non-academic 14-year-olds should be removed from mainstream schooling to attend a skills academy to learn a trade, such as plumbing. The Scottish plumbing industry has worked hard over many years to remove the idea that a career in plumbing is only for those who struggle with basic subjects ... this latest announcement bears all the signs that we have some way to go before we convince our leaders that following a vocational route is an acceptable alternative". The plumbers and those in the skills federations want to ensure that people who have academic abilities can make that choice. The Conservatives also like to quote the Headteachers Association of Scotland. It warns that the skills academies might attract the most disaffected pupils and could be "a magnet for middle-ability pupils who see the vocational modules as an easier option than more academic subjects". The association is concerned that the proposal could "herald a return to old divisions between junior and senior secondary schools." Do we want to provide skills and vocational opportunities for all, which is the SNP's position, or do we want to offer those opportunities on a selective basis, which is the Executive's proposition? Murdo Fraser talked about Forfar academy, in SNP-led Angus Council's area, which demonstrates precisely the example that we need to follow. I suspect that the Labour Party's announcement on skills academies is an attempt to make it look as though it is trying to do something new, but it is a cop-out. The Executive is covering up what it has not done over the past few years, and SNP councils such as Angus Council are showing the way forward. We can have skills bases and skills departments—we can even call them skills academies if they are within the mainstream operation of schools. Indeed, if the schools of ambition programme was extended from music and drama into vocational skills, perhaps that would be something else that we could agree on. However, if skills academies are just some kind of concept or marketing branding that is used to cover up what the Executive has not done, I am sorry, but we are not interested. The pupils, the teachers, the employers and the skills federations are saying that they want real  training with substance and opportunities for all. We should let the pupils decide whether they want to take the opportunity to learn vocational skills to gain the competencies that Murdo Fraser talked about or whether they want to pursue an academic route into further and higher education. That is the key choice, and it is what we should be debating. I move amendment S2M-5386.2, to leave out from "for many children" to end and insert: "most political parties have recognised the need for more vocational experiences for pupils over 14 since 2003 and is concerned about lack of progress in providing this to date; agrees with the position of the Schools and Colleges Review and the Parliament's Education Committee in its recent Pupil Motivation inquiry that all children should have vocational opportunities and that these should not be restricted by assessment of academic ability at the age of 14; acknowledges that the real challenge is to provide opportunities and choice for all pupils, working together with schools and colleges, and notes the concerns of skills and trades organisations that the proposal for skills academies provided for pupils with lack of academic ability, as proposed recently by the First Minister, is not what is required by them to meet current and future skills demand."

Will the member give way?

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer, as the First Minister has made an announcement in support of skills academies, I refer to the ministerial code and seek an examination of whether any civil service time or public money was used for that announcement. As the Executive has chosen not to include the matter in its amendment, it is clear that the First Minister's announcement was on behalf of the Labour Party, not the Liberal Democrat-Labour Executive.

Is the minister aware that Finland tops the league tables that we are talking about? The Education Committee and the minister's predecessor visited Finland last year. Is the minister aware that a key aspect of Finnish education is the emphasis on the early years? Finland has high-quality nursery teachers, educated to degree level, working with children from a very early age. The minister announced recently the introduction of structured play into primary 1 classes, but will he assure us that he will not swap teachers from nursery schools in order to implement that policy in primary schools? We cannot have nursery pupils losing out on their education because of the introduction of structured play in primary 1 classes.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive supports the introduction of private companies to run local GP practices. (S2F-2625)

Is the First Minister aware that Harthill health centre is the subject of tenders for future GP services? At a packed public meeting last week, many of its 1,000 patients from Greenrigg, Blackridge and Whitburn expressed alarm that they are being made guinea pigs for privatisation, because one of the three tenders is from a multinational, multimillion-pound company that has no experience of GP services in Scotland, but has significant contacts with NHS Lanarkshire. If the Executive has any belief that the NHS is for the public and not for profit, will the First Minister seek, and share with my constituents, legal advice that shows that a precedent will not be set and that automatic tendering of GP services will not take place when GPs are willing to continue a practice?

The journey has been long and intense for everybody who has been involved in the process. I thank everybody concerned: the Education Committee's special adviser, Ken Norrie, and BAAF Scotland for their exceptional advice; the minister for his responsive approach to the bill, which is to be welcomed; our clerks, who have had to endure a great deal; and Iain Smith for steering us through the process since March. It has also been a long journey in policy terms. Kenny MacAskill was right to say that adoption reflects the mores and norms of the time. Before devolution, the need to update adoption law was loud and clear, but it is only because we have the Parliament that we have been able to give the required time and attention to update the law. Although I have some criticisms about the last-minute restructuring of much of the bill, the bill team is also to be commended for taking a comprehensive approach to redrafting the bill. One point that came up time and again was the importance of the child's opinions, as did the fact that their rights should always be paramount. That is grounded in the Children (Scotland) Act 1995, which Lord James Douglas-Hamilton steered through Westminster, and it is important that we are grounding the bill in the same principle. The bill is just the legislative part of the journey of caring for looked-after children; the policy agenda has still to be progressed. That is why the strategy consultation is vital, why tackling the educational opportunities for looked-after children is important and why the family group conferencing that was mentioned should be examined and embraced.  I, too, want to refer to the more controversial debates that we have had. Apart from at conception, parenting and sex have nothing to do with each other. Parenting is about caring, nurturing and supporting, and many children would be horrified by the fact that their parents actually had sex. Adam Ingram is correct to identify the issue as being about same-gender parents, because it is not about sex. We should reflect on that. A serious point needs to be raised about funding and resources. We heard a lot of evidence at stage 1 on the continued need for children to be looked after, both in institutions and in foster care. Sadly, many children may not be able to be adopted, and the Executive's idea that some financial provisions would be reduced because of the reduction in the number of children must be revisited. Another vital point that led to the restructuring of the bill was that adoption support services should be continuous both pre and post-adoption. Some of the points about the drugs, deprivation and neglect faced by some of our children must be addressed. The problems related to attachment disorders that may affect children in the early months of their lives can still affect them seven or eight years later. It is important that the support exists, so I hope that as part of the policy agenda we will consider the therapeutic services that need to be addressed. I regret the way in which permanence orders have been dealt with. I sincerely think that we may have gone into a problematic area that will cause difficulties, and Parliament and the Executive in the next session may have to consider primary legislation to rectify that. There will be a need for prompt post-legislative scrutiny. Again, I thank everyone concerned. I am pleased that the Scottish National Party will support the bill.

Will the member take an intervention?

These amendments represent an important development. When the bill was introduced, there was no reference to kinship care. At stage 1, the minister was criticised for not including fostering and we were told that progress was being made on that, but it was not until 26 October that he met a reference group on fostering care and kinship care and it was only yesterday—one day before the stage 3 debate—that we finally got the national fostering and kinship care strategy, which states: "we have commissioned an independent survey of all the entitlements ... to which kinship carers may be entitled." I pay tribute to Rosemary Byrne, Paul Martin and the others who have raised the issue of the support that relatives can give children, but the ministers' amendments are Johnny-come-lately policymaking. His proposals have come at the very last minute. I am pleased that the minister responded to members' requests for a kinship care strategy and for financial support for kinship carers, but I regret that the proposals are so late. The next session of Parliament can pursue the matter with far more vigour than is possible now. The change is so drastic that the bill's long title will have to be amended. One of the minister's amendments seeks to remove the reference to fostering because, all of a sudden, the bill is being broadened to include kinship care. That is a good move, but it is happening at the last minute and only a day after the launch of the fostering and kinship care strategy. I welcome Rosemary Byrne's comments and look forward to supporting her amendments.

I agree with the member's comments. Given that the ADSW, which will have ultimate responsibility for so many of these children, supports the amendments in the name of Adam Ingram, does he not think that we should pause for reflection and go with the ADSW? It will have to apply the legislation and it is telling us that it wants the amendments in the name of Adam Ingram.

The Scottish National Party rejects the amendments in Roseanna Cunningham's name and will vote against them, because they do not reflect the SNP's view. The debate must be about children's rights, not about  adults' values. As Karen Gillon said, the debate is in danger of becoming a debate about values and about what adults think of other adults, when it should be about what is in the child's best interests. I agree with Paul Martin, because I think that enduring family relationships and stable family units provide the best way to ensure continuing stability for children. That is right, but we did not need Paul Martin's amendment. We acknowledge that couples can provide an enduring family relationship. As Margaret Smith said, we must ensure legal stability if one member of a couple dies, so that children who are affected have a parent who can continue the enduring family relationship and the family unit. Precisely for the reasons that Paul Martin gave, we must ensure that same-sex couples can adopt as couples and not just as individuals. We must reflect on the fact that we live in a world in which people are not queueing to adopt or to foster. People who wish to adopt or foster are valuable individuals and we must encourage, in a fair way, more people to adopt or foster. I want a Scotland in which children's rights are paramount. I do not want to hear about the old arguments and the old ways of Scotland. I want a new, modern and progressive Scotland. Sometimes, it is easy to be popular and more difficult to be right. Let us be right.

I have a serious point to make. Does the minister see the amendment having any unintended consequences, not in relation to faith-based agencies but in relation to local authorities, which are defined as adoption agencies?

The SNP values the role that faith-based agencies play in adoption, and the Education Committee was extremely impressed at stage 1 by their contribution. All parties—including Lord James, Elaine Murray, Kenneth Macintosh and others—agreed that the bill will not prevent faith-based agencies from referring people on. Why would we include in the bill something that is not necessary? We have an assurance from the minister that the faith-based agencies will continue to be able to refer people on. It is right for them to be able to refer on those people whom they cannot help. There is another argument about the philosophy and the approach of the bill, which puts the rights of the child first. Indeed, the only rights in the bill are the rights of children. That reflects the history of children's policy and the Children (Scotland) Act 1995, which put the rights of children first. To put the rights of adoption agencies or the rights of adoptees—

May I take an intervention, Presiding Officer?

I know that there is a difference of opinion within the Executive, but the minister should not use the Opposition to make that point. It is important that the bill does not give rights to adoption agencies or adoptees. Such rights would be superfluous, because the rights of children are paramount. Michael McMahon used the Fur Farming (Prohibition) (Scotland) Act 2002 to justify his amendment, but that reveals the flaw in his argument. We want faith-based agencies to be able to refer people on and there is nothing in the bill to prevent that. On those grounds, I reject Michael McMahon's amendment.

It is important that we legislate on matters that can be defined. Paul Martin said that people have personal definitions of the term "stable family unit". Section 31 uses the term "enduring family relationship", which is a different way of saying stable family unit. The courts and adoption agencies will ensure that children are adopted only by people who are in enduring family relationships, which will be in the child's best interests. Section 31 therefore does exactly what Paul Martin wants the bill to do, so there is no need for amendment 84. If the change that amendment 84 would make has no substance, we must ask what it is for. Section 9(3) says: "The court or adoption agency is to regard the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of the child throughout the child's life as the paramount consideration." The idea that a court or adoption agency would regard an adoption by an unstable family unit as somehow safeguarding a child's welfare is absurd. We should stick with the bill, which provides that children can be adopted only by people who are in an enduring family relationship.

An enduring family relationship is one that the people who will do the vetting and assessment of applicants judge to be a continuing relationship that will maintain the child throughout its life. Adoption is not just about the point of adoption; it is about the post-adoption period, which goes on for a long time. We have voted on the importance of adoption services throughout the child's life; the Children (Scotland) Act 1995, which underpins much of the bill, also refers to the welfare of the child throughout its life. I am confident that "enduring family relationship" is the term that we need. The term has a legal, rather than a personal definition, so we should stick with the bill as it stands.

Does the minister acknowledge that that was not in the bill at stage 1, and that the redefinition of adoption to include the whole process—pre-adoption, during adoption and post-adoption—rather than simply what happens at the point of adoption was the result of cross-party pressure from the committee? That substantial rewriting of the bill has meant that it was not possible for the committee or the Parliament to make any changes until we saw the amendments that were lodged five days ago.

I am struck by how much grace and modesty has been exhibited during the debate. I congratulate Jeremy Purvis on securing the debate and the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning on his stamina, as he has gone through a robust stage 3 and remained to respond to the debate. I declare an interest as a member of the colloquium of Heriot-Watt University and as a former postgraduate student at the Scottish College of Textiles. I am delighted with the progress that is being made at Netherdale, as Galashiels is a fantastic place to study. I was there many years ago, but I can say that it has a special feel to it for students. The relationship between the town and the students is healthy. I was impressed by the talent, expertise, energy and sheer spirit in Galashiels and by the contribution that the college made—I know that that is still the case. I studied business studies, but I was conversant with the issues and concerns that faced the hard-working textiles and design students. The fashion show that the school and Heriot-Watt University put on is certainly the  highlight of the year. I urge anyone who receives an invitation to go, because it is a showcase for Scotland and for the students. I congratulate everybody who is involved in the fantastic developments, which will result in a sea change. We have campaigned for the re-opening of the Waverley line. I often travelled from Galashiels to visit my parents on dark winter nights and I know about having to leave at midday on a Sunday to travel over Middleton moor in a cold and draughty bus to get back to Galashiels on a Sunday evening. That experience will be transformed for the students of the future. As members have said, the changes are not only about keeping talent in the Borders; they are also about attracting talent to the college so that people can have the experiences that I had. Derek Brownlee talked about families. We must reflect—and I hope that the minister will—on the fact that we have a strong Scottish qualifications and credit framework. One of the ideas about the articulation between colleges and universities is that, for those who come from deprived backgrounds and did not have a chance to access university, sometimes a further education college provides a foot in the door. Many of those who worked for the textiles companies that have now unfortunately gone are older women and I would like them to have the opportunity to come back into education through the further education college and then perhaps to move seamlessly on through the education system, perhaps achieving degrees with Heriot-Watt University. Christine Grahame talked about the articulation with the qualifications framework. The new campus is an interesting model—many of us will want to consider and examine its progress in years to come. I congratulate everybody who is involved in the changes. A phoenix may have arisen from what could have been ashes. The support for the retention of the school in Galashiels came not only from local members—members from throughout the parties wanted the special spirit to be retained. I look forward to seeing progress. We need to ensure that the co-location works for everybody. People in the Borders and elsewhere will examine it closely.

I welcome the new Minister for Education and Young People to his first question time and note that he has at short notice managed also to commandeer the international tourism and culture briefs, although he might want to take a crash course in Scottish film. Does the minister agree that there is more setting in Scottish schools than people realise? Given the onset of more advances in individualised learning, does he agree that it is about time we had an honest debate about what is happening? On the quotation that Bill Aitken used, perhaps the First Minister was just reflecting what is already happening in Scottish schools, rather than leading the debate.

Is the First Minister aware that the capital cost of St Patrick's primary school in Kilsyth in Cathie Craigie's constituency is £5.9 million in 2006 prices but that, as calculated using an Audit Scotland report from 2002, the extra costs for the contract will be between £4.4 million and £7.1 million? Will he finally acknowledge that the excess costs of PPP would be better invested in more teachers for smaller classes and in better equipment and resources to help to drive up attainment, particularly among the bottom 20 per cent of pupils in Scotland? Does he acknowledge that, according to a report by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education that was published this week, the performance of those pupils has remained disappointingly static under his stewardship?

rose—

On anomalies, does the member acknowledge that, although 90 per cent of three and four-year-olds go to nursery education, school transport is not provided because such education is not statutory?

Is the minister familiar with the Audit Scotland report into PPP school funding, which found that PPP projects cost between 2.5 per cent and 4 per cent more than they would if they were financed by traditional borrowing? To apply that to Ms Whitefield's constituency, that would mean a minimum saving of £15 million for Airdrie academy, £3.6 million for  Clarkston primary and £5.7 million for Chapelhall and St Aloysius primary. Is he aware that, in that case, traditional funding methods and not-for-profit schemes, as proposed by the Scottish National Party, would save enough money to fund an extra secondary school in Airdrie and Shotts?

Will the committee reflect on the fact that the section of the line where stations are less than a mile apart is the western part of the  line, where the current line is an extension of the Helensburgh line? Will the work on timetabling consider that issue in particular?

It might have taken the Conservatives eight years to recognise that, but some of us have valued Phil Gallie's contribution from the start.

I appreciate the member's comments. Does she agree that it is unwise to assume that funding for buses can be reallocated to fund the proposed station at Blackridge? There are already too many question marks over the funding for buses.

Jeremy Purvis will be pleased to hear that I will not be choking, as I have now fetched a bottle of water. I certainly have ambition for Linlithgow: I want the people of Linlithgow to be able to travel every day on a reliable railway that will help them to fulfil their obligations to arrive in Edinburgh on time for work; I want Waverley station to undergo phase 2 development; and I want a rail link from Edinburgh city to the airport. I just do not want the EARL scheme, because it is expensive and we could do far more with the money than the Liberal Democrats, with their limited ambition, have conceived of for Linlithgow and the rest of Scotland.

Does the member accept the evidence from West Lothian Council at the committee's meeting in Whitburn that the £500,000 that is on the table for bus subsidies will not be sufficient even to cover access to Armadale and Bathgate, let alone Blackridge?

I put on record my thanks to the Airdrie-Bathgate Railway and Linked Improvements Bill Committee. It has provided a robust examination of the case and its report is rounded, but also pointed in many areas. I remind the Parliament that people—some of whom might not live to see the railway opened—have campaigned for the railway line for many decades. We should thank those who have kept the pressure on in West Lothian and Lanarkshire to ensure that the line is reopened. As Phil Gallie made clear in his opening speech, there is a sound case for the project. The base case ratio of 1.81 makes it a sound investment. The benefits of the project are manifest. However, we should remind ourselves that it is not necessarily about providing an end-to-end solution from Glasgow to Edinburgh, so journey time should not be a major consideration, although it certainly is an issue in relation to profitability. However, 74 minutes compared with 50 minutes is a big difference. I remember that when Croy station was opened on the current Glasgow to Edinburgh line, it was a surprise to many that not only was commuting extensive between Croy and Glasgow, but it was extensive between West Lothian and Croy and Falkirk and Croy. We must remember that the world does not begin and end in Glasgow and Edinburgh: there is a great deal of vibrancy in the parts in between. The committee's report notes that the local  chambers of commerce made the point that although the areas between Glasgow and Edinburgh "should be the hub of economic growth, many were economically and socially neglected." There is a great deal of potential in the area and a great deal of optimism that it can be successful. Page 11 of the committee's report notes that "West Lothian Chamber of Commerce remarked that local small businesses are being constrained from growing into medium size enterprises due to the difficulty in recruiting people able to travel to work in the area." We are looking at a solution to untap potential, which is welcome. It is argued that the line will reduce congestion on the M8 by 10 per cent, but I agree with Bristow Muldoon that that might be an underestimate. Significantly, house-building growth and business growth have major implications. I do not know whether the Minister for Transport will have an opportunity to examine the heartland development in Whitburn, which will make a major and significant change to the area. Indeed, approval has been given for another exit off the M8. Obviously, there is concern about additional exits and entrances on the M8, so the decision shows the importance that is being attached to that economic development, and it adds to the case for a Blackridge station, in particular, because there is such development in the area. Even the Whitburn development alone will make a big difference. People in West Lothian have lived in hope for some time that the solum would be preserved, so it is convenient and beneficial that that will be the case, because otherwise the development would have been more difficult. The committee is right to say that the displaced cycle routes must be replaced with alternatives that satisfy cyclists. It is important that we ensure that a good replacement for the cycle route is provided. The report makes it clear that it is essential that there is adequate capacity at Waverley and it makes some pointed remarks about access into Edinburgh, which must be considered. As a daily commuter from Linlithgow to Edinburgh for more than 11 years, I say to Bristow Muldoon that Linlithgow commuters would much prefer to have a reliable service to Edinburgh five days a week than a direct service to the airport once a year, when they go on holiday. The railway system is creaking at the seams. There is a desperate need to ensure that we have a railway that is fit for purpose.

Bristow Muldoon did not give way to me, so I will not give way to him. It is important that the essential work that needs  to be done on the existing lines and track is carried out, as the report says. I turn to park-and-ride issues, which no one has mentioned. There is great potential for park and ride. I have some concern that the main park-and-ride development will be at Uphall. We should consider as possible locations for park-and-ride developments Armadale—although the numbers there are perhaps not as big as they should be—and Blackridge. The Airdrie to Bathgate line will offer potential for economic growth, but I want to focus on the case for a station at Blackridge. It would not be right for members of a community in the west of West Lothian to have trains hurtling through their village and not have a station. Frankly, I am disappointed that a proposal for a station at Blackridge was not in the bill in the first place.

We did not say that.

No, he did not. It was useful that the committee gave everyone a fair hearing. The preliminary stage report—to which the committee signed up unanimously—states: "The Committee acknowledges the arguments made for these additional stations, for example, the social case for a station at Plains and the stronger economic case put forward for Blackridge." I agree with that and I am glad that Cathy Peattie does, too. As well as a strong economic case, there is a good practical case for a station at Blackridge. As anyone who is familiar with the geography of Armadale and Blackridge will know, for many people in Armadale a station at Blackridge would be nearer and quicker to get to than a station at Armadale. If the Armadale station proves more popular than the station at Bathgate—we have heard how popular the existing Bathgate to Edinburgh line is—having another station at Blackridge would allow a spread of use between Armadale and Blackridge. The popularity of the Bathgate to Edinburgh route cannot be overstated. The twin tracking of that stretch of line is essential. At the moment, trains must stop at Uphall and Livingston North,  which is completely unacceptable. First ScotRail acknowledges that there are issues with those delays. I am glad that twin tracking can start soon.

I would have liked stations at Blackridge and Plains to have been included in the initial proposal. The problem is that they were not. The committee is not responsible for the late introduction of the bill by the promoter. The position that we are in is unfortunate. It is deeply worrying that the current Government is saying that no additional funds will be provided to build those stations. The idea that they can be built from savings that are made while the line is constructed is of concern. That is why a national contribution is necessary to ensure that they are delivered. It is disingenuous to say that those savings will come from bus routes, because the committee acknowledged that the amount of money that it is predicted will be needed for bus links is probably an underestimate. Bus links will still be needed to Armadale, so the idea that £500,000 will be available to fund a station at Blackridge is not realistic. That sum is probably not sufficient to fund the bus services that might be needed elsewhere in the county. Many hard decisions still need to be made. I am disappointed that there is no commitment to stations at Blackridge and Armadale in the bill. The Transport and Works (Scotland) Bill will, if passed, allow them to be provided for subsequently, but the Airdrie-Bathgate Railway and Linked Improvements Bill represents an opportunity for Labour and the Liberal Democrats to deliver them now. Those parties may want a second chance after May, but that is for voters to decide. The line is important, not just as a strategic transport link but as a link for individuals. Several years ago, when the Motorola plant in Bathgate was still open, I listened to one of the managers talk about the problems with the transport links. He said that he had a group of apprentices who came from North Lanarkshire, only one of whom could drive—he came from Airdrie. He drove his colleagues to work at Motorola, but he failed to pass his exams to proceed with the apprenticeship, which meant that all four apprentices had to give up work. That is a salient reminder that the building of the new line will benefit individuals: it is not just about trains and strategic links. If we can provide hope, opportunity  and life chances to people such as those young men, we will be doing a good job.

rose—

Obviously, Sandra White would have liked to be here to speak about NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, but I will address the wider issues that are identified in the debate's title, "National Bed Assessment", and pick up on some issues that have been raised in the debate. John Swinburne is right to reflect that, although in Parliament we by and large deal with management processes in the health service at a strategic level, ultimately it is about individuals and people. That must colour our perceptions of and discussions on the health service. When I was first elected to the Parliament in 1999, my first question at my first meeting with representatives of Lothian Health Board was, "What are you going to do about MRSA?" They replied that the design of the new royal infirmary would cut down MRSA figures. Unfortunately, recent figures show that the incidence of MRSA at the Edinburgh royal infirmary is high—at a time, interestingly, when St John's hospital has made great progress in reducing it. If we are to tackle the issue of hospital bed assessments, we need to learn from elsewhere. I am interested in hearing the minister's reasons for not carrying out a national bed assessment in Scotland, given that such an assessment took place in England as a means of directing resources. The changes to A and E services that members have already highlighted also have implications. For example, in the Lothians, emergency surgery  and orthopaedic trauma services were moved from St John's hospital to Edinburgh royal infirmary. Indeed, because of that decision, Edinburgh royal infirmary has to increase the capacity of its reception area by 40 per cent. Many requiring orthopaedic trauma treatment are elderly people who, for example, have broken bones. In the Lothians, they have to go to ERI for their initial treatment and either are sent home with a care package—which, in the case that John Swinburne highlighted, was obviously sadly lacking—or, if they need to remain in hospital for treatment, are sent back to St John's. I wonder whether elderly people should be shifted from pillar to post in that way. We have rehearsed the arguments about those clinical arrangements, but I want to look at how the situation pans out across Scotland. I know that planning work has been undertaken on health board catchment areas and so on. However, with the closure of the A and E department at Monklands hospital, the ambulance services will have to make a judgment call whether to take people who live in the west of West Lothian to the ERI or to St John's. Of course, if people require emergency surgery or orthopaedic trauma treatment, they can no longer be taken to St John's. At the moment, my constituents are quite often taken to Monklands hospital but, if that A and E department is closed, where can they go? A hospital is planned for Larbert, but that in turn raises questions about the size of its catchment area. I also know that clinicians at St John's are concerned about the sustainability of some services if the hospital at Larbert begins to take some of the patients from West Lothian. As a result, bed assessments are important not only for individual treatments but for service sustainability. Of course, hospitals tend not to keep people in for as long as they used to, but that practice has serious implications for patients who have had to travel great distances. Moreover, members have highlighted the impact of evening discharge on individuals and their families. It has become increasingly clear from my constituency case load that centralising services has led to patients being discharged at awkward times of the night. Of course, that is fine for patients whose families live in the immediate vicinity, but the situation can prove difficult for patients who live an hour away and have, for example, to negotiate the Edinburgh bypass. I hope that we can reflect calmly and coolly on the reality on the ground. We know that the area is complex and that issues have become compounded but, unless we know what we are working with, we cannot make any judgments. The call for a national bed assessment, which the SNP supports, is probably the least that we can ask to take this matter forward.

The minister will know that I have concerns about building on brownfield sites and particularly about demolition processes. I support amendment 84; public health must be a consideration. Demolition is not a prescribed process. Councils have concerns about  that, and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency has concerns about particular substances. The minister addressed some of those points when we discussed an amendment that I lodged at stage 2. However, I have since written to her to ask why the concerns that she acknowledged are not dealt with adequately by the bill. Amendment 84 would allow us broad scope to consider public health when we consider planning. If we are building on brownfield sites and, during demolition, it is found that asbestos has been used—as has happened in my constituency—people must be protected. I urge the minister to give amendment 84 due consideration.

Will the minister give way?

The debate has been thoughtful and some important comments have been made. By and large, it has  been a consensual debate. If one message comes out of it, it is that all parties are determined to tackle the problem. The Executive can count on the Parliament's support for that. I congratulate the Executive on producing an action plan seven years on—it is better late than never. As the action plan document shows, we are presented with some challenges. The child who was nine years old when the Executive came to power is now 16 years old and could well be a person who is not in education, employment or training. The document separates the pre-16 situation and the post-16 situation. The blue-headed pages of the document, for which the Deputy First Minister and Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning is not responsible, are perhaps more detailed and have more content, and have been the subject of most of the debate. The pink-headed pages, for which the minister is responsible, are perhaps a bit lighter and have not had as much consideration in the debate. When the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning sums up, perhaps he will address the points about the situation post 16. We have a big problem and we recognise the scale of it. Why did what was done before not work? Much of what is in the document justifies current strands of thinking. What has changed? We know that the welcome contributions from the Hunter Foundation and the Smith group are new and did not exist before, but I am interested in what the step change is. As Nicol Stephen said, it might be the fact that the document is the first action plan that brings everything together, and that people have a sense of ownership and of tackling the problem collectively. That might be the difference, but we deserve to hear so. The problem is enormous, and we are not the only country that is tackling it. The main factors in young people finding themselves not in education, employment or training are disadvantage and educational dissatisfaction. The debate has reflected that. The situation is unsustainable for the individuals concerned and for the country. A few people have said—rightly—that the group is not homogeneous. The cohort that is not in education, employment or training includes a number of categories. One main category is care leavers, 59 per cent of whom are not in education, employment or training. Would anyone like their child to have a 59 per cent chance of being in that situation? None of us wants that, yet that is the reality for children who are under the state's care and for whom the state has parental responsibility. I welcome the development of a strategy for looked-after children, but I remember that Cathy Jamieson was the minister who was previously in charge of that strategy, which has been a long time coming. That  has contributed to our frustration. Carers form 5.8 per cent of the NEET group and young parents form 20 per cent—Shona Robison touched on teenage pregnancies. The issue is not just opportunities for people post 16. The key argument that many of us make is the need to make early intervention a priority. If we can take a message from the debate, it is that early intervention has consequences for teenage pregnancies, health and justice issues, which Kenny MacAskill talked about. We have debated why Scotland has one of the highest suicide rates for young men and we have debated mental health problems. The consequences of early intervention are deep and manifest. Why is early intervention important? Nine per cent of young people have physical or mental health problems. When we talk about early intervention, we mean additional support for learning and the need for nursery teachers to identify problems early in education—David Davidson spoke about that. The children concerned generally have problems that relate to wider societal issues. If we can do anything today and give ministers a message, we should say that, by and large, the issue is about education, family responsibilities and social breakdown, which we must address. That is one of the clearest messages that we can send. This is one of the few times that I have agreed whole-heartedly with Duncan McNeil, who made a thoughtful speech. Self-esteem, wanting to learn, knowing how to learn, dignity, discipline and respect are important issues. I will touch on the points about pupil motivation, skills and vocational and technical training, which Alex Neil mentioned. Parity of esteem is essential. Things will not work if skills academies and vocational education are seen as a dumping ground or ghetto—we have been told that in the schools and colleges review and the pupil motivation inquiry. It is essential that every child has an opportunity to gain vocational or technical experience. Providing such opportunities takes us back to "A Curriculum for Excellence", reviewing the curriculum and opening up space and time to provide those opportunities. There was an interesting polarity between what Frances Curran and Murdo Fraser said. Both mentioned project funding for voluntary organisations, which is a strong theme. The Prince's Trust's work on xlerate with xl represents an important contribution that can make a big difference. Working with the few is essential and can benefit the many. Colleges do not have the capacity to cope with the sheer scale of what has been proposed; rather, we are talking about skills opportunities  within schools, on which we have heard announcements in recent days. However, there are challenges in pupils going to colleges or colleges coming to pupils. A big issue for colleges if more 14-year-olds go to them is understanding the new child protection issues. We must get our heads round such things. Big businesses and small businesses can make an important contribution in our communities. A sense of identity can be promoted. Long-term investments can be made for long-term improvements. That is what early intervention is about. It is about encouraging businesses not only to work with 14 to 17-year-olds but to get in earlier to support communities and schools and to give people a sense of discipline, identity, self-esteem and dignity, as has been discussed. The minister will have sensed from members that a community of interest exists in Scotland to make things work. The cost of not doing what should be done is too great for individuals and for Scotland. Individuals' lost opportunities are opportunity costs for the country that cannot be afforded.

Perhaps the member should reflect on the fact that the Executive has abandoned the integrated community schools initiative.

I appreciate the member's comments. Does he agree with the SNP that, precisely for that kind of assessment, access to a nursery teacher should be available for all children, especially those from the most deprived areas?

Will the member give way?

Will Murdo Fraser give way?

I appreciate the comments that the minister has made so far, but does he accept that if education is so important in tackling the problem, the absence of the Minister for Education and Young People and his deputy is an insult not only to this chamber but to the young people concerned?

Is the minister aware that the SNP's school-building programme will match brick for brick any proposals by the Executive? When he considers his priorities, what priority does he give to after-hours access to PPP schools by youth and community groups to tackle the fitness and obesity problems in our communities? Can he confirm that expensive PPP programmes lock out youth and community groups from schools at 4 o'clock? What is the Executive doing about that?

Can the minister reassure Parliament that he will take every step to re-examine the published paper and that he will, if it contains any clinical arguments that people who live in more remote areas are being put at risk, take action to ensure that the centralisation that is proceeding across Scotland—including the centralisation by stealth at St John's hospital—is tackled and stopped immediately?

Government statistics show that there has been a 10 per cent increase in the number of persistent offenders. Does the minister think that the policy of ASBOs and dispersals has achieved anything?

A stark warning that society is demonising its children has been issued only this morning. A leading Scottish political figure has said that Scottish society is at "a very dangerous tipping point" because adults are turning young people into hate figures. That figure was not Robin Harper; it was not my colleague Kenny MacAskill; and it was not any of the Conservatives. I hate to tell the  Executive that it was Ewan Aitken, the Labour leader of the City of Edinburgh Council. In that regard, Derek Brownlee was right to accuse the minister of complacency. As members recall, Ewan Aitken was until very recently the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities' spokesperson on education and young people. However, this morning, he is quoted as saying that "the nation's youth was being 'demonised' and that it was vital to address the misconception that most of them were up to no good". In that respect, I welcome the fact that the Greens have raised the debate, because we do young people a disservice if we do not address their very real concerns. No one underestimates the problems that are caused in our communities by persistent young offenders' antisocial behaviour. However, as I said, we do young people a disservice by not reflecting the wider issues and the longer-term implications of a policy that deals with the symptoms rather than the causes of the malaise in our society. In my brief time, I want to focus on early intervention. Yesterday, Parliament debated the Education Committee's report on its early years inquiry, which concluded that if we want to tackle society's problems and try to change it for the better, we have to consider early intervention. The same applies to justice issues. A study by the Glasgow children's reporter shows that 40 per cent of persistent young offenders aged 15 had first been referred for care and protection at the age of eight. There is a sense of urgency and alarm because we have seen 55,000 children and young people referred to the children's reporters this year. The care and protection figures have escalated, and I know that the minister has acknowledged the problems, but referrals for criminal behaviour have actually remained fairly static. If we accept that those who are vulnerable and are under care and protection have a tendency to become persistent young offenders later, and if we do not tackle the mismatch between the escalation of the care and protection figures and the other issues, we are storing up problems for the future, because once a young person is in that cycle it is difficult to get him or her out.

I appreciate the point that Jeremy Purvis makes, and I said that the increase in numbers is complex. However, one of the concerns that we have heard from children's reporters is that they have to refer cases back because social workers and police are referring cases in the first place because they see doing so as a passport to getting services. That is where the pressures and constraints are. Because of the Executive's focus on youth offending as an issue for social work, social workers' career prospects are better in criminal justice than they are in child protection social work. Vacancies for child protection workers exist for longer than do those in other areas. Committees of Parliament have suggested that it might be appropriate for all social workers to have mandatory child protection sessions, because of the shortages in child protection. When we consider the demonisation that takes place and the concerns that have been raised by some child protection cases, we can understand the anxieties that social workers have about specialising in child protection. Early intervention can work. I recently visited the Blackford Brae project, which is run by Barnardo's Scotland. That facility deals with young people, many as young as primary-school age, who are in fear of exclusion, and it saves the state money because it helps young people to stay in mainstream education, and tackles their antisocial behaviour when they are very young. If it is not tackled when they are young, it leads to overcrowded prisons and other pressures later. I wonder about the minister's comments and about his willingness to trot out the successes of the Executive. I wonder whether the Liberal Democrats really want to be part and parcel of an Executive that uses such antisocial behaviour rhetoric, as opposed to action. I see some interesting grimaces on Mike Rumbles's face, but I seriously believe that the minister's comments belied his sense of discomfort. Perhaps we will get a Labour minister with responsibility for justice to sum up, or perhaps the Liberal Democrat minister will be able to tell us in his summing up speech what he really thinks.

There is concern about the facilities that young people can use. How does the minister feel about the public-private partnership contracts that lock young people out of schools and mean that they cannot take part in youth activities because the rents are too high?

It has been suggested to the committee that we should consider mandatory training for childminders. However, that can be  provided only if finance is available to provide relief support for childminders who undergo training. The councils are obviously best placed to provide that. Has the Executive considered that matter seriously?

This morning's meeting of the Parliament has offered an interesting reflection on how far Scottish democracy has progressed. It started with time for reflection led by an 18-year-old female bricklayer and—in a Parliament in which 40 per cent of members are women—it continued with a debate in which nine speakers have been men and only two have been women, despite the fact that the subject matter has traditionally been regarded as a women-led agenda. We must acknowledge, as the Education Committee's report does, the importance of the women—particularly those in the workforce—who provide most of the care, support and education of young people. The committee witnessed and applauds the pride and passion of all the people who work in the early years sector. Katie McAdam said that all young people deserve a positive future, which is exactly what the report and the debate are about. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said that we must invest in early years for the Scotland of tomorrow. He is right. We heard about the cognitive development that is important if we are to build a knowledge economy. Members also said that if we are to tackle issues to do with justice and antisocial behaviour and ensure that our young people have good social skills and behaviour, action must be taken at a very early stage. Perhaps we should consider early years intervention and support in the context of the justice debate. Christine Grahame touched on that. Early years support and intervention are about  the Scotland of today as much as they are about the Scotland of tomorrow. It is important that children in the here and now receive support in a safe and stimulating environment. When we and the Government consider budgets, we must acknowledge that care and support for today are as important as investment for tomorrow. Important points have been made on interesting strands of the debate. The Education Committee supported the momentum in the early years of devolution for the provision of education for all three and four-year-olds, and much of the debate has focused on nursery provision for children in that age group. However, the committee feels most passionately about the zero-to-three agenda, to which the Parliament can make a difference. It is not local councils but health authorities that have the lead responsibility for children under three in Scotland. The fourth edition of "Health for All Children"—Hall 4—noted that there has been a reduction in access to health visitors, who are the only point of contact for many people with children under three. We must consider who provides services if we want there to be universal provision, which is a theme in the committee's report. Universal provision does not mean that everybody should receive the same service; it means that everybody should receive something, which is the message that emerges from the debate. We must consider provision for children under three, which has been described as a "mosaic", a "cocktail" and a "patchwork". As the committee said, services must be integrated at the point of delivery. The system is currently a morass and is far too complicated. We must simplify the structures around provision. Wendy Alexander said that everyone should have an entitlement to services, but interpretations differ as to what the entitlement should be. David McLetchie made the case for a voucher system—whether those are vouchers in the traditional sense or tax credits—but he talked about a demand-led approach to child care. He was right to say that Gordon Brown has introduced such an approach but, although the voucher scheme has helped some people, it has not improved the delivery of child care services. People need choice and flexibility, which is why a shift in emphasis from a demand-led approach to child care to an approach that considers supply and integrates services would provide more flexibility and choice and deliver better services, particularly in areas that are hard to reach, whether they are rural areas or deprived communities, as David Davidson said. The issue is at the heart of the debate. With the exception of the Labour Party, I think that every party in the Scottish Parliament would like the Parliament to have increased economic  powers. The debate on fiscal autonomy always focuses on economic matters such as changes to corporation tax, but perhaps the Parliament could take a lead and consider supply-side issues and the benefits of having increased powers over funding streams for child care. Perhaps that is the dialogue that we should have with Westminster. The committee makes a benign statement about the integration of funding streams, but integration is genuinely needed if we are to improve service delivery. Parents in Scotland pay up to 70 per cent of their child care costs, unlike parents in other countries. Committee members took part in fascinating visits to Finland and Sweden, where parents pay only 30 per cent of the costs. That makes a huge difference to families. We also considered the experience of children in other countries. In Helsinki, every child receives the same food and learns the social skills that are so important—Wendy Alexander mentioned nutrition. The extension of the nursery school day, even by a few hours, would help to improve children's experiences. The Scottish National Party is committed to increasing nursery provision by 50 per cent and acknowledges that nursery provision is not just about education but can help parents. The SNP thinks that every child should have access to a nursery teacher—currently only 40 per cent of children do. Those two policies could make a difference. The committee's report should be regarded as a staging post and not as the end of a process. It should represent the start of dialogue and debate. At last night's reception, I heard that as a result of the report, East Lothian Council is interviewing candidates for the post of early years development officer working with children under three and the private sector. Change is happening, which is the report's purpose. There are big gaps in the national review of the early years and child care workforce. Consideration must be given not just to improved provision but to structural matters. It was remiss of the Executive to neglect the consideration of nursery teachers in the review. We must provide support for grandparents if we are serious about the zero to three-year-olds. Research shows that 36 per cent of under-threes and 15 per cent of three to five-year-olds are looked after by grandparents, many of whom have finished their working lives and are looking forward to their retirement. They support their children and grandchildren out of love, so the least that we can do is to provide support for them. Ken Macintosh talked about the informal arrangements in playgroups and other support. Nobody says that we must be prescriptive about grandparents, but their support for their grandchildren should be  acknowledged and valued through some kind of social provision. Again, that cannot be done through vouchers or a demand-led approach. If we are serious about supporting grandparents in Scotland, we must have an integrated supply mechanism to fund child care. I will end on a point about the early years funding strategy. The City of Edinburgh Council is absolutely right to ask why we have a separate schools budget but not a separate early years strategy and funding stream. Such a strategy would allow integration with child protection work in the health sector—a lot of integrated work is happening on that—and additional support for learning. A single funding stream that gave local authorities flexibility in deploying resources—as the committee's report states, they are the best placed to do that—is a meaningful measure that could come from the committee's report and the debate. I hope that the debate is not the end of a committee inquiry but the start of a continuing debate that has some meaning, because we are considering not only the children of Scotland's today but the children of Scotland's tomorrow.

In paragraph 139 on page 32 of its report, the committee identifies the importance of the tax and benefits system in ensuring a joined-up approach to child care.

Wendy Alexander mentioned having a child around for fourteen hours, but my young child does not sleep. She is right about entitlements, however. She mentioned universal provision, but the problem is that much of the funding for support for zero to three-year-olds comes through the working tax credit and other provision for working families. If we agree that some support is required for all mothers of zero to three-year-olds, we must find a way of having a supply-side subsidy, even if it allows only a few hours of support a day.

Will the member give way?

The committee is concerned that 36 per cent of children under three receive full-time care from their grandparents. Will the member comment on that?

I acknowledge the Executive's moves to make improvements in primary 1 and in the transition from nursery to primary, but how many additional nursery teachers has the Executive employed? If the minister cannot tell me the answer now, does it not cast some doubt on how the Executive is meeting its targets for class-size reduction in P1? Is it taking nursery teachers out of nursery classes?

That was a very important statement for the Executive to make. However, how does the minister relate that statement to reports by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education? An HMIE report on the estates review in Moray specifically mentioned the 60 per cent rule and capacity issues. How will the minister ensure that the Accounts Commission, as well as using a value judgment on undercapacity, takes account of the educational and community benefits that a rural school can offer? How can we change the current climate, in which too many schools feel under threat because of statements from the Accounts Commission and from HMIE, which report to you?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive has any plans to conduct a review of how children's services are funded. (S2F-2486)

Does the First Minister share my concern at the 15 per cent increase in child protection referrals that is revealed in the figures that were published on Friday? Each and every one of them reflects a damaged childhood. How does that square with the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration's concerns about the crisis in funding there and Professor Midwinter's claim that the structural funding gap and the mismatch between national and local levels—councils spend more than 60 per cent of grant-aided expenditure on those services—are the most worrying he has seen in decades? Does the plight of the most vulnerable children in Scotland not give a practical and urgent reason why the First Minister must publish the budget review group's review now?

I draw Parliament's attention to the first item of business on Wednesday 25 October, which is a debate on the Education Committee's report on its early years inquiry. Although I appreciate the opportunity to debate early years, which is an important issue, I have concerns about the start time of the debate. I have raised the issue with my business manager, and the committee convener has also expressed concerns. We must find space and time for legislation and for debates on inquiry reports. However, there was no consultation about changes in the allocation of time. Four members of the Education Committee did not arrive for several hours this morning because of disruption on the transport system. Many people travel to the Parliament. Given the changes in timetables that we expect from December, we must consider carefully how we conduct our business. There should be consultation on changes in business, especially with those members who have child care responsibilities.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether a reduction in training opportunities in specialist training posts in anaesthetics as part of the modernising medical careers programme will reduce the anaesthetics services available in St John's hospital in Livingston. (S2O-10702)

Is the minister aware that, whether he likes it or not, the new fixed-term contracts for junior doctors are considered to be second-class training and that, already, our best trainee anaesthetists are leaving Scotland? Is he aware that, as consultants told MSPs last night, many of the trainees who will fill contracts in August next year will not be ready immediately to fill on-call rosters, which will mean that women in labour and people in need of emergency surgery may need to be transferred from district general hospitals such as St John's to bigger acute services hospitals? Does he agree that that is no  way to run a health service and that he must act now to stop junior doctors voting with their feet?

To ask the Scottish Executive what controls are available to prevent pollution from the activity of mobile crushing plants used to crush demolition arisings for the purposes of recycling. (S2O-10583)

It is rather difficult to say. I am sure that the minister agrees that no contaminated waste should be recycled as part of the arisings. However, how can she be sure that the materials are separated properly in the first place and that no contamination is spread by the operation of mobile crushing plants that are not licensed in Scotland but are imported from elsewhere?

Does the minister agree that, when Labour came to power, only 8 per cent of university entrants came from deprived backgrounds and that the figure has gone up only to 8.6 per cent? There is a huge challenge left unmet.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I have particular concerns about the further education figures, which is why I am concerned that the numbers going into higher education—which includes universities and further education colleges—have flatlined under this Government, despite its claim that the numbers have increased.

The Executive has already written off a third of the debt and the current annual repayment income on the existing debt is only £29 million. Does the minister consider that to be a satisfactory state of affairs for public finance?

All of us in the chamber will recognise the opportunities that access to higher education can bring. Many of us will have been the first in our families to have gone to university. Since I went to university in the 1980s, at the age of 17, there has been an expansion in the number of young people who go to university. However, the Government wants to claim as its own successes in the expansion of access to higher education that were achieved before it came to power. Today, the Scottish National Party can reveal figures that show that, despite there being 2,000 more 17-year-old Scots in the population than there were in 2001, 2,000 fewer of them are going to university now than were five years ago. When Labour came to power, 46.6 per cent of young people in Scotland were going into higher education. Now, marginally fewer—46.4 per cent—are doing so according to the Executive's latest figures in its "Age Participation Index for Scotland 2004-05". We can debate whether the figure is too high or whether it is sustainable, but we cannot argue—as the Government tries to—that the figure has gone up.

If the minister had listened to the start of my speech, he would have heard me say that there was an increase in student numbers in the 1990s. However, the increase began in 1990, not when Labour came to power. The Executive claims, in its glossy documents, that the increase was down to the Labour Government, but it was not. Just as the school performance of the bottom 25 per cent of pupils is flatlining, and just as pupils' attainment below higher level is flatlining, so the Government's performance in higher education is flatlining. The fact that a Labour document claims that student numbers have gone up and that access to higher education has increased under Labour from 40 per cent to 50 per cent, although it has not, shows us that the Government does not have a grasp of the fact that it is flatlining in its education performance. It is no wonder that Jack McConnell wants to introduce another arithmetic examination—he must want to check dodgy  Labour claims. If he is responsible for this matter, we will be left with the bizarre sight of a mathematics teacher who cannot count. The SNP believes that those from deprived backgrounds should have wider access to higher education. The Government says that it believes the same but, since 2002, it has managed to increase the number of students from deprived backgrounds in higher education only from 1,630 to 1,665. That grand total of 30 people is hardly anything to write home about—or even enough to put in an amendment. After nine years of Labour and seven years of Labour and Liberal Democrat rule, we should be seeing some results. There is a debate to be had about participation levels in higher education. I think that the target of about 50 per cent is about right, given that other countries are competing for knowledge economy jobs in a fast-changing world where one's ability to learn tomorrow is as important as what one knows today. I should point out that the current 46 per cent participation rate includes people taking higher national certificate and higher national diploma college courses, which is probably why the rate was so high when Labour came to power after the Tories. Anyone who attacks such levels should consider that point.

No—I want to carry on. The 50 per cent participation rate is made up primarily of people from the middle class. Perhaps many of those people might find more personal fulfilment if they pursued other opportunities instead of automatically drifting to universities. If everyone is to fulfil their potential, we need the brightest people in deprived communities to form more of that 50 per cent. If the Government has increased neither the absolute numbers at universities nor the number of people from deprived areas going to universities, what has it done? Well, the state has created a mountain of debt that hangs like a millstone round the neck of students and graduates in their 20s and 30s and is a drag on the economy. In 1999, the average student debt was £2,500. Since then, that amount has been ratcheted up to an average £11,000 today, and it is rising even further as a result of back-end endowment fees that are added on at graduation. Debt and the fear of debt put off exactly the sort of students from deprived backgrounds whom we want to get into university. Although the United Kingdom figure for university applications has risen, there has been a dip in the number of applications from Scots, particularly from over-25-year-olds with financial and family commitments. As a result, there are compelling education and  social justice reasons to tackle the student loans situation, although the public finance and economic arguments, which my colleagues will set out during the debate, are just as important. The point is that the student loans and graduate debt system in this country is inefficient, expensive and a drain on the public purse.

I am about to discuss that. It would cost £100 million. The Conservatives have published figures showing that across the UK the public purse is shelling out £1 billion a year to subsidise the interest on loans, even though it has been estimated that 30 per cent of them will never be repaid. In Scotland alone, the cost of interest subsidies is £100 million. That figure does not even take into account the loans that Labour sold off in 1997. Scots have paid out more than £25 million—and indeed are still paying—to subsidise loans that have been sold off to banks in America and from which they will see no income. Even though they were based on a seven-year repayment model, loans are taking 13 years to repay. The situation is so bad that, according to the Government's accounts, it has already written off £500 million of the debt. Indeed, the difference between the book value of the debt and its fair value shows that the Government itself expects not to get back a third of it. The Government says that the debt amounts to £1.4 billion, but it needs to look at its own accounts. There is a serious concern about the growing debt culture in this country and whether individuals or the economy can sustain such debt. The Bank of England has warned that student fees in England will increase inflation. The SNP wants an education system based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. As a result, we want to stop the fundamentally flawed, expensive and unsustainable rip-off of the public purse that is the student loans system. It is clear that, in that respect, the public finance arguments are as compelling as the access to education arguments. Parents and grandparents want their children and grandchildren to have the life chances that they never had, but they are horrified by the level of debt in which those children and grandchildren find themselves. Scotland in the 21 st century needs a Government that is bold and imaginative, not tired and flatlining. It is time for a change to get the Parliament and the country moving. I say to the Labour and Liberal Democrat Government: move over, so that Scotland can move on. I move,  That the Parliament recognises the opportunities made available to young people accessing higher education in Scotland and the importance to the Scottish economy of having a highly educated workforce; notes with concern, however, that debt and the fear of debt are having an adverse affect on Scots applying to universities; believes that access to university should be based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay, and calls for replacement of the current expensive and inefficient student loans system by a fairer grant system and for the problem of student loan graduate debt, which is a drag on the economy, to be addressed.

This is an important and much-awaited bill. It draws on the  raw emotions of the human condition, because at its core is a response to love and loss, hurt and harm. We must always remember that behind the bill are many children who need love and support. It is incumbent on us all to put them at the forefront of our consideration. I agree with David McLetchie on a number of points, which is quite worrying. I agree with him on the consolidation of the legislation, which is a good practice that has emerged. However, we note that there are 83 sections on adoption, 11 on permanence and one on fostering. I echo Susan Deacon's point that perhaps not everything should be done by law. The minister is trying to tell us that the fostering strategy is probably more about policy and regulation than about primary legislation, but we do not know and cannot judge, because we do not have that before us. Many people have raised that concern. It has been an interesting debate. Adam Ingram set the bill in context as only one part of the wider policy issue and the wider concern about children in care and in need. I am disappointed that those who have commented about children living in families with drug and alcohol misuse are not present to hear that, because that is an important part of the debate. The First Minister says that more children should be taken into care. He should consider the bill's financial memorandum and the absence of a fostering strategy before making such judgments and comments. Euan Robson talked about permanence orders. They provide the biggest step change in the bill, and they will make a big difference to individuals, especially bearing it in mind that many children who are up for adoption or who need a permanence order are not young, as used to be the case, but older. Elaine Murray made an interesting point about a partnership being tested as part of the assessment process. That is an important idea and should be considered. There are different opinions, and if they are expressed in a measured way in the chamber, they should be listened to and taken account of. Roseanna Cunningham talked about whether there was a need for an opt-out requirement for faith-based agencies. The committee tested that idea to a considerable extent, and we came to the view that it would not be required. However, it is clear that there is much to be learned from the two faith-based agencies that gave evidence, particularly on the need for a national perspective on operation and advice. I hope that the minister will consider that. At the end of the day, the issue is about children and what is in their interests. I take the minister's point about children's advice and views being  heard, and we may need to test that at stage 2. There were also some important contributions about contact orders. I am concerned about the leave of court procedure, about which the Faculty of Advocates is concerned, because it is not a part of Scots law. Scott Barrie made an important point about delay in the system. I am not convinced that changing the definition will create big growth in adoption numbers; that awaits proof. However, it will speed the system and stop the drift and delay. The adoption process can take several years, which is a lifetime to young children. That must be addressed. Kinship care has been discussed a lot and well argued. Unless the minister says so in his summing-up, I will not be convinced that the Executive has proposals on the table from which we can take comfort. I would like to hear something a bit more exact from him. Maureen Watt made an excellent speech that addressed many of the key issues that we must consider at stage 2. A particular issue is the idea that the adoption process is long lasting. The sense of identity that teenagers or sometimes people in their early 20s may want, even if they were adopted earlier, needs to be recognised. Support needs to be given at a later stage. Not having a fostering strategy to consider puts the cart before the horse, as Maureen Watt said. Maureen Watt also talked about the state as parent. We need to ensure that children can go into loving family homes because the state is not the best provider of services, support and parenting for children, despite the dedication that is shown by many people who work in the sector. We have an obligation to do something about that. Members, including David McLetchie, have talked about evidence. I do not think that evidence exists either way; we were not convinced of any evidence either way. However, that does not mean that we should not do the right thing. If the life chances of a small number of people can be affected, we should take action. If no evidence exists, that does not mean that we should have complete inaction. Inaction has for far too long bedevilled the adoption system, which needs to change. I urge members who are thinking about voting against the motion to note that this is stage 1 and that there is far too much detail that affects adoption more widely for members to vote against the motion now. Opportunities will arise at stages 2 and 3. I see the logic of David Petrie's proposal, although I happen to disagree with it. I urge members not to throw the baby out with the bath water by rejecting the bill. In his e-mail to us, John  Deighan suggested that a vote of conscience should be taken at stages 2 and 3. We do not want to lock children out of loving homes, whether that means one or two children or the tens of thousands whom the bill could affect. We need to widen the pool of adopters. The rights of children to be adopted and to be given the love and care of a family home should come before any trade-off that involves individuals' rights. The bill will create no right of individuals to adopt. Patrick Harvie normally makes good speeches, but I was disappointed that he did not mention children and that his speech was not about children. If we are to persuade people, we must ensure that the rights of children come first. That is precisely what representatives of gay organisations who gave evidence to the Education Committee did: they focused on the child's needs.

No—the Presiding Officer has indicated that I need to finish. The whole point of the bill is stability and the arguments about that are important. If members think that unmarried opposite-sex couples or same-sex couples should not be allowed to adopt as couples, perhaps they should lodge amendments to remove the opportunities for individuals to adopt. If the precautionary principle were applied, such opportunities would be removed. However, I doubt whether anybody would be prepared to do that. I say to members who are deciding how to vote that they must look to their conscience. As Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, the question is one of compassion and wisdom. Wisdom says that we should consider the bill at stages 2 and 3. On compassion, our conscience should be not worn on our sleeve but felt in our heart. Conscience puts children first. I support the bill.

As a member of the Education Committee, I point out that the committee  acknowledges that. We do not think that there will be a large expansion as a result of the redefinition. However, the change will be significant for the individuals concerned.

We do not intend to vote against the financial resolution on the bill. However, does the member agree that it might be helpful if the Executive took the opportunity to provide supplementary evidence on the financial memorandum during stage 2, for precisely the reasons that he has mentioned?

One way in which we can improve the uptake of adoption, particularly by married couples, is through adoption leave. It is essential that, in employment terms, adopting a child should be considered similar to a pregnancy and that employers should provide support. That is one way of removing barriers.

The minister will be aware that some of us were concerned that the bill as introduced seemed to indicate that there would be support only at the point of adoption. Is he indicating now that he recognises that adoption is a lifetime process and that there should be continuing support?

I appreciate Robin Harper's comments, but does he agree that we should urge the Parliament to have a broader debate on risk issues, perhaps on a day when we do not have an interesting visitor addressing the Labour group? Perhaps more of the Labour members could then join Mary Mulligan and contribute to the debate.

I congratulate Mary Mulligan on securing the debate. Child protection is one of the most serious issues that we have to deal with in the Parliament. The minister will know, from his time on the Education Committee, of my long-held interest in child protection. During the committee's inquiry into the Executive's progress in delivering on its child protection agenda, an issue that came up time and again was the need to share information. Shared information and information technology systems will not, however, protect children; people will protect children.  In having this debate and in focusing on this agenda, it is important that we consider the risk for children. Too often in the chamber—usually when it is busier than this—we talk about child protection in relation to stranger danger as opposed to the problems that arise when children are at risk from people whom they know. The vast majority of children who are at risk are at risk from people whom they know. The people who can make the decisions to intervene are those who have contact with the families, whether through the health service, through social work or through education. That is why having shared information is vital. There is a wider agenda of child protection and about drugs workers thinking about the child within the family. We have had debates on that and concerns have been expressed—not least by the First Minister—about how children from drug-misusing families are identified and supported. The danger of women underreporting the fact that they have a drug problem because their children might be taken away from them is still with us, and I hope that we can have a considered debate on that. We must also have a serious debate about risk in general. We do not want to wrap our children in cotton wool or to have an explosion of Big Brother back-watching that protects the agencies but does not necessarily deliver for the children. I heard worrying feedback from somebody who said that when drugs workers visited a drug-misusing adult, the first thing that they would ask about was their sexual behaviour, not whether they had children. In the past, the main concern of drugs workers was the transmission of health risks, not whether there was a child in the family. I hope that the training has improved that situation. That switch in thinking is as important as the IT systems that surround it. A crucial concern, which I raised in our debate on "Hidden Harm: Responding to the needs of children of problem drug users", is the recommendation in the report of the child protection audit and review, "It's everyone's job to make sure I'm alright", on having a national information system. We know that national computer systems that are run by Government run into big problems: we heard only this week about the collapse of one such system. Perhaps a more localised approach could help. However, one of the concerns that has been raised, following the experience of the tragic cases that we have had, is the fact that vulnerable children are often moved, which makes them more vulnerable. Therefore, the system cannot be localised to just one area. I support Mary Mulligan's plea for the Executive to reconsider the funding for such systems. I had a meeting in the Parliament with representatives from the City of Edinburgh Council and NHS  Lothian who were very concerned, following the publication of the O'Brien report, that they desperately needed a system, which I understand they will pilot from the C-me system. They were worried about the funding for that system because child protection was being treated as a national issue and systems were being piloted, at that time, in Aberdeen and Lanarkshire—in the "Hidden Harm" debate, Hugh Henry mentioned the fact that something was happening in Lanarkshire. Meanwhile, other authorities were left wanting to do something. They did not want to use their own resources, as they knew that a national resource was coming. They thought that they might be able to use part of the efficient government funding, but they were not sure about that. In the meantime, councils are having to take responsibility for developing such systems. I congratulate West Lothian on what it has done. I know that the people there are not backwards in coming forward to use IT systems. Indeed, I visited the Strathbrock partnership centre in Broxburn about five years ago to see the work that it does with care of the elderly, which links up health, social work and so on, and I remember saying at that time, "This would be ideal for children and child protection." I am glad that the participants in C-me are getting national recognition in the Parliament. We get a regular, six-monthly check on outputs from the Government, but can the minister give us the latest details on progress? How can systems such as C-me be used throughout the country, so that we have a national link-up, without worries and concerns being created that, all of a sudden, there will be an identity system for all children? The system is very much about protection for vulnerable children. We need progress and we need to keep at it because the system is helping to protect children who are at risk from people in their own homes; such children represent the vast majority of children who are at risk.

The minister will recall that the reason for introducing the huge increase in top-up fees for medical students was the need to tackle the problem of retaining doctors in Scotland. He says that there are 60 more Scotland-domiciled medical students in Scotland this year, but is he aware that in south-east Scotland only 296 anaesthetists will be in training next year, whereas 400 are in training this year? Does he acknowledge that those figures mean that 104 doctors who should be in Scotland might need to leave Scotland and go to England? Training doctors has always been a problem and the attempt to tackle the issue by increasing top-up fees as part of changes to the higher education system was fundamentally flawed.

I note the minister's concern that some councils might use the money for recruiting new teachers to fund pensions. Will the minister set out the Executive's concerns in that respect? How will we ensure that the Parliament can account for where taxpayers' money is going if it is not being used to recruit teachers?

I very much agree with Scott Barrie's comments. Is he aware of the example of Bathgate academy, which has kept such youngsters in school and has provided a dedicated teacher to help to build stability and responsibility within a healthy living environment using physical activity and diet? Projects such as that, which have been piloted and proved to work, are exactly what we need to look for across Scotland.

I know of some schools in Linlithgow that are having difficulty in recruiting head teachers, and there has been a sharp reduction in the number of applications for head-teacher posts. Does Murdo Fraser agree that the Audit Committee and the Education Committee must take seriously the Audit Scotland report that highlighted some of the concerns about head teachers?

I thank the member for giving us a tour of East Renfrewshire. I think that East Renfrewshire is similar to other areas, such as West Lothian, where I am from, in that there has been an increase in population and in demand on schools and they have had to respond. Perhaps in East Renfrewshire there has been a better way of dealing with class sizes, but in West Lothian there are still primary school children sitting in classes of 33. Does the member agree that one of the challenges that we face is looking at the council areas within Scotland and ensuring that there is equity between them, so that every child benefits from class-size reductions, particularly in areas such as East Renfrewshire and West Lothian?

Bearing in mind the points that the Conservatives made about behaviour issues, does Iain Smith acknowledge that the availability of free school meals in the primary years can help to tackle some behavioural issues? There are concerns that low levels of nutrition for children have a negative impact on behaviour.

In this chamber we share a collective responsibility to shoulder the desire of this and previous generations to uphold the fundamental importance that Scots place on education. We share that responsibility to open up the horizons, life chances and opportunities for fulfilment for our children so that they can fulfil themselves as individuals and collectively drive our economy in an increasingly knowledge-based arena. No political party has a monopoly on that. Scotland has long held the value and importance of education in high esteem. We could say that, as a nation, we were the first country to put education first—from the first days of comprehensive schooling, when there was a school in each parish that provided literacy skills to enable people to read the Bible, to the modern recognition that learning is lifelong. In that spirit I commend those who are taking part in the activities of learning month this September. The understanding of the democratic intellect as the foundation for our nation must not be lost on politicians. Neither the Labour leader Tony Blair, nine years ago, nor the current First Minister, can claim a Scottish national education heritage and badge it as a party advantage. Nor should they imply that education is somehow removed from our constitutional state. Surely even the minister, with his limited historical analysis—this is the man who threatened to compromise the future of history teaching—would understand that Scotland has a distinct and independent education system precisely because that system was founded, fought for and nurtured from the days when Scotland was last independent. Thankfully, the historically challenged minister has now been thrown a lifebelt—I hope that he will accept it—by the Scottish Association of Teachers of History, in relation to how our children can learn about their place in the world and the world's history in a structured, ordered and meaningful way. I urge him to take the association's proposals seriously. Education should be used neither as a crutch for a Government that sees little progress being made elsewhere nor as a punch-bag for political posturing. The Deputy First Minister and Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning's use yesterday of the academic work of a world-renowned scientist as a political punch-bag was an appalling attack on the world of science in Scotland. We will ensure that every scientist in Scotland knows how little the Liberal Democrats value science. Education ministers now—as we will do in Government—must act as stewards and leaders to drive forward an already strong system, to remove the barriers that reinforce weakness in  the system, to lead strategically and to set out our vision. I will talk about our amendment, but first I will focus on the Government's motion. More teachers are being recruited, but it is a bit late and there will not be enough of them in the classrooms to cut class sizes. How do we know that? The Educational Institute of Scotland has voted to ballot on industrial action because of this Government's failure to cut class sizes. Does that count as the "stable industrial relations" that are mentioned in the motion? After seven years of Labour-Liberal Democrat rule and nine years of Labour rule, so confident is the Government of its achievement in this area that it cannot tell us how many pupils are still in classes that are too big. The report that came out in February of this year said that four out of 10 primary 1 children were being taught in classes that were too big. For the parents of primary schoolchildren who are sitting in classes of more than 30, that is just not good enough. I invite the minister to come back and boast when he has delivered on cuts in class sizes and not before. Targeted support for children with additional support needs is not being delivered properly; the minister can ask any MSP in the chamber for their constituency casework. Head teachers tell us that they need more power over budgets in this area so that they can staff and resource to children's special needs rather than to budgets. The one mark of the Government's ambition is for all our 16 to 19-year-olds to be in education, employment or training, but that leap is from the current position whereby we are one of the worst in the world. That is hardly a glowing tribute after seven years of being in Government. I hope that we will have a debate on that specific challenge. The Government's figures, which were published in March 2006, told the reality of static education performance in pupils achieving foundation levels 3, 4, and 5, general and credit at standard grade and intermediate 1 and 2, which are all the qualifications below the higher grade. We have a strong education system and that fact is reflected in international studies, but improvement is measured by trend analysis of absolute performance. Are Labour and Liberal Democrat ministers seriously gloating over the fact that consistently in the past three consecutive years only 34 per cent of Scotland's pupils in S4, S5 and S6 have achieved a credit standard grade? That is no improvement whatsoever. Further, there has been no movement in level 3 and 4 performance. Many pupils leave school with the lack of skills that CBI Scotland has complained about. Jack McConnell may think that pupils sitting another exam the day before they leave school will fix  literacy and numeracy problems, but what we need are lifetime skills, generated over the course of a pupil's time at school. Overassessment is a barrier to lifetime literacy and numeracy. Up to the age of eight, a child learns to read but from eight on they read to learn. We say that we should tackle literacy and numeracy with firm foundations in the early years, with class sizes of 18 from primary 1 to primary 3. The SNP policy proposals for education, which we will lay out in the coming months and in our 100 days document, are based on five fundamental principles for opportunity and achievement: an early start is the best start; an international outlook; aspirational ambition; egalitarian values; and a community approach. However, the SNP amendment includes practical proposals for effective governance. They are SNP education policy, but perhaps what is more important is that they are the self-same requests made by the head teachers and deputy head teachers in the Headteachers Association of Scotland, who are Scotland's education leaders in the field. We propose that more school funding should be devolved; the 80 per cent target is not being met and the figure is down at 50 per cent in some local authorities. We propose real cuts in class sizes. The Government knows that teachers are being recruited but are not being employed in the classes, which is why, as Murdo Fraser mentioned, we have post-probationers who cannot get jobs. The Government has mishandled the funding for teacher recruitment between councils with growing school rolls and those with falling school rolls. Let us open the books to track the spend and ascertain where the money is going. It is the number of teachers in the classroom that matters and not the number who are registered with the General Teaching Council for Scotland. The situation is a classic dependence by the Government on inputs and not outputs when it comes to education policy.

There were a number of questions there; perhaps I will take the human one first, which referred particularly to post-probationer teachers who cannot get employment because local councils are not employing them. Some  councils with rising school rolls say that they have not been given sufficient funding to deal with that, but other councils with falling school rolls are getting too much. The human element in that is that if a post-probationer teacher has not got a teaching job, they can be stacking shelves. That is exactly the point that was made to me by people who cannot get a teaching job in schools just now. It is a serious problem; 2007 should have been the end date for cutting class sizes, not the start date. The SNP wants nursery teachers to remain in nursery classes, but Labour wants to take the nursery teachers out. The introduction of free school meals in the early years was another request from the leaders in the education field. If we are serious about tackling obesity and bad behaviour, let us adopt the SNP policy. If the Government is not able to adopt the SNP policy, it should move over so that Scotland can move on with the SNP. Scotland was promised education, education, education nine years ago when Labour came to power, but Jack McConnell's little-me version is a bit late and, I might say, a bit overanxious. The child who started school in 1997 as a bright-eyed five-year-old is now 14 and will be 15 next year. They will have gone through their education without benefiting from cuts in class sizes, the revised national curriculum, the promise of more physical education teachers or a range of other promises that have still not been delivered. Many of those children will be taught in new or refurbished schools over the coming period, which overcomes 18 years of underinvestment by the Conservatives, but the SNP will match the building of new schools brick for brick with our not-for-profit funding and, unlike the Liberal Democrats and Labour, we will have money left over for books and teachers in the future, rather than lining the pockets of bankers with excessive private profit.

No, I need to finish. Scottish education needs strong leaders politically and it needs to respect leaders in education. That is why the SNP amendment reflects the concerns of head teachers in Scotland. What is most important however is that Scottish education needs leadership that is more passionate about what education can do permanently for Scotland's children and the country than about what it can do temporarily for party-political advantage. Labour's latest focus in education—nine years on from a promise of education, education, education—is sad and stale, and will produce static results. Scotland had the best education system in the world and it can be the best again, but not just by wishing for it. The Government has  to move over and the Parliament has to move on. It is time for energy, delivery, dynamic vision and passionate leadership of education in Scotland. I move amendment S2M-4755.3, to leave out from "the priority" to end and insert: "continuing excellence within Scotland's distinct and independent education system, appreciated internationally for its pioneering work in quality improvement; recognises the challenges faced by schools, education authorities and other partners to modernise the school estate, to drive up standards and to tackle deep-seated problems such as persistent under-performance among disadvantaged pupils; notes that the Scottish Executive's promises to cut class sizes and adequately resource additional support needs remain unfulfilled; supports requests from school leaders for more funding for schools to be devolved, real cuts in class sizes, nursery teachers to remain in nursery classes and for the introduction of free school meals in the early years; calls for the replacement of PPP funding for school modernisation by not-for-profit trust funding; believes that the education of all Scotland's children and young people is fundamental to securing a more productive, integrated and successful Scotland in which all our young people can participate fully, and looks forward to further strengthening of our distinctive education system using the enhanced powers and resources at the command of an independent parliament."

First, I must apologise for arriving late for this morning's debate. My children and child care had to come first. The SNP would have matched, and will match, the Executive's building programme brick for brick and will have money left over for teachers and books, while the current Administration is lining the pockets of private bankers with excessive profits.

Will the minister give way?

Perhaps the minister might explain why, if all those teachers are being trained, our class sizes are not coming  down and why the Executive cannot tell the chamber what the results of class-size reductions are?

This debate is about justice. We should pay tribute to the Clydeside workers and their campaign groups and to all workers who have campaigned on the issue. Justice must be fair, timely and swift, and the law should serve justice, so I thank the Executive for lodging the motion. We agree with the vehicle by which we are taking the issue forward. I want to touch on why the issue is important. There is a cairn in Bathgate that is dedicated to those who lost their lives when working. On the cairn are the words: "We fight for the living and we mourn the dead." Today, what we are doing is fighting for the living. We can do it by legislative process and compensation, but the fight on asbestos is not just a past fight; it is a current fight. Those of us from West Lothian are conscious of the work of workers from Golden Wonder's former factory in Broxburn, and of the work of Alex Horne and others in that regard. The fight on asbestos continues and I would like to draw the minister's attention to a particular issue to do with asbestos. We have planning laws for new build, but we have very weak planning laws for demolition. One of the issues that I am dealing with concerns the Motherwell Bridge Ltd site in Uphall. The situation is that the Health and Safety Executive is responsible for the health and safety of workers during a demolition; the Scottish Environment Protection Agency is responsible after demolition when asbestos-polluted materials are on the ground; there are general competencies for councils; and demolition contractors are responsible for the method statement of how demolition happens. However, the new build on brownfield sites, particularly across the Lothians, raises a real issue with public health because there is currently no law in this country to protect the public from demolitions that involve asbestos pollutants. I hope that the Planning etc (Scotland)  Bill, to which I plan to lodge an amendment, will address that issue. On the campaign for compensation in relation to asbestos, I say that just because asbestos is out of sight, that does not mean that it is out of mind, and just because the cause of harm was yesterday, that does not mean that we forget it today. Our message to asbestos sufferers is that the Scottish Parliament and all its political parties will stand by them and their families today, because we mourn the dead and fight for the living.

Given that the minister has responsibility for enterprise, he will acknowledge the importance of the future development of our knowledge economy. Does he agree that a bridge to help to build the knowledge economy might be provided by a public relations exercise that makes science sexy and ensures that people know about the history of science in Scotland, including the work of James Clerk Maxwell and others?

Will the minister give way?

The grant-in-aid letter that the minister issued in March made it quite clear that universities cannot charge any fees on top of those set by Parliament. If Parliament does not agree to set a fee, the minister might well come back with another order that seeks to set a different fee level, but until then the fee level will be zero and the universities will not be able to charge any additional fee at all.

Let us get a few things straight about why we oppose the  order. Scottish education should be based on the ability to learn, not on the ability to pay. By introducing additional variable fees, the Executive is opening the door to top-up fees for all. If Parliament agrees to approve the order, the mechanism will be there to introduce a 40 per cent hike in ordinary tuition fees and a 200 per cent hike in medical fees. There is no flood of educational refugees from England to Scotland. The number of students from England who study in Scotland has increased by only 1.8 per cent. Two weeks ago, the Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning told the Enterprise and Culture Committee that there was no evidence that Scots were having any difficulty in getting places at Scottish universities.

I will tell the member how I would answer her. Several years ago, Calman said that we had to ensure that Scottish medical schools accepted pupils who had achieved five straight As in their highers but who had not done so at one sitting. Neither the Minister for Education and Young People nor the Minister for Health and Community Care has delivered on the commitment to tackle that. That is one measure that should be taken. Universities will not get a penny more under the order that the Executive is asking Parliament to approve, nor will they get a penny less if Parliament votes not to approve it—they will just get in teaching grant what they would have got from fee income. Non-European Union overseas students will not be affected. There has been a 29 per cent increase in applications to Scottish universities from EU students who are not English, Welsh or Northern Irish, who must be treated in the same way as Scottish students. In the Executive's book, it is only English, Welsh and Northern Irish students who can be discriminated against. The English students who applied to—and who, in many cases, have been accepted by—Scottish universities did so last year, before they knew about today's vote. This year's students are already in the system and they should not have to pay the price of an additional top-up fee to deter future students. Regardless of what members think about the order, it has been laid far too late. The Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council has had to allocate grants to universities without knowing whether the order would be approved.  Parliament should not reward poor and late legislative procedure and the ministers should be sent back to think again because they have made a pig's ear of the process. They complain that it will take until 20 October to get through a revised order, but that can be dealt with. When answering my colleague Alasdair Morgan's question on part-time fees at First Minister's question time earlier today, Jack McConnell said that the Executive would make a decision when it had all the evidence. However, he is quite happy to proceed with the proposed changes, even though there is no evidence for them. Members who believe in evidence-based policy should vote against the order. There has been a reduction of 6.5 per cent in the number of applications to Scottish medical schools by English students. The Executive must consider the retention of doctors later in their careers. It seems to want fresh talent to come to Scotland as long as it is not English. Scotland should be a bit more broad-shouldered than that. [ Interruption. ]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Students come to Scotland from around the globe—including England—because of the quality of our universities. They come because we have better qualifications and better service. Our universities will face funding challenges once the increased income from top-up fees for English universities kicks in. That is a separate issue, but it is an important one, which Parliament should be debating rather than the wrong-headed proposals that we are examining today. Sometimes in politics there comes a moment to do the right thing. This is such a moment. I urge members to vote against the order and to get the minister to come back with a better proposal.

The member seeks to take the bill back to its original form, as put forward by the promoter. Should I warn my constituents in West Lothian who are campaigning for a halt at Blackridge on the Bathgate to Airdrie line that there is a member who wants to take railway bills back to their promoter's original proposals? Should I warn them that he has done that once and that he might do it again?

I take it that the minister will join me in wishing the Educational Institute of Scotland well for its conference, which starts today in Dundee. Does he acknowledge that English and maths teachers constitute the largest number of teachers in our secondary schools, that 17 per cent of teachers are over 55 and that, despite the late but  welcome recruitment of new teachers in those subjects, there has been only a 5 per cent increase in new recruits? The reason that there are no interim measurements is that the policy is less a target to benefit pupils than more wishful thinking from the Government.

Will the member give way?

Does Rosemary Byrne share the concern that the budget that was allocated for the Education (Additional Support for Learning)  (Scotland) Act 2004 was for administration of the act and not for training and support?

On behalf of the Education Committee, I point Robin Harper to the report on pupil motivation that the committee produced recently, which will be available in the Scottish Parliament information centre.

Does the member agree that, despite national resources going into education,  we have an increase in the number of teacher vacancies? Is not the real and systemic problem the fact that the resources that the taxpayer has provided may not be reaching pupils in the classroom?

When I saw the text of the Conservative motion, I had a sense of déjà vu. Yet again, the Conservatives are cleaving to the mantra of the market and competition in education—a mantra that has been rejected repeatedly by the Scottish people. I remember 1996, which was the last time the Conservatives were in charge of Scottish education, when 30,000 people on the streets of Edinburgh marched against Conservative education policies. They were not just trade union members, teachers or even parents; the community of Scotland turned out in its tens of thousands to reject the Conservatives' management of education. When we consider the issues that we are debating today, it is clear that what the Conservatives are offering has changed little from what they were pushing in 1996. Choice in education is an issue in the current debate, but the issue is not choice between schools, but choice in schools. There is a lack of breadth in the opportunities that are available to some of our children in the education system. There should be diversity in education, but there should not be division. The Conservatives are about driving wedges between communities. The Scottish National Party—with the grain of Scottish views on education—believes in a national, comprehensive system in which schools are at the heart of communities.

I explained the comprehensive system. I will now give one reason why I think that the Conservatives are wrong. Most of Scotland exists not in the city of Edinburgh, where one pupil in four goes to a private school, but in small-town Scotland. At the moment, the top 20 per cent of pupils are performing well, 60 per cent are doing fairly well, but 20 per cent are not achieving. My approach is to allow and encourage schools to have a specialism, so that every pupil can taste excellence in some subject. I want to ensure that excellence is available to all schools and pupils.  That is not market choice, selection and shopping around for schools, which the Conservatives would like to have. I believe that there must be diversity.

I want to continue. We want a national comprehensive system in which there is a broad curriculum, which is one of Scotland's strengths. We send our pupils to school for far longer than any other European country—for 1,000 hours a year, compared with the OECD average of 750 hours—but they have less time than others for their own history, for languages, for science and for physical education. What are they doing? In the debate on the national curriculum review, the Executive acknowledged that overassessment is burdening and causing difficulties in our system. I want to push the pace on reviewing assessment, to open up the curriculum and to provide the space and time for the extra specialism that I want every school to have. Here in Lothians, pupils leave school at 12 o'clock on Friday. Afternoons are already free in this region and we should be using the opportunity that that represents for the curriculum. I believe that, if the 20 per cent of pupils whose performance HMIE tells us is flat-lining got a chance to taste what it is like to be successful in languages, science, sport, drama or whatever, they could spread the motivation that they gain from that across other subjects. I support the schools of ambition initiative, but I think that it is not ambitious to have only 20 or 30 schools in that category. I want all schools to have that opportunity. I agree with the minister about the Scottish Qualifications Authority awards and I am glad that pupils and staff from Linlithgow academy will be attending. However, the reason why Linlithgow academy is successful is because it is comprehensive and takes pupils from all backgrounds and social areas. That is its strength. That lesson should be learned. The EIS report that has been mentioned must be taken seriously. I have great concerns about the implications of mainstreaming. My concern is not about reviewing the policy. I acknowledge that special schools are not closing. However, there is an issue about special units. I will be meeting parents in West Lothian who have concerns about special units being closed. Last week, Jack McConnell said that education and knowledge transfer should be at the heart of making Scotland successful and competitive. I agree with that. However, it took seven years of audit for the Executive to discover that. Further, on  Tuesday of the same week, I met university principals and vice-principals and the European education commissioner to discuss Scotland's input to the European institute of technology, work on which is being done here and now. Scotland can help to shape that institute. Why does it take the SNP to take Scottish education to the heart of Europe and drive forward that agenda? Political leadership is about making things happen. The SNP has pillars that it wants to drive forward in relation to education. The early start is the best start and I think that we can get consensus across the chamber in that regard. We must ensure that our education system is accessible internationally. I believe in aspiration. We should end the complacency culture and generate ambition for all. At its heart, the Scottish education system is egalitarian. It is based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. Unlike the Conservatives, the SNP, the other parties in the chamber and people in the rest of Scotland believe in schools that operate at the heart of their communities. Education is not something that is boxed off; it is at the heart of Scotland. I move amendment S2M-4464.1, to leave out from "believes" to end and insert: "supports greater choice within schools, rather than between schools, in order that pupils can benefit from breadth in the curriculum and believes that the agenda for education in Scotland should be focused on raising the levels of achievement for all and should include a review of the deployment of education resources at school level against the national resources provided, an analysis of over-assessment in schools and policies to drive forward the pursuit of excellence."

Does the member share my concern that in the latest census of primary school teachers, only four teachers in the City of Glasgow designated their sole subject as special educational needs? The mainstreaming issue is not necessarily just about what is happening with special schools, but about special education within mainstream schools.

Head teachers have said that they will not be able to achieve the reduction in class sizes to 20 pupils in English and maths. Is the minister listening to the head teachers or is he ignoring them?

The Parliament's Education Committee heard yesterday from Glasgow City Council that, increasingly, many of the children removed from substance-abusing families are babies in the zero-to-two age group who have themselves suffered because of substance abuse. Can the minister reassure me that any families taking in such children will have continuing care and support, because many of those children will have health and learning difficulties for some years to come as they grow up?

The Government plans to establish a legislative duty to share information. Will a linked national computer network that allows information to be shared be provided before people are criminalised for not sharing information?

The update report, "Hidden Harm—Next Steps: Supporting Children—Working with Parents", which was published this week, makes the point that child protection should be a main objective of drugs policy and practice. As 50,000 children live in a drug-misusing family and one in 50 babies born in Scotland are born to drug-misusing parents, no one should underestimate the scale of the problem. Neither should we fail to appreciate the complexity of the issue. Perhaps because drugs are illegal, too many people see the drugs issue first and the child second. I make it clear that the SNP views the issue as a child protection issue. The fact that drugs are the cause of the chaotic family life of the young people concerned should be a secondary consideration. The original Executive response to the initial "Hidden Harm" report also addressed children who are harmed because of alcohol abuse. An estimated 100,000 children in Scotland are in that position. Drug abuse brings with it particular issues. For example, it means that the Executive has to provide more support for outreach to connect with hard-to-reach families. Early intervention is required if the abuse is to be reported. It is important that parents do not have to ask sheriffs for a disposal to get rehabilitation in prison. This is as much about early intervention as it is about crisis management. I have concerns that some of the focus is on crisis management. I do not doubt the concern and commitment of those involved, whether they be ministers, social workers, police or health professionals, but I am becoming increasingly frustrated and angry about the Executive's slow and cumbersome progress on delivering the reams of recommendations that are made in myriad reports. Patience with the Executive is running out. The problem is that slow action means that too many children are losing out on a childhood of care and nurture. There have been a series of delays and—as recently as this week—mistakes by the Executive, which have hampered progress on child protection reform. The Executive has failed to get its collective act together, as it was urged to do by the First Minister himself in 2002.

Certainly. One is the failure to deliver recommendation 17 of the 2002 report. It stated that by 2005 there should be a linked, computer-based information system that would include a single integrated assessment—which the minister called for—that would allow a planning and review framework for children in need. Only this week, West Lothian Council produced its own information system, called C-me. It is meant to share information, but the important point is that there was meant to be a national system. As the minister knows, the problem is that because many vulnerable children are moved around the country, localised systems will not be enough. The Executive established the social work inspection agency but failed to legislate to give it powers to inspect. Last minute fast-track legislation had to be introduced to allow it to go and inspect without invitation. Remember that it could conduct an inquiry into the Western Isles child protection case only at the council's invitation. Vital joint inspections of children's services were held up by six months and started again only this week because the Executive failed to legislate properly, even though Wendy Alexander and I questioned the Executive on the issue as far back as 2004. Yesterday, the Executive completed a piece of legislation to replace school boards with new parent councils. That is hardly the most important need for children in Scotland, given that the introduction of the much needed adoption and fostering bill was pushed back in the queue. That bill, the Adoption and Children (Scotland) Bill, does not mention the role of extended families. Only yesterday, Children 1 st urged the Parliament to amend the bill to require adoption agencies to consider alternative arrangements with the extended family before a child can be placed for adoption. In New Zealand, 75 per cent of children live in kinship care, but only 12 per cent of children in the UK are in kinship care. Kinship care will be vital in relation to the drugs issue. Children 1 st also proposes family group conferencing, which the minister did not mention in her statement. Such conferencing will play a vital part in resolving how to cope in a drugs-misusing family. There is also no sign of the children's hearings system legislation. That will also have an impact. I doubt whether that legislation will be introduced during this session of Parliament. Following Bichard, the Executive has promised more child protection legislation, but time is running out.  On Monday, the minister visited Brenda House in Niddrie in Edinburgh, which specifically provides rehabilitation for mothers with children. I visited the same Brenda House with the Social Justice Committee of the Parliament as part of its drugs inquiry five years ago. The recommendation made then to the Executive was that many women do not present themselves for help with addiction because they are frightened that their children will be taken away. That is an important consideration in the light of the shift in practice that the Executive proposes. The Parliament told the Executive five years ago that children who live in drug misusing families need support. Councils are spending up to 50 per cent over their grant aided expenditure on children's services, mostly for child protection. The City of Edinburgh Council has reported that it is short of administrative workers to type up case notes and that it might not be able to comply fully with Government child protection measures. The minister may look glum, but she should remember the cases of Caleb Ness and Michael McGarrity, in which problems arose because of a lack of information sharing. Typing up case notes is part of that. We found out this month that 109 clients in Edinburgh have waited more than 52 weeks for assessment for their addiction. The Association of Directors of Social Work say that across Scotland some key services operate with a vacancy level of 40 per cent. So forgive me for not being completely consensual on the issue. It is essential to ensure that progress is made, but it might have been more appropriate to take first steps before "next steps". The minister will know that taking children away from their families is a serious matter indeed. The public sector is not necessarily the best carer for such children, as the minister has highlighted. There is so much to do in this area, but everybody must face up to their responsibilities. The SNP will offer its support to deliver improvements, but we will not do so uncritically. Experience on this issue shows that the Executive often needs to be closely scrutinised to ensure that momentum is not lost. I move amendment S2M-4370.2, to leave out from first "acknowledges" to end and insert: "notes that in 2002 the current First Minister, formerly minister with responsibility for children, said that the Executive and relevant agencies had three years to get their collective act together on child protection; recognises that child protection issues generally, including the increasing number of cases where drugs misuse is a factor, are complex and need thought-through policy solutions and concerted action for delivery, and calls on the Executive to redouble its efforts to complete implementation of the child protection recommendations contained in the 2002 report, It's everyone's job to make sure I'm alright , which it  committed to fulfil but which are still outstanding, and to ensure that it adopts a comprehensive policy approach to proposed legislation for child protection, adoption and fostering and children's hearings which puts the child at centre stage and which addresses support for kinship care, listens to children and to professionals in the field and also addresses support services where current spend on children's services by local authorities on average far exceeds GAE allocation to a disproportionate extent."

Will the minister confirm that the Executive's proposals are not about removing children from families but about providing caring support for young carers, which must be resourced?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

The process has been frustrating for many of us, but I hope that the minister realises that, despite our reservations about the importance of the bill and the priority that should be given to it, the Scottish National Party has approached it constructively by scrutinising the bill and trying to introduce measures to improve it when we though fit to do so. The Parliament must decide when it is time to legislate and time not to legislate; it must decide what is best delivered through policy and what is best delivered through law. The key element of parental involvement in education will not be delivered by law but by policy and enthusiastic people—head teachers, council officials, parents and, indeed, the teachers, who are hidden in the shadows of the bill and do not get a mention. Despite those facts and the reservations that we expressed at stage 1, when we were concerned that the ministers had rushed the bill's introduction without consulting on the appointments procedure,  SNP members will not stand in its way. It is not the most important bill for the Parliament to consider. In the minister's portfolio alone, there are proposals for legislation on adoption and fostering, on children's hearings and much-needed legislation on child protection. The idea that any of that could or might have been delayed because of this bill is of serious concern. Everybody who was concerned with school boards recognised that there was a need for modernisation, but there was no clarion call from school boards, parents or teachers for the bill to be one of the main objects of the Executive's concentration. There has been much movement since the proposals were first published and progress has been made on a variety of issues. The two-tier solution has addressed many of the concerns about the democratic accountability of ensuring that the parent forums had leadership that could represent parents' views, and the Executive has listened to representations on early years education. I welcome that, but the Executive should also acknowledge that Opposition parties have given it latitude and accepted that more detail should be in guidance. There has been dispute about whether we should have required more detail in the bill, but we have given that latitude in the good faith that, when the Executive introduces the secondary legislation, it will pay due regard to the proposals that the committee made at stage 2. The SNP will support the bill, but I emphasise that the bill's most important aspect is the provisions on parents' involvement in their children's education. If we are to effect a sea change and ensure that the Scottish children who currently underperform get a chance in education, we must work with parents to achieve that. It will not happen in isolation, because most of a child's education and experience does not happen within school but is formed outwith school. Bringing those parts together is a worthwhile aim. I sincerely hope that the minister's and the councils' education strategies will reflect those points and that they will be part and parcel of the bill's implementation.

I supported Jean Turner at stage 2 and am pleased that the minister has responded positively to the suggestion that she made. That is a good example of responsiveness and of the ability of the Parliament's committees to ensure that, when we pass legislation, the views of people who work in the field are reflected in our legislation in a practical way. Amendment 16 will allow the key educational role of head teachers to be recognised. They are not just managers of our schools, even though the increasing bureaucratic burden may make them feel as if that is what they are. Amendment 16 will help to reinforce the point that they are educational leaders by allowing them to act as advisers to parent councils.

Amendment 30 concerns one of the most controversial matters in the bill. The Executive's response to the consultation on the appointment procedure was published only halfway through stage 2.  Iain Smith has perhaps made the argument for agreeing to Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's amendment 30, which would require appointment panels to consist of equal numbers of people from the education authority and the parent council and would ensure that a member of the education authority would have the casting vote. Most of the appointment procedure can be dealt with in guidance, but the relationship between the head teacher and the parent council is crucial and the requirement that an appointment panel should consist of equal numbers of members of the education authority and members of the parent council should be enshrined in statute. Iain Smith said that parents might be in the majority on an appointment panel, but I disagree with such an approach. As we were repeatedly told by unions and local authorities, the local authority is the employer and must take the ultimate responsibility for the appointment. For exactly the reason why Iain Smith argues for flexibility, we think that the bill should provide for the composition of the appointment panel. The arrangements in amendment 30 are equitable and fair and would reflect the new era of professionalism in appointments and the education authority's role as the employer.

Amendment 32 has caused us to bypass other subjects but, on amendment 29 specifically, how would a parent council make representation on child protection issues to, for example, a health authority? Health authorities are not mentioned in the bill. Would the parent council have to do that via the local authority? If amendment 29 were accepted, the parent council could make direct representation to the relevant authority.

The amendments are hardly complex; they are fairly easy to read. If Parliament rejects them, it rejects parental involvement in children's education, in the council strategy, in the school development plan and in discussion among teachers, head teachers and parents on attitudes towards education. They are specific and practical measures for spelling out that the bill is not just about parental involvement and representation on school boards; it is about the meat and drink of education, which is the learning experience. We are trying to embed the learning experience in the legislation. The approach is fairly simple and straightforward and I press amendment 3.

I put on record our support for those parents who have chaired school boards and parent-teacher councils in the past. They served their children and the community well and we should recognise that fact. I should be grateful for small mercies, given that members seem to have voted against all my other amendments today. I am pleased that the Executive listened to the arguments that I made at stage 2 and lodged an amendment similar to the one that I previously proposed. We should recall that the reason for such a provision is that, despite the good will and good efforts of all involved, circumstances may arise in which co-opted members who are parents of former pupils might overstay their welcome by continuing to chair the parent council. It is important that we keep parent councils live and fresh by requiring that only parents whose children attend the school can be given the responsibility of chairing the parent council. I am pleased that the Executive has acknowledged that by lodging amendment 13.

Amendment 29 is in line with the position that was adopted by the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities at stage 1. This is the first time that we have had an opportunity to debate, to legislate on and to vote on the matter. The aim of the amendment is to ensure that the role of parent councils is not restricted to the life and circumstances of the school but relates to wider community planning and strategic issues, such as transport and the school's surrounding environment. If we believe that schools should be at the heart of the community, we should agree with COSLA and support the amendment, to ensure that schools can contribute and be consulted on issues that touch on them. I support amendment 28, in the name of Lord James Douglas-Hamilton. Unless we vote for the amendment, there will be no mention of teachers in the bill. There is an acknowledgement of the role of head teachers and parents, but teachers and their connection with pupils should also be supported. I think that, with amendment 32, Phil Gallie is hijacking the bill. The amendment is a very late contribution and is misplaced. If he had paid any attention to the contributions that have been made by parents organisations and by the Education Committee, he would know that the matters to which the amendment refers will be part and parcel of consultation on and discussion of parental involvement in the very educational issues about which I have argued all afternoon. The framework of the legislation allows for that. Why do I think that Phil Gallie is wrong? His arguments are misplaced in a number of respects. He says that amendment 32 replicates the provisions of the 1988 act. If he had looked at that act, he would know that it does not. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton was also incorrect in saying that. The 1988 act gives schools boards authority over spending. Amendment 32 is not about spending, but about approval. Phil Gallie says that it is about ensuring that parents have a say, but in fact it is about ensuring that they have a veto. Why should it end with sex and drugs? Why should the amendment not extend to religion? It could be a charter for establishing creationist schools. If a member comes late to a piece of legislation, they should think through the content and technical details of the amendment that they lodge, rather than going for headlines and seeking to hijack the bill. Some of us have taken a lot of time and put in a lot of effort to ensure that parents have meaningful involvement in their children's education. On that basis, I will support amendments 29 and 28 but reject amendment 32.

The group of amendments highlights the fact that the bill is about two issues: the representative forum for school management support and parents' involvement in their children's education. Barriers to involvement apply to both elements. The SNP supports the amendments on equal opportunities. Perhaps amendment 2 is an attempt to broaden that out and to recognise that, for inclusiveness, we must address equal opportunities in individual children's education as well as in representation. It is clear that we must ensure that education authorities not only make sure that parent councils are established but are far more actively involved in identifying the barriers to parental involvement. Those barriers will change and will be different in  rural areas, urban areas, city centres and other parts of Scotland with different experiences. For example, the increase in Polish migrants to the Inverness area will pose key challenges for the local council and education authority. Children in Scotland supports amendment 2 and thinks that it would be a useful addition to the bill. The amendment would prevent councils from just ticking a box to say that a parent council has been established and would give them an active role in identifying the factors that discourage parental involvement. The amendment has a broader scope than the equal opportunities provisions, although they are not mutually exclusive. The amendment would be a useful addition that underpins the fact that there is more to the bill than the mechanistic establishment of parent councils to replace school boards.

This group of amendments hinges on one argument—that the legislation must emphasise that it is not just about the representation of parents on something that replaces school boards. Many of us have been quite sceptical about the bill and if it is to mean anything, it must encourage the promotion of parental involvement in a child's education. Amendments 3, 4, 5 and 6 would make it explicit to anybody who was reading the bill or executing it through council strategies that it is about promoting parents' involvement in their children's education as well as in the school generally. Although it is clear that the council has a duty under section 1(2) to promote parents' involvement in the education that a school provides "to that pupil" and "to its pupils generally", that is not referred to again after section 1. It is important to encourage councils to ensure that, in any strategy that they put forward, parental involvement is about involvement in the children's education individually as well as in the structural, mechanistic—I will use the word "mechanistic"—establishment of a parent council. The vote that took place right at the beginning of the debate, about early years education, reinforces my point. Some of the arguments that were put against the SNP's trying to promote early years education as being covered by the bill were concerns about how parents would involve themselves in the parent forum. That could not be further from the point at argument. The point at argument in relation to early years education is that, if we can encourage parents to become involved and support their children's education in the earliest years, they are more likely to stay involved. That is a test of where the Government is coming from on this. We must reinforce the point that the bill is about not just replacing school boards but parental involvement in education. We must ensure that that is explicit in other parts of the bill, not just in section 1. I have agreed that much of the regulation should be in guidance, rather than in the bill. There has been good will from members around the chamber to allow the Executive to keep the bill free from too many cumbersome additions. However, there are  certain principles that must be embedded in the bill if it is to work. It is in that spirit that these amendments have been lodged. I move amendment 3.

Amendment 1 is fairly straightforward. It recognises that there will be a national parents forum to represent the views of parents, and it proposes that should be the duty of ministers to consult that forum. Section 1 is a high- level, strategic element of the bill and sets out the duties of ministers. It is the appropriate place to recognise that there will be a national parents forum. When a similar amendment was lodged at stage 2, the Education Committee was split 4:4, and the convener's casting vote led to its being disagreed to. I hope that the Executive has had time to reflect on the appropriateness of recognising that there will be a national parents forum and that it is willing to support the amendment. When the committee took evidence at stage 1, it was struck by the need for a national body. I pay tribute to the work of the Scottish Parent Teacher Council and the Scottish School Board Association, which have represented the views of parents very well and have been influential in the progress of the bill, adding their opinion about what would be appropriate. We do not want to be prescriptive about the bill, nor do we want the minister to have a statutory responsibility for establishing a national parents forum. Since the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Act 2005 was passed, we have had to be increasingly careful about the bodies that ministers establish under the law. In this case, were the ministers to establish a national representative body for parents, that body would not necessarily attract charitable status. A national parent organisation such as the Scottish Parent Teacher Council can raise charitable funds without being taxed in a way that affects the organisation adversely. That is one of the reasons why we agree with the minister. The national parents forum should not be established by the ministers. However, if the bill stipulates that ministers should consult any national body that is established at the grass roots by the parent forums and parent councils, that would be one way of ensuring that such a national body is recognised. The Parliament could send the signal that it is in favour of such a national body being representative of grass-roots organisations in schools and communities throughout Scotland. That would also be a signal that we do not want to follow the Scottish Consumer Council's model, which would provide for an Ofcom for parents. Amendment 1 is simple; in that spirit, I hope that the Executive has had more time to consider the issue and that it will be able to support the amendment. I move amendment 1.

I ask the minister to read the amendment, which refers to "any national parents' organisation established by Parent Forums or Parent Councils". That is precisely because we want the organisation to be led by people at the grass roots. Perhaps one of the reasons why the Scottish School Board Association has not been able to exercise the powers that it could have exercised is that they were not originally legislated for. The minister's arguments are defeated in that regard.  At stage 1, we identified that one of the biggest holes in the bill was the lack of a reference to a national body for parents. I suspect that the only reason why that cannot be included in the bill is that to do so would mean that the body would not attract charitable status. That is an anomaly, which deserves recognition. It is important that ministers have duties and responsibilities to consult parents under a parental involvement bill. In response to Elaine Murray, I point out that we pass legislation all the time that says which organisations ministers have a duty to consult. Jim Wallace made such a proposal in the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Bill, specifically saying that students should be consulted on the introduction of variable fees. Yet, having consulted students, the Executive will tomorrow propose legislation to introduce variable top-up fees in Scotland. I am sorry to say that, despite such a provision to consult, the Executive has disregarded the views of students. The principle is the same, however. In other pieces of legislation, there are duties on ministers to consult different organisations. The effect of amendment 1 is simply that it would recognise the importance of a national body for parents, which is what parents told us they need.

If that is so, why did the bill as introduced make no mention of nurseries?

I will focus my remarks on amendments 7, 27 and 14. I am pleased that the Executive has responded to the Education Committee's demands that early years education be addressed. The Executive has proposed a three to 18 curriculum. Three-year-olds and four-year-olds attend nursery education that is provided by the state. There will be an anomaly in the bill unless we accept the arguments of the Scottish National Party and the committee on the need to address early years education. A parent of a child who attends a nursery that is associated with a primary school will be encouraged by ministers and the local council to become involved in their child's education, but a parent of a three-year-old or a four-year-old who is in a standalone council nursery school will not receive such encouragement. There will be an imbalance in the bill unless members support amendment 27 and reject amendments 7 and 8. We recognise that early intervention and support and early years education can allow youngsters to make a great start, but we know that the transition from nursery school to primary 1 can be highly problematic. If we acknowledge that parental  involvement is a key factor in successful attainment for youngsters, it is important that we support such involvement. That is why, both for continuity purposes and so that there is equity in the rights of parents across the sector, it is vital that parental involvement in the education of three-year-olds and four-year-olds is recognised. The effect of amendment 7 would be that Scottish ministers would have no duty to promote parental involvement in early years education. That is a highly questionable proposal, especially when the committee decided unanimously that the Executive should be responsible for promoting parental involvement in the education of children who attend publicly funded nursery schools. Amendment 27 is about imposing on councils a responsibility to promote parental involvement. I have no problems with amendment 14. I am pleased that the minister has suggested that contact with the providers of nursery education should be promoted, but why is he happy to give the responsibility for establishing such contact to parent councils and parent forums when he is shirking his responsibility—and allowing councils to shirk their responsibility—to promote parental involvement? The two things are not mutually exclusive. We can build into the bill a recognition that early years education is a key factor in education and that parental involvement should be encouraged at all levels, and not only by the local authority. I urge the chamber to reject amendments 7 and 8 and to support amendment 27, which would ensure that councils also have a responsibility in this area. I am pleased to support the minister on amendment 14, which provides for a useful arrangement for the promotion of parental involvement at the local level. We should not forget the big picture: the Executive should not be let off the hook, but should ensure that local authorities have a duty to promote parental involvement in early years education.

I hope that the minister has some influence in the process. Will he try to encourage all the participants, by using any influence that he has, to take part in Monday's negotiations without preconditions, in order to resolve the dispute in the interests of students in particular? Bearing in mind that there was an allocation in the previous comprehensive spending review for academic salaries, and that the next comprehensive spending review has been delayed, will there be an impact on the timescale for any settlement that can be achieved in Scotland?

Will the minister take this opportunity to provide the Executive's response to the revised World Health Organisation charts on ideal birth weights for breastfed babies, bearing in mind that the historic overestimate can lead to unnecessary supplements of formula milk for breastfed babies, which can lead to later obesity and might cause some mothers to stop breastfeeding because of worries about low birth weights? Will he also reassure us that he will prioritise replacing the current charts in child development books at the earliest opportunity?

We are moving towards consensus on the matter, but will the minister be more specific about how he will involve the SQA in particular in making assessment an integral part of developing the curriculum review?

Will the minister give way?

What is the member's response to the teacher census, which shows that only 117 primary school teachers in Scotland specialise in physical education? The number has reduced by 40 since the previous census.

The Scottish National Party is pleased to have the opportunity to debate progress on the curriculum review. We called for such a review and are supportive of its aim of trying to return the capacity of teachers to use their professionalism to drive forward learning and teaching. Our job today is to assess progress and we will do so in a constructive way that will raise criticism and concern where necessary but which will provide support, encouragement and ideas for progress in equal measure. There is much that is good in Scottish education, but it is essential that we drive forward continuous improvement, to challenge a system in which some pupils perform well but the performance of a significant minority is flat-lining. The bulk of children are doing fine, in a world in which, increasingly, fine or okay will not be enough. Talents, skill, ingenuity, creativity and ability to learn will be the test of a nation in which productivity of labour may have been the test in the past. The curriculum review could be a real catalyst for continuous change and improvement in Scottish education. It could help to liberate teachers truly to use their professionalism to engage and stimulate children in learning. It could help to lay the foundations for a serious lifelong learning agenda, which, in a fast-moving world, will shift the emphasis from what is learned to how it is learned. But will it? I am concerned that the date for implementation has slipped by a year, but I am more concerned that Scotland should get the curriculum right. It may have taken almost 10 years for Labour in power to get to this stage, but the direction is right. Educationists have known that this is the right course of action for some time and the concern is whether there is enough energy and drive from the minister to propel it forward. The Government must ensure that the net effect is change for pupils, not just for policy or that stimulates the Executive policy makers and generates deep and meaningful debate in the numerous workshops and presentations but does not touch those who matter: the children of Scotland. My biggest worry is how the review will be implemented, embraced, resourced and supported and what the Executive, in its leadership role, is doing to remove the barriers to progress. Too few teachers have seen, heard or read about the review to give me much confidence that it is being delivered properly. The American educator Larry Cuban talks of educational change as a "hurricane at sea"—huge waves on the surface and unruffled calm on the sea bed. An intrusive, quick-fix implementation of curriculum reform would be just that: lots of  surface activity, but little change where it matters, which is in the classroom. There are huge waves of thinking in the curriculum review, but they may not reach the sea bed. I fear genuinely, from feedback I have had, that the curriculum review is operating like a closed, exclusive, secret club. That feedback is from people who are involved in the curriculum review—particularly from the science section—who were not quite sure what it was about. That might be part of the evolutionary approach, but we should read the signals and take action. I have been pleased to see reference to developing informed attitudes to science, as science is not just for scientists; it is essential for modern citizens, with ethical challenges ahead for people and government. There are concerns that the Executive may not be brave enough to ride the waves and to push for a curriculum for a modern Scotland that embraces, for example, the perspective of Professor Tom Devine on how Scotland could develop a positive internationalist sense of self by having its history as a spine through the curriculum. The science perspective is challenging and interesting, and begs the question of what is taught and when. Languages should be taught sooner and longer, but not necessarily at the same intensity at each stage. We must excite and stimulate interest in science early but specialise later. If the minister is seeking political direction from the Parliament, the SNP will step up to the plate and offer some direction, critically but constructively. The curriculum review is right to encourage a cultural change in education, empowering teachers to grab the initiative, be creative and be trusted for their professionalism. The review addresses the key areas of reducing content; making connections through interdisciplinary teaching; and lowering summative assessment and engagement through innovative pedagogy—all good things. It is right to be evolutionary, but revolutionary thinking and drive are needed to deliver properly. The cultural shift has both professional and political buy-in, but a systemic problem needs to be addressed that I am pleased the minister mentioned in the latter part of his speech. The push of the curriculum review is in danger of being held back by the pull of a strong alliance of forces in the shape of quality assurance and assessment. HMIE and the Scottish Qualifications Authority may be pulling in a different direction, in a tug-of-war with Scottish education and the curriculum review, as the minister acknowledges. The job is to harness those forces and to get them to work in the same direction. We have a systemic problem in that we send our children to school for longer than societies in most other European countries, yet we trail on the time that is used to teach languages, physical education and Scottish  history. What are children doing in all the extra time? They sit tests, tests and more tests. The bureaucracy is distorting the system and is starting to become the driver in education, rather than the responder. This week, the chief executive of the English Qualifications and Curriculum Authority said that he wants to reduce exams by a third and admitted to assessment overload. We have long argued that we must take the bureaucracy out of education. We have had promises, but little has been delivered, and that is the real challenge. The exam-only system was replaced with a system that introduced continuous assessment for a good reason. However, all that has happened is that we have got an overloaded exam system plus continuous assessment, which is punishing innovation and creativity. That is what we must relieve. Exams must serve the curriculum; the curriculum must not serve the exams. We need teaching for lifelong learning, not teaching for a short-term test. Education in Scotland is still a world of constant assessment, and we need to address that. A certain eight-year-old who is working towards his level C asked me if the levels went up to level Z. A child of eight thinks that the world of school will, one day, be gone for eternity, but the idea that there is an alphabet of levels to go through brings a different perspective. I applaud the move to have fewer levels, but I think that only one is being removed. As the minister will know, in Finland the inputs of the system rather than the outcomes from the children are tested. The Finns looked askance at us when we asked what they did on testing in primary schools. However, with so many pupils staying on, having one system for S4 and S6 makes sense. So, where do we go and what are the final messages for the minister? Let us address the issue of assessment and quality assurance. We must not let HMIE become an inhibitor of progress—I do not think that it wants to be, but there is a perception that it will be. The Conservatives may want head teachers to be leaders in budgets; we want them to be teachers in learning. The minister has powers over funding that he must use wisely to harness all the forces of education in one direction and to remove the barriers to progress as well as the inherent contradictions. I ask the minister to remember the words of "Scots, wha hae", which he and I sang, sadly, recently. They are words of bravery and it is time for bravery and leadership in education.

Is not it worrying that the teacher census that was published this week recorded that only 117 primary teachers' main subject is PE?

Will Jamie McGrigor give way on that point?

Will the minister give way on that point?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will transfer responsibility for Careers Scotland from Scottish Enterprise to align it with the Executive's Education Department in order to promote earlier intervention with pupils to address Scotland's record of having the highest percentage in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development-surveyed countries of 16 to 19-year-olds not in education, employment or training. (S2O-9422)

I thank the minister for his answer and look forward to his response in due course. Careers Scotland staff constitute 40 per cent of Scottish Enterprise staff. Will he guarantee that Careers Scotland's important work will not be damaged by the current financial crisis? A transfer out of Scottish Enterprise would be one way to guarantee that.

We should thank those who participate in the private bills process, which is onerous. Does that not make it even more reprehensible that the way in which the City of Edinburgh Council, as the promoter, presented the two tramline bills meant that there were major changes to the lines, including the changes that arose during the past few weeks? Is that not unfair on and disrespectful to the Parliament?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has implemented all 17 recommendations in the child protection report, "It's everyone's job to make sure I'm alright", published in November 2002. (S2O-09320)

The minister will be aware that the deadline for implementing those recommendations was November 2005, which has passed. When the First Minister says that everyone involved in child protection has a responsibility to fulfil their duties, does he include himself and the Scottish Executive? The Executive is seeking later this year to introduce laws that will penalise child protection workers who do not share information. When will it implement the child protection report's recommendation that there be a national scheme to allow professionals in different areas to assess and share information?

If the debate has a theme, it is about methadone, whether the country has moved on and whether people can move on. If the debate has a subtext, it is about whether the Government and the Parliament have made progress in how they tackle drug use. At the Scottish Parliament's inception in 1999-2000, drugs was an issue that brought all the parties together. There was common agreement that it was not a justice issue only, but that it had health, social care and a variety of other dimensions. I fear that the impetus that was built up by the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, the Parliament and the Executive is in danger of being lost. Many good points have been made in the debate, but they were also made many years ago. The Parliament's job is to scrutinise suggestions and proposals and to ensure that agreements to make progress on certain matters are honoured. That is why the Conservatives are right to air their concerns about the use of methadone. We should review the progress that has been made as a result of methadone use but, in doing so, we should not be judgmental; that is why the Tories' position is a failure.

I am sorry, but my time is limited. I commend everyone who has sought to make changes in how we tackle the problem. In 2000, the Parliament had a full-day debate on drug misuse. I remember the conviction of Richard Simpson, Angus MacKay and Iain Gray in driving forward the Executive's proposals. Paul Martin and Tommy Sheridan have made points about family support that were addressed in recommendations 12, 13 and 14 of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee's report on its inquiry into drug misuse and deprived communities, which was published in 2000. What has happened to the children's change fund? Is it providing family support groups with sufficient support? In 2000, only one social inclusion partnership gave financial help to family support groups. If there is any lesson that we can take away from the debate, it is that the Parliament must refocus its attention on its scrutiny role, because there are measures that could and should be being taken. I turn to the use of methadone as a treatment for drug addiction. The Executive responded  favourably to recommendation 23 in the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee's report, which said that methadone programmes should be expanded. The information that Charlie Gordon provided about Glasgow was extremely helpful. Such activity should be part of a regular scrutiny process because I am not convinced that progress is as rapid as it should be. I have some specific points about children. My concern is that if tackling drug use is to be a national cause, as well as being hard on ourselves, we must scrutinise the Government on the issue. I object to the First Minister making presumptions about where children should go, when the Executive has not delivered on its promises. In November 2002, the Executive launched its child protection report, "It's everyone's job to make sure I'm alright". The deadline on the proposals to improve information sharing expired in November 2005. Those proposals, which were about getting the police and health, education and social work services to work together, could have helped to prevent some of the problems that have been experienced and some of the tragedies that we have heard about. The Executive has failed to deliver a computer programme for producing integrated assessments that would help to deal with such situations and which would assist fieldworkers on the ground. When it comes to tackling drugs, everyone has responsibilities. It is a complex area, so there is no single solution. It is easy to preach zero tolerance, but we must take our responsibilities seriously. Rather than spout platitudes, let us have accountability and scrutiny.

Is the minister aware that the withdrawal of advanced highers from pupils in Inverness is a direct response to the failure to support the class contact time reduction that was agreed nationally under the McCrone settlement? Is he aware that, in the same letter  from which he has quoted, the explanation of the difficulty with class contact reduction is that "the allocation of additional resources from the Scottish Executive does not allow us to pass on any additional resources to secondary schools"? Will the minister look into the issue of the top-slicing of the nationally agreed McCrone settlement to fund reductions of provision elsewhere? Will he ensure that Highland Council and the pupils who are directly affected are not compromised by a failure on the part of the Executive to fund the McCrone settlement fully?

Will the member give way?

How on earth did all those things happen without the legislation that we are discussing? Why does the minister need statutory powers to ensure parental involvement if all those great things—which I applaud—can happen without the bill?

Will the member give way?

We would have been at stage 3 but for the fact that the Education Committee had to stop the bill's progress to take on an emergency bill on joint inspections, so the situation is actually even worse.

I begin by thanking all the parents who serve on school boards—many of whom have done so for many years—to support their children and their school. The minister singularly failed to do that in his speech. Parental involvement in education is important, but parents' role lies particularly in their own child's education. It is about motivation, help with homework and encouragement. All parents can give their children that help. The Scottish National Party's position in the debate is reflected in paragraph 2 of the Education Committee's report. Although we are "supportive of the aim of raising levels of parental involvement in schools", we doubt "that the Bill, if passed, would be effective in achieving this aim." We consider that matters other than those in the bill are higher priorities in education. We need to tackle the fact that one child in five is underperforming and underachieving and has unrealised potential. The education system is not dealing properly with such children. We must also deal with the travesty of educational outcomes for looked-after children. Nobody disputes the fact that school board legislation needs to change. The Conservatives introduced school boards against the backdrop and incentive of opt-out opportunities for schools that wanted them, but time has moved on. The  days of Conservative government are in the dim and distant past, which is a welcome fact to many. The issue must be the modern representation of school boards. School boards could be modernised. They recognise the need for modernisation, adaptation and change. However, are we seriously saying that they are so fundamentally flawed that they must be abolished? No. The minister had thought that councils would favour the abolition of school boards, but many did not, to the extent that the Executive backtracked before it introduced the bill. The initial proposal was for very weak parent forums, whereas the Executive now says that it wants to have elected parent councils, which will be similar to the old school boards, and that it will not really change all the positions and differences in policies. Given that, why are we removing school boards and creating parent councils, which will be the start of rejecting the promotion of partnership with local authorities, outside interests and pupils? The minister seemed to be interested in my suggestion of the term "school council", but most schools have school councils for their pupils. Why do we not just call the proposed bodies school boards?

I abstained on the bill, because we are on a wing and a prayer as to whether it will improve the situation. Minor provisions in the bill might be of some advantage. The main reason for our position is that we should be debating important child protection legislation—the Bichard legislation—and the children's hearings system, which demands legislation. I am not saying that some improvement in and modernisation of school boards is not required.

I need to make progress because of the time limit. The bill is not the key priority for education in Scotland. From talking to parents who are involved in school boards, I am concerned that a disincentive has been created. The good work that they have done has not been recognised. They will continue to serve on parent councils and parent forums, because they will do what is required and what is in their children's interests. However, they are concerned about the time and  effort that will be required to change the system and to move the deckchairs around when the new process will not be much different. I will move on to why other issues in education are more important. Yesterday's report from Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education reflected on leadership, which is important. Leadership is key for well-performing and top-performing schools. Funnily enough, the one bit that has remained contentious in the bill after everything else has been changed and watered down is the appointment procedure for head teachers and senior staff. If leadership is so important—as flagged up in yesterday's report on why many of our schools are not performing as well as they could—why is it absent from the bill? The Executive started to consult after it introduced the bill. I would be up for the Executive saying, "This is what we're going to do; these are the proposals," and making that part and parcel of the bill. However, in paragraph 129 of its report, the Education Committee is right to say that we should not proceed to stage 2 until we know the firm proposals. The relationship between head teachers and parent councils is key. What has been wrong with the appointment procedure until now if 15 per cent of head teachers are not performing? What can be done to rectify matters? We must engage with such questions and ensure that parents are actively involved. They should not have a token position. Parents know that people must be professionalised. We cannot expect people to be nominated or approved for serious and responsible voluntary positions without training. Everybody recognises that training is needed. An effective school will work effectively when parents and the head teacher provide strong leadership. Other issues include education, governance and representation. I asked the minister at the Education Committee why there must be a strategy for parental involvement in statute. The answer was that if such a strategy is not in statute, some local authorities will not implement it. If parental involvement is important, but local authorities do not have a strategy for it, we should ask why those local authorities are responsible for delivering education. The Parliament should return to that issue. Is the proposed legislation worth the candle? Probably not. Will it be approved? Probably. Will it make a difference? We do not know. I move amendment S2M-3895.1, to insert at end: "but, in so doing, notes that parental involvement in the management of schools as institutions is not the same as parents' involvement in their own children's education  which should be the focus of policy, and regrets that the Scottish Executive has failed to provide detail about its proposals for the role of parents in the appointment of headteachers and senior staff before introducing the Bill or the debate and vote on Stage 1 of the Bill, noting that this is now the most contentious part of the Bill since the Executive latterly introduced proposals for elected parent councils similar to elected school boards into the Bill."

Children 1 st has said that the views of children have not been reflected in the bill. Looked-after children do not like the word "parent" being used in the title of a body or in any wording to do with a body. Perhaps using "school council" instead of "parent council" might be a way of reflecting the views and interests of looked-after children who do not have parents.

Thank you, Presiding Officer; you are very generous. We were particularly fortunate to hear about Trish Godman's experiences. Scott Barrie is absent, but I know that he will be disappointed not to have contributed; I am sure that he will make his views known to the minister in due course. We have had an interesting, informed and considered debate, apart from the minister's sedentary distraction during our discussion of the Swedish model. I did not know that he had such an interest in Saab cars. The minister said that the review represents a coming of age for social work—my daughter might  be a bit disappointed if she has to wait until she is 38 to get the keys to the door. Adam Ingram pointed out that society has changed. In the past 40 years, the safety net for a socially cohesive society has become fragmented and there are many new challenges, not least the drugs challenge, which many members mentioned. When we consider that 50,000 children are being referred to children's panels, we realise the scale of what we are dealing with, although we could view those referrals as an opportunity to secure resources. One of the tests of whether the review delivers will be whether children need to be referred to children's panels for resources to be secured. There was some consistency in the speeches and some useful points that we can take forward. Leadership is critical. The review talks about the increased role for the chief social work officer within the council, but leadership needs to come from the top and there is a real challenge for the Executive in how it deals with that. That should be considered in the consultation and the response. Many members, including Trish Godman, mentioned having a minister for social work. It is increasingly difficult to reconcile community care, criminal justice and social work within the potential silos of the civil service and the Executive. It would be helpful if the minister would address how the Executive will change as part of that leadership challenge, part of which involves recognising the Executive's delivery mechanisms and responsibilities. Euan Robson mentioned the Social Work Inspection Agency, but—oh dear—it appears that we forgot to legislate for inspectors, hence the reference to social work inspectors in part 2 of the Joint Inspection of Children's Services and Inspection of Social Work Services (Scotland) Bill. Will the minister address the issue of legislation? I understand that although legislation will be introduced as a result of the review, that will not happen until 2008, yet we are faced with legislation on adoption and in relation to Bichard. We are also looking forward to the introduction of legislation on children's hearings. I would have thought that legislation on social work and on children's hearings would have been compatible if they had been delivered together. I am concerned about any slippage in timescale and I would be interested to know when we might expect to have all those pieces so that we can deliver for the people of Scotland. There is scepticism and concern about the paraprofessionals. They represent an opportunity, but Christine Grahame made an important point about the protection of title. The suggestion about regulation should be taken up. We should remember the idea of a ladder of progression into  social work, which arose when the Education Committee considered child protection. The issue of the tens of thousands of people working in care positions should be addressed, in order that we can ensure that they make progress and, if they so wish, can join the profession, having completed the required training. Perhaps we should be a bit more open minded; the consultation and the Executive's response will have to address that area. Points were made about research and degrees. One of the proposals that was mentioned during this morning's debate on volunteering was that because so much social work and care is provided by the voluntary sector, working with the voluntary sector must be part and parcel of the training for social workers. That proposal, which came from Volunteer Development Scotland, should be considered when we talk about joined-up thinking. Euan Robson, who has obviously not lost his passion for the subject of social work, stressed the importance of ownership and pride, as did Lord James Douglas-Hamilton. A point that has been repeated by many members—it was made by William Roe, too—is that we have to start now; early establishment of the national social work services forum that the minister mentioned would be a signal that we agree on that point. Such a forum could hit the ground running; legislation and other aspects could come later. Why not set up the forum early? Doing so, and having joint ownership of it with the profession—as I think is implied—would be a good step forward. Funding is critical. No one denies that there are more social workers than before or that the input of resources has increased, but the central issue, as raised by Mary Scanlon and others, is that demand has increased. That demand is twofold—it is a result of the societal problems that we have talked about with child protection and drugs, but it is also a result of legislation that has been introduced. To return to the issue of joined-up thinking, we should reflect on yesterday's debate on the local government settlement, in which Des McNulty, the convener of the Finance Committee, made the important statement that, when legislation has been passed, its implications must be considered. When subject committees consider bills, they receive the Finance Committee's report on the financial memorandum—I see Elaine Murray, who is a member of the Finance Committee, nodding. I am not sure of the extent to which the consideration of certain financial memorandums has addressed the implications for social workers—perhaps the Finance Committee operates on a higher plane. We all have a duty to examine the interrelations. Last week at First Minister's question time, the First Minister was asked about children from drug  misusing families and the implications of their situation. I understand that the crisis in the provision of foster care places and the concerns about temporary accommodation are serious. If we are to have policy shifts and changes, please let them not be, as Carolyn Leckie said, changes in responsibilities without sufficient resources to match. That will be an important factor in considering the policy change that has come from the First Minister. The rationale for that change, the delivery and, not least, the resources that are made available should be subject to serious scrutiny. Trish Godman was absolutely right to mention the absence of an independent review of funding. Her comments echoed those that were made in one of the first debates in the Parliament in 1999, on local government, during which everybody said, "Hang on; where is the local government funding review?" We should take the opportunity to have such a review for social work. There is not a bottomless pit of money, but we must address the escalation in local government expenditure on children's services. At a time when we have an aging population, we do not want to rob Peter to pay Paul in social work provision—we do not want funding for young people to be provided at the expense of the elderly. We have a responsibility to face up to that issue. Integrated working in social work and health is important, whether it takes place in schools or cafes. I indicated that I would take an intervention from the minister on that point, so I give way now.

I thank the minister for his intervention, but I want to address the issue of communication. Mary Scanlon made a point about health services, care services and councils working together. That happens in West Lothian. When I saw the system in early 2000, it worked well and could have been a template for child protection; indeed, I understand that it now is such a template, although that has taken five years. Susan Deacon raised the issues of leadership and risk, which are absolutely central. The members of the Executive and the Parliament must, as politicians, take a leadership role in ensuring that we have a temperate and realistic debate about risk. We do not want to wrap children in Scotland in cotton wool, but we must  accept that, with child protection issues, everybody must look closer to home. It is easier to blame or have concerns about the stranger in the dark but, if we are serious about tackling the problems of drugs or child abuse, we must accept that the issue is closer to home. In that debate, we must embrace the proposals of the social work review. I commend all those who took part in the review, which has opened the door for a new phase and era for the social work profession. However, social workers cannot and must not walk through that door alone. Whether they have to try to do so will be the test of the success of implementation.

I appreciate what the member says. Does he share my concern that, this week, the Executive abandoned its target of having every school become an integrated community school, bearing in mind that community schools were meant to provide a single point of access for social work and health services?

Will the member give way on that point?

Will the member acknowledge that although recruitment has increased, the real problem now is retention? The relationship between the statutory sector and the voluntary sector is the key. As a result of all the pressures that we have talked about, we frequently see social workers leaving the statutory sector and moving into the voluntary sector. That is one of the issues that the review should address.

Last year the First Minister indicated that senior social workers and directors may face jail or severe civil offences if there are shortcomings in their social work departments. If we are moving away from a blame culture, will that approach be dropped?

I welcome the minister's statement. Commuters who travel on that line have severe difficulties meeting their work obligations because of problems arising from the lack of double tracking. If the minister could confirm that there will be an early start to the double tracking of that part of the line, that would send a strong signal of the Executive's full support of the extension of the line beyond Bathgate to Airdrie. An early start would be welcomed by our constituents and by employers in Edinburgh who  are suffering because of the frequent late arrival of trains that use the line.

Can the minister explain how anyone is to believe the Government's education targets? The Executive is now stating that it wants to move from an 80 per cent devolved school management target to a target of 90 per cent, despite the fact that, in huge swathes of Scotland—including Fife, as we have just heard—it is failing even to meet the initial target of 80 per cent?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

That is interesting. Is the minister acknowledging that the Executive has only belatedly recognised the importance of volunteering? The SNP has acknowledged for some time that volunteering is essential, as have the Conservatives, to be fair. I see that the Minister for Education and Young People is in the chamber, so I point out that we should remember that the voluntary sector provides a huge number of children's services, which will now be subject to the joint inspections that are to be introduced. Why has the rest of Scotland had to wait while, by the deputy minister's admission, the Executive has played catch-up on the importance of volunteering?

In preparing for the debate, I was taken by an article in a Holyrood magazine supplement. It listed the five things that volunteering is not. It is not a cheap option, as it requires resources, commitment and skilled management, and I commend Rosie Kane for discussing those. Volunteering is not amateurish, as many volunteers are highly skilled, with a wealth of experience. It is not a minority activity, as research indicates that over 1.5 million people are involved. Volunteering is not unchanging, as it continually affects and is affected by change in society. It is not a cliché or a stereotype, but incredibly diverse. Those descriptions are why, in a debate such as this, Parliament should not deal in clichés, platitudes or patronising pats on the back, well-deserved though a pat on the back may be. Volunteers in Scotland look to the Parliament to tackle real and difficult practicalities. Several members mentioned funding and disclosure, which I will come back to later. We have responsibilities; we have to make things easier for volunteers. We have to remove the barriers. That is the test of whether we are doing our job. Fantastic volunteering work is being done. Only  last night we had a debate about the Linlithgow primary school pupils who act as tour guides and take people round Linlithgow Palace. That is a great example of the positive role that young people can play in volunteering. I agree with Patrick Harvie that volunteering is the flip-side of the antisocial behaviour argument. The involvement of young people in positive aspects of life means that they can make a constructive contribution well into the future. I want to touch on three areas: young people; the elderly; and disclosure. I am interested in ProjectScotland, and I wish it well. I am interested in the minister's focus on involving those from more deprived areas in ProjectScotland. He also said that Scotland is the first area in the UK to develop a national volunteering programme. I recognise David Cameron's belated entry into the debate; he wants to have forced volunteers, which is a contradiction; national social service is different from volunteering. However, I am pleased that the idea has raised its head. Interestingly, Gordon Brown and David Blunkett have talked about young people volunteering. They are considering the possibility that young people who want to go to university, but have a gap year, will have their tuition fees paid if they volunteer. That would be interesting, bearing it in mind that we are not meant to have tuition fees in Scotland, although we have the graduate endowment fee. Can the minister tell us whether there will be any Barnett consequentials should the UK scheme go ahead, and if so, whether we could use some to pay off the graduate endowment fee for students who volunteer in their gap year? I welcome the fact that the focus may be on those from more deprived areas becoming involved in ProjectScotland. If that is the case, it is important that we know that that is where the focus is. It is well and good that any Barnett consequentials should go into that, especially if it is explained why. Again, that is something practical that the Parliament should discuss. We should consider paying graduate endowment fees for those who volunteer in a gap year before they go to university. That is a practical and simple move that we should debate. If we want to put those resources elsewhere, we should debate that as well. A lot of voluntary work is done in children's services and there is a huge opportunity to combine that and the work that is done with the elderly. Developing cross-generational understanding has a lot of good will. Karen Whitefield had a debate about the good work that the older generations do with the younger in her constituency. That work can generate huge synergy and we should pursue it. Many of us have complained for many years  about disclosure. The Education Committee's child protection inquiry raised some of those concerns. I welcome the fact that people who work in more than one children's sector will have to go through the disclosure process only once. There will be organisational issues about how all the voluntary organisations with which they work will then be notified if there were a change in their circumstances. When the Bichard legislation comes to the Parliament, we should look at disclosure through the lens of the volunteer to ensure that we make it simple, operational and safe. We must have realistic risk. The best way to prevent young people being at risk is to ensure that there are well-organised youth organisations. We want young people to participate in society, not hang around the streets. One way of ensuring that is to champion the idea, but we need to ensure that we have a robust disclosure mechanism that protects our children and also makes volunteering risk averse for those who want to do it.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

When I was elected to the Parliament, one of the first things that I did was to write to Historic Scotland about the possibility of roofing Linlithgow Palace. Perhaps the minister could raise that in his discussions with Historic Scotland. Roofing would allow an all-year service. At present, some activities are confined to the summer months and other months with dry weather.

I congratulate Mary Mulligan on securing the debate. I live in Linlithgow and am very proud of it. I am also extremely proud of the young people of Linlithgow. I congratulate Linlithgow primary school on its achievement. I recognise a few faces behind me in the public gallery. The school's work sends a  signal about the importance in our country of volunteering and pride in our communities. There are a couple of themes that I wish to pick up on. The role of young people in the understanding of their towns and communities is vital. In an increasingly globalised world, with McDonald's and Starbucks at every corner, a sense of identity and understanding of one's community is extremely important. We have such a valuable wealth of talent among individual children, and we also have a pride in our communities. A sense of history and of the importance of the palace is imbued in everyone who stays in Linlithgow. I will tell members a story from one of the other primary schools in Linlithgow—not Linlithgow primary. The youngsters started playing Mary, Queen of Scots. One young girl told me that she wanted to be the axeman—quite the blood-and-guts role. She said that she would also like to be James VI. I asked her why that was. She said that she would not have let him grow up, so that the union of the crowns would not have happened and Scotland would not have been ruled by England. It was an interesting interpretation of history and it shows that, in the playgrounds of Linlithgow, there is a sense of the drama and history that is part and parcel of the town. I extend to the pupils of Linlithgow primary school the congratulations of my colleague, Kenny MacAskill, who is another MSP who represents the Lothians. He was a pupil at Linlithgow primary many years ago, when there were only two primaries in the whole of Linlithgow. I stress the importance of people's sense of history and of their understanding of their place in society, in their community and in their country from an historical perspective. One of the interesting political issues that is raising its head now is how we teach history in our schools. Only today, the Scottish Association of Teachers of History visited the Parliament. I point out to the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People that the meeting was attended by 20 MSPs. It is not often that such a large number of members attend such meetings. It is important that we consider how history is taught in our schools. The project work in the primary schools and the work and understanding of the guides in Linlithgow Palace show the communication and enthusiasm that, as Mary Mulligan said, can spread to those who come and visit. When we consider the teaching of history in primary and secondary schools—as was discussed in the Parliament earlier today—it is important not to lose what we have, which is very precious. A country must have a sense of self; a community must have a sense of self; an  individual must know their place in that community and in that country. The work of the youngsters will stay with them. I have spoken to many young people who have gone through the process and who are now at Linlithgow academy. Their experience is very special and remains with them throughout their lives. Councillor Tam Smith, one of the councillors who represents Linlithgow, went along to a visit with Historic Scotland when the town was nominated. I asked him what he thought about that, and he replied that it was brilliant. "Brilliant" is perhaps the best word to describe it. I hope that the experience indeed stays with the young people from Linlithgow primary school as they progress, and I hope that we can celebrate it. At a time when we often hear about adverse things to do with young people in our society, I think it is great, right and proper that we can celebrate something very successful, which can serve as a beacon for the rest of Scotland. The Linlithgow primary guides could perhaps give lessons to people from elsewhere in Scotland on how to do the job well.

Having not taken part in the various debates in recent weeks, I hope to bring a fresh perspective to the issue. I want to explore what the proposals will entail and their consequences in human terms. Until the Parliament has power on wider issues such as the economy and benefits, too much of our time will be spent on debating local government financial settlements, because it is in local government that most responsibilities still lie. One positive suggestion that has been made is that, because the same issues will arise time and again, we should have a standing tripartite convention or committee involving local government, the Executive and the Parliament that meets regularly. If the minister and his colleagues do not want to have to respond to irate letters in the press from local government leaders at the time of the local government settlement, it is important that we have regular dialogue that is based on partnership, not a one-to-one bipartite arrangement between the Executive and local government. That is a positive suggestion for the way forward. The Finance Committee paper that was published this morning makes absolute sense about where the problem lies. Paragraph 18 talks about "the discrepancy between the Executive's inflation provision and its inflation forecast." It does not take a financial genius to work out that there is a big gap that needs to be closed. The issue is whether the gap has been closed sufficiently to ensure that local government does not have to make above-inflation council tax increases. The minister said that we do not want rhetoric. He said that the Government is employing more teachers and reducing class sizes, but—hang on—when Dennis Canavan asks, as he does, what progress is being made on reducing class sizes, the Executive does not know. It is interesting that the targets on class size reductions and employing more teachers are for 2007-08, while the spending to produce those changes is coming through now in the 2006-07 settlement. Given that the spending is coming through in the core funding for local government, should we not expect to see some results in 2006-07? Local authorities say that, because of the pressure on  budgets from single status, they are considering school closures. We know from the efficiency programme statements that councils should not touch the revenue costs that relate to the number of teachers who are employed, but if councils are considering school closures, how are they ensuring that there is a sufficient number of teachers? If sufficient resources are being put in and we are making progress on teacher numbers, why is it that, in Glasgow, nursery teachers are being pulled out of nursery classes to save £370,000? Only last week, the Education Committee heard that a higher proportion of nursery teachers improves young people's life chances, although I appreciate fully that we have a range of provision in nursery education. With all the money that is going into education, why are cuts being made now, especially given that education should not be targeted under the Government's efficiency proposals? That is worrying and perhaps reveals a discrepancy between the finance order for 2006-07 and the Executive's delivery targets, which are for the following year. My worry, which is shared by various local authorities, is that the preservation and protection of education is not happening in the here and now. Some spare capacity and resources in education are being used to shore up budgets to deal with other financial pressures on councils. That does not suit the Executive's proposals for education and it certainly does not suit pupils. The worrying aspect is that we may be storing up problems for the future.

I am conscious of the time, so I will move on. In West Lothian, an extra £600,000 needs to be provided for residential child care, specialised foster placements, child protection and care of children with special needs. We have introduced legislation on special needs, but it needs to be resourced through core funding. Only last week, the First Minister talked about the need for children of drug misusing families to have temporary or permanent care places, but that costs money, which should be provided through core funding. By and large, local authorities throughout Scotland have to spend 50 per cent more than their grant-aided expenditure allowance on children's services to protect Scotland's children. No local authority in the country would jeopardise child protection services as a result of financial pressures in the budget. Local authorities face tough practical choices in relation to the children of this country. The issue is not just about the  pounds, shillings and pence in the local government settlement; it is about the rationale.

On that basis, I ask the minister to consider rationally the proposals from the Finance Committee about the discrepancies, so that we can protect existing proposals. We must consider seriously the differences between the Executive's targets for 2007-08 and the finances in the order. We need to consider whether that money will reach the people whom it should reach.

I recognise the plaudits for West Lothian Council, but does the member acknowledge that they have come at a price? Successive Labour administrations have increased band D council tax by 89.3 per cent.

I thank the minister for giving Opposition members early sight of the consultation paper—I appreciate the spirit in which it was given. The Scottish National Party, as it has done continuously in the child protection agenda, will provide constructive support and, where necessary, criticism and scrutiny in Parliament to ensure that we deliver for Scotland's children. I am pleased that the minister accepts that although the bill is a vital part of the child protection agenda, it is only one part of that agenda. I urge him to pursue the wider agenda with as much vigour as he is pursuing this aspect. Perhaps he might want to reflect on the timescale for the introduction of the legislation, bearing in mind that the Bichard report came out 18 months ago, and the importance of that report to the Executive's agenda. I wish to question the minister on three specific areas. Cross-referencing, in particular, has been a key matter for criticism and concern. In practice, what difference will the central barring unit make to cross-referencing between the sex offenders list and the list of people who should not work with children? Currently, the decision about who should not work with children lies with civil servants. My understanding is that the disqualified from working with children list will still apply. Therefore, what change will there be if a small number—60-odd—are on the disqualified from working with children list and several thousand are on the sex offenders list? The consultation document says that there will not be automatic referencing or debarring. If the central barring unit decides to close the gap,  how will it do so more quickly and efficiently than has happened in the past year, to reassure the public that those—

I am asking a question.

The question, as the minister will acknowledge, is this: What is the relationship between the sex offenders list and the central barring unit, and what will be the difference from the current governance situation if the same people could be making decisions? Retrospectivity is a concern. How long will the process take? What timescales does the minister propose for retrospective checks on all those who work in relevant jobs? People may question the difference between the list of people who are disqualified from working with children and the list of people who are disqualified from working with vulnerable adults. As both groups are vulnerable, what is the rationale for having two lists? Did the minister consider having one list for all those who work with vulnerable people, irrespective of whether they are children or adults?

How many hundreds of millions of pounds have been paid out as excess profits to private financiers as a result of the PPP contracts? Before any future spending  commitments are made, will the minister consider adopting the Scottish National Party's proposal for a not-for-profit contract so that we can build more new schools and put smaller class sizes for pupils before excess private profits for financiers?

I rise to support the motion. The Scottish National Party has agreed from the outset to co-operate with ministers to ensure that, although the bill would be given proper scrutiny, it would be fast-tracked to allow joint inspections to continue. There is no more serious issue than child protection and, in recent weeks, society's views with regard to the risks to children have become clear. We know from statistics that, unfortunately, children who are most at risk are often at risk from people whom they know, such as family members. It is sad that in the heat and light of the headlines, attention is given to stranger danger and the bureaucracy of lists that do not necessarily guarantee protection when, at the end of the day, children are attacked by people and not by bureaucracy or the lack of it. We can ensure that the state, in all its forms, whether at national and parliamentary level or at council level, puts its operations in order so that we can be proactive in ensuring that children are protected. That is why I strongly support joint inspections. Interestingly, some of the controversy surrounding the differences between the legislation in Scotland and that in England has been played out in recent weeks. As part of the scrutiny of the legislation, it has been interesting to see the differences between joint inspections in Scotland and those in England. By the time the legislation is complete, the concentration on child protection in Scotland should lead to a more robust system of child protection and investigation of services than exists in England. In its original child protection inquiry report, the Education Committee expressed concerns about the timescale for the implementation of certain protection measures, not the least of which is inspection. We are therefore keen to get implementation back on track. I refer the minister to one issue of concern. There are things that prevent the state in all its forms from supporting children—sometimes it is lack of resources, sometimes it is lack of people and sometimes it is lack of leadership. I have a concern to raise with the minister and I hope that he will take action on it by bringing it to the attention of the inspectorates. It is to do with the City of Edinburgh Council, which has in recent weeks made clear its response to the Social Work Inspection Agency's inquiry in the Western Isles. That inquiry was pertinent to the bill. From the sad case of Caleb Ness and the recommendations of the O'Brien report, members will remember that the key issue was not necessarily a lack of social  workers, but a lack of bureaucratic back-up through secretarial support. In its response to the inquiry, the City of Edinburgh Council said that the change to existing practice—the exchange of records—will "be difficult to implement in Edinburgh, given the current inadequacy of the administration support for child-protection work, in terms of the typing of case notes, filing and photocopying." "Typing of case notes" means the typing of current case notes. I would be appalled if there was vulnerability in the exchange of information and communication between agencies because of a lack of secretarial support for child protection cases. In the light of that, and in the light of the experiences that we have had in Edinburgh, I ask the minister to consider asking the joint inspectorate to look at the City of Edinburgh Council first when the inspections get back on track. I return to the bill. The Education Committee made good progress and its scrutiny achieved the duty of confidentiality that is now contained in the bill. The Parliament is sometimes at its best when there is co-operation between ministers and members of the Opposition; the bill is another example in which that has worked to good effect. I say to the minister in good spirit that I hope that any future child protection legislation will be treated in the same way. I therefore invite him to make an early statement to Parliament and to other interested parties about his plans for future legislation resulting from the Bichard inquiry and recent events. I draw particular attention to the protocols. Karen Gillon made a point about young women seeking sex advice from doctors. There is an issue about there being different protocols. On that, too, we made advances, and the minister knows that I pressed the issue. There will be separate protocols for child protection and for children's services, which will allay some of fears and concerns that we have heard from the medical profession. Joint inspections and child protection itself will operate only if the all the players co-operate proactively and not defensively just because an act says that they must. That is the spirit of the bill, so I am pleased that we have come so far. The jury is out on how successful the legislation will be, as it will always be in child protection cases, but I am pleased to give the SNP's support to the bill.

I think that Lord James Douglas-Hamilton was offering faint praise for the deputy minister. I understand Lord James's argument, although he used precisely the same reasoning during previous stages to suggest that the bill should have a sunset clause. Child protection cuts to the heart of many serious concerns that have been raised over the past few weeks, especially the issue of sex offenders teaching in schools. Although that issue arose down south—I am not saying that sex offenders have taught in Scottish schools—the issues surrounding the list of those who are disqualified from working with children is pertinent to the debate. We have yet to hear a ministerial statement on that from Peter Peacock—I would like to hear his statement sooner rather than later—but it looks likely that the Parliament will need to review the content of the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003 in the context of improving child protection. Therefore, the Parliament is already being required to review legislation on child protection regularly and as a matter of course. We should bear in mind the fact that the Education Committee was concerned about the Executive's implementation of child protection services generally. In 2004, the committee published a report that criticised—and, where appropriate, commended—action that was being taken on child protection. The Parliament has a good track record on identifying and reviewing such legislation. I understand the argument that Lord James has made, but I believe that amendment 2 would set the wrong precedent. I will be extremely surprised if the Executive and Parliament do not review the legislation, as I expect that a review of the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003 will be undertaken as part of the minister's planned new legislation, of which he will inform the Parliament at some point. On that basis, the SNP will not support amendment 2.

I support amendment 1, in the name of Lord James Douglas-Hamilton. I supported it by signing the original amendment. As other members have said, the issue of confidentiality has been key in the debate on the bill, which is fast-track legislation. We should respect the views and concerns of the medical profession, especially on the issue of confidentiality. I thank the minister for paying close attention to the concerns that were raised by the Parliament at stage 1 and in the amendments that were lodged at stage 2, and for introducing the issue of confidentiality into the bill. Had we not had the pressure of scrutiny of the bill by members of all parties, I do not think that the duty of confidentiality would necessarily have been included; it was not in the bill originally. If there is a breach of that confidentiality, should it be dealt with through internal disciplinary processes, or do we recognise that, because of its serious import, some form of judicial response—in this case, a fine—should be signalled? The concerns of the medical profession are sufficient for us to say that we do not think that breach of confidentiality should be dealt with internally in an employment situation. We recognise those concerns and we want to send out a clear signal that any breach of confidentiality carries a social penalty and will be met with a judicial response. We have come some distance, but the provision for fines would go a great deal further towards reassuring the medical profession that we respect issues of confidentiality. We want to ensure that the bill contains a clear signal that breach of confidentiality will be disciplined not through internal employment measures, but through judicial response. As Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said, such a response would be required only rarely. I think that it is the responsibility of the Parliament to give that reassurance to the medical profession.

Much of the skills debate tends to concentrate on enterprise, the economy and employer-led initiatives. The Government often claims that its role and responsibility is to co-ordinate employer-led activity. I think that the hard-nosed businessmen to whom Jim Mather referred are capable of adding the skills and training themselves and look to the Government to take care of its own back yard by developing the workforce for which it is responsible. Indeed, this debate was first called workforce development. I look forward to the Government confessing to the problems it has faced in developing the public service workforce for which it is responsible. For example, with regard to teachers, we know that  there are great challenges and constraints in reducing class sizes. We also know that many young people are vulnerable because of the need for more social workers. And that we need more doctors and nurses. The Government has in the past been unable to anticipate and plan for changes such as the coming European working time directive for doctors and for issues to do with nursing and the changing age profile of the workforce. Employers expect the Government to look to the development of its own workforce. There are huge challenges. The NEET figures are very stark indeed and we must address them. Taking the minister at his word—that he will listen to what members have to say—I point out that 50 per cent of Scottish Enterprise's budget is addressed to Careers Scotland. I raised that issue with Nicol Stephen when we did the budget scrutiny. Is it appropriate that most of the attention is concentrated on remedial action in the post-school environment? If we want to tackle the issue seriously, perhaps the intervention should be earlier, before youngsters get into the NEET category. I want to pursue the theme of early intervention. I also want to reflect concerns that businesses have about the Government's initiatives, particularly in teaching and education. We know that the Government faces big challenges in meeting its targets for class-size reductions. To meet the target for the number of teachers it requires, it would have had to double, if not treble, the number of English and mathematics teachers in initial teacher training—the places in initial teacher training would have had to be taken primarily by English and maths teachers. Because the Executive has started work on reaching its target too late, it will have problems. It is increasing the number of teachers in English and maths, but what about language and science teachers? The immediate priority has started to exclude the recruitment of teachers of other subjects. As Jamie Stone said, if we want to meet the challenges of the future, we must have language teachers to teach pupils, particularly in early years and particularly if we want to have the secondary-into-primary use of McCrone time to allow such intervention. When employers talk about the skills gap, they are often talking about soft skills. Yesterday evening, I read an interesting and telling report by John McLaren—not somebody whom I would ordinarily quote—entitled "Soft Skills & Early Years", which was produced for Scottish Enterprise. He comments: "The best evaluations relate to Early Years Intervention and indicate, for some programmes, very high rates of return. This suggests that 'soft' skills might be best  encouraged at an early age, when habits are less set and minds more plastic." Members who attended the Scottish Children's Reporter Administration presentation at lunch time will know about its appeal for a joined-up approach. We know that criminality and offending often occur among people who have suffered from being in care or under protection at an early age. In the United States, people such as James Heckman are considering at which point in the journey interventions should be made if we want to invest in soft skills and human capital. Our country must sign up to a national mission in relation to children in their early years, by which I mean those who are zero to three, never mind those who are three to five and at nursery school. We must reach those children if we want to make a huge shift, break the cycle of dependency and provide energetic, creative people for our future workforce. That mission is the Government's job. Given our aging population, the figure that Jim Mather mentioned—that one in seven young people are not in education or training—is acutely sensitive for the employment market.

I agree, but the big challenge for the Parliament and the Executive is whether we micromanage year to year or engage in a strategic debate about where we want to be in 2020. Do we have only the one role that the minister mentioned? My concern is that lifelong learning tends to be about continuing education for adults and not about what happens in the early years. The Executive is going backwards in relation to early intervention. In 1999, we started work on social justice and early intervention, but, unfortunately, all the signals are that the work is slowing down. For example, Glasgow City Council is taking away nursery teachers and schools. A strong economic case can be made for early intervention. The minister is right that we must consider the size and age profile of the population in 2020, but we must do so strategically. The people of Scotland look to the Parliament to give a strategic vision, rather than to examine statistics and micromanage activities day to day or year to year. We can have a national mission that addresses the needs of the economy and that provides firm foundations for the young people who will carry us into the future.

Is the member aware of the Education Committee's inquiry into the matter? The school-college review showed that the most advantage from vocational training at age 14 could be gained not through focusing such training on the disaffected or on those who lack motivation but through making it available generally. Perhaps the member's point is misplaced.

If the resources are not being top sliced and are available now, will the minister explain why since 2003—when the Government came belatedly to the class-size reduction agenda—vacancies for English teachers have tripled and those for maths teachers have doubled? How on earth can he achieve his class-size reduction targets for 2007?

I am pleased that we have the opportunity to discuss an issue that is of great importance to our constituents. Post Office Ltd should be aware of the strength of feeling that exists, not just among pensioners and other people who use post offices day to day, but among traders. I have received a great deal of correspondence from business customers of Post Office Ltd who are deeply concerned about the implications of the changes for the economic viability of Bathgate. I am pleased that we have the opportunity to discuss the issue, but there is a certain air of unreality about the debate. People reap what they sow, and we are now seeing the consequences of decisions that were made by Westminster Governments about Post Office Ltd. This is not the first debate on post offices in which I have spoken;  I led a debate in 2000 in which the SNP raised the issue of the UK Government's benefits policy and its consequences. At that time, there were proposals for the rationalisation—otherwise known as closure—of post offices in urban areas with populations of fewer than 10,000. That is not what is happening here, but I would like to quote what Henry McLeish, who was the responsible minister at the time, said during that debate. He said: "we have a Government that is building into a bill at Westminster obligations on the post authorities to ensure that there is an effective, viable network. It may be that in some areas the post office is not commercially viable, but is a social necessity. That is the issue that should unite us today. No one would argue against the proposition that we should have an effective network."— [ Official Report , 8 March 2000; Vol 5, c 486.]  The issue that we are debating now is the movement of post office services into the Spar franchise and whether that will provide an effective network in the future. On a variety of levels, that is certainly open to question. The social inclusion agenda is devolved, which is why we have debated post offices in the past, and why it is an area about which we should have concerns. The idea of pensioners queuing outside in the rain because of the size of the Spar shop in Bathgate is a concern as far as social inclusion, dignity and respect for our pensioners are concerned. That is something that we must consider. There is also a point about the future viability of post office services, as we have seen in Carmondean in Livingston and elsewhere. When Wm Morrison Supermarkets plc took over Safeway, there were questions about the viability of there being an effective network in the future. Henry McLeish was right to say in 2000 that we had to consider whether the Westminster Government would help to guarantee an effective network, but we are now seeing the results, and the question must be whether there is an effective network. Elaine Murray is right to stand up for her constituents, and Mary Mulligan was right to talk about the Bathgate situation, but people reap what they sow. That must be fully acknowledged. Post Office Ltd should reconsider the proposals. From a commercial point of view, it should listen to the concerns of small traders and businesspeople about the implications of the proposals for a market town such as Bathgate. It is not a small village; it is a town. It is struggling, but it has a potentially viable future, and its post office is part of that. The briefing from Post Office Ltd states that there are to be no post office closures. I am sorry, but that is just what it is doing. It is closing the post office in Bathgate and providing its services  elsewhere, but there will not be a post office—there will be a Spar shop with a post service in it. Post Office Ltd also went on to say that although the decision to transfer the management to CJ Lang & Son Ltd is not itself subject to formal consultation, it wants to understand how the planned changes will affect its customers and is keen to seek feedback. How kind—the decision is not subject to consultation. I know that in Bathgate the work to remove refrigerators and create space is already happening. That is wrong. From a public relations point of view, it is an abuse of the public's trust of Post Office Ltd and the benefits that it gets from its title; it is seen as a public service and it benefits from that. People think that the decision is open to consultation, but the briefing shows clearly that it is not. I welcome the debate, but let us be realistic about what is happening and why it is happening.

Does the minister acknowledge the shocking levels of obesity and dental decay among young children, even among pre-school children? Cutting the number of visits that health visitors make from six to four will not help that situation. I agree that it is important that vulnerable children are targeted, but the Executive should be going forward with a progressive early intervention strategy. As far as health checks for young people are concerned, it should not be robbing Peter to pay Paul.

As somebody who is not a member of the Finance Committee, I commend it for the focus of its report and its themed approach. It provides an appropriate lens through which to examine the budget and, in particular, the efficient government initiative. At the Education Committee this morning, concern was expressed that the efficient government initiative is reflected in the size of the tiny mince pies that were presented to the committee by the convener. The person who made that comment is also a member of the Finance Committee who knows a thing or two about pies. I want to link education and finance, as Elaine Murray did eloquently in her speech. Some £4 billion from the public purse is spent on education and 85 per cent of that money is spent by local government. The minister said that Parliament should examine spending priorities, but the Education Committee is left to examine only 15 per cent of the education spend, although a good third goes into the national priorities action fund and we have no bottom-line scrutiny of that fund. It is meant to incentivise Executive priorities, but we cannot assess whether it does. The Education Committee has a limited point of focus. The councils receive approximately £3.5 billion to spend on education; that money forms a significant part of their budgets. Councils receive 34 per cent of the overall public services budget but they are facing 44 per cent of the efficiency savings. It is interesting that, during the final year of Tory rule, councils received 40 per cent of the total spend. The figure is reducing and will go  down to 31 per cent by the end of the spending review period. At the same time, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities tells us that councils face additional burdens, many of which come from central Government. Those include fuel costs of £27 million, superannuation costs of £31 million, strategic waste fund costs of £15 million and special needs costs of £18 million. There will also be new burdens in relation to foster care, child protection, care of children with special needs, home care, care homes for the elderly, private sector residential care homes—which will hit the City of Edinburgh Council particularly badly—the central Government funding shortfall for free personal care and the requirements of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. Not all those burdens come from the Scottish Government—some come from Westminster—but increasing burdens are being put on local authorities at a time when their share of the public spend in Scotland is going down. One specific concern is about tracking whether the Government's priorities are being addressed. For example, for the second year in a row, the Education Committee has said that there is no way it can track whether councils' spending meets their new obligations on special needs. There is a lack of clarity in tracking investment in additional support needs. Importantly, the Minister for Education and Young People told the Education Committee that education services are exempt from efficiency savings. If so, why does paragraph 74 on page 18 of the Finance Committee's report mention "advice from an Executive official that Glasgow City council expects to save £19.8m" and state that "Although those are described as efficiency improvements by the council they include reduction in education costs of over £1 million"? The issue is of great concern, because the education spend is a huge chunk of the local government spend. As paragraph 70 of the report states, if education services are exempt, the efficiency savings would have to be made from the remaining £5 billion of grant-aided expenditure, which means that, instead of 3.5 per cent savings, the savings will have to be 6.6 per cent—10 times the savings that some Executive departments will have to achieve.

That is exactly my point. The biggest element of education revenue costs is teachers' pay. That leads me on to the Government targets. We know that certain parts of Scotland have problems with education, many of which relate to deprivation; for example, Glasgow City Council, which is cutting its education budget. We should employ more teachers to cut class sizes. The Government says that it will do that by 2007, so why, although record numbers of students are entering teacher training, are the same numbers of teachers not being employed? The number of teachers who register with the General Teaching Council is not the figure that matters—the important number is how many teachers enter classrooms at the chalkface. The Minister for Education and Young People says to councils that they must not use the pressures on local government spend as an excuse not to recruit teachers. Glasgow City Council is moving primary teachers into secondary schools to help with the reading, writing and basic literacy problems, but it should be employing more teachers now. All those issues arise, even before the McCrone contact-time provisions kick in. We have a real problem. We have been told that education is exempt from the efficiency savings, but the reality on the ground—

I am sorry; I am in my last minute. Education is a good example of the pressures that are being put on local government. Because education spend on pay is exempt, the rest of the budget is being hit. The minister is right that we need order, control and discipline. As he said, we must also respect the need for fluidity. However, a lot of macho posturing has gone on in relation to the efficiency improvements, some of which are ill thought out. I do not necessarily blame the minister for that, but I certainly blame his predecessor. We are often told that people are being softened up for change, but I believe that hardening up is taking place. The expected efficiency improvements will not necessarily come through encouraging local government to come up with its own solutions in a well thought out and planned way; instead, as the minister hinted, the improvements could come from a centralisation agenda that would certainly hit home and create efficiencies. That issue may not have been addressed in the Finance Committee report, although we could ponder it in the future.

If we look at what is happening down south, we see that a great deal of time and attention have been spent on preparation for efficiency savings as part of the Gershon review. Does the member believe that the same has happened here in Scotland? Has enough time and effort been put into preparing for savings?

Does the minister acknowledge that truancy rates remain persistently high? Does he recognise the success of the automatic messaging service that many schools have introduced? What plans does he have to roll that out? In seeking to have parents take up their parental responsibilities, does he see a role for any reformed school board or new parent council in developing policy for parental responsibility with regard to truancy rates?

Is the minister's view that when access to records is sought as part of the inspection of general children's services, best practice would be to seek consent?

This bill is probably one of the most important that we will deal with, even though it is being rushed through and has been given very little parliamentary time this afternoon. Politicians, whether national or local, have no greater responsibility than dealing with child protection. Joint inspections are recognised by all across the chamber and in wider society as a means of driving forward best practice. Unfortunately, we know from tragic cases that, time and time again, the lack of interface and problems between different organisations—social work, health organisations and the police—cause difficulties and give rise to tragic circumstances. Lack of access to health records was a stumbling block that meant that the roll-out of joint inspections had to be curtailed. Therefore, the Scottish National Party is happy to co-operate with the progression of the bill, although I wish to point out that the need for such legislation was foreseen by the Education Committee during its inquiry into child protection last year. Wendy Alexander and I intimated to the minister that there might be a need for legislation, and that since child protection was one of the most important areas in which legislation might be required, we should act. However, we recognise that we are where we are, and we have to go forward on that basis.  I know that my time is limited, but I will pull out some of the key areas—my colleagues may do the same. There is an issue about confidentiality and about access to individual health records in particular. People are concerned that although the bill has two parts, it covers three areas. Part 1 covers child protection and children's services as one element. Part 2 has implications for the Social Work Inspection Agency, and access to medical records—but only by a medical practitioner—is covered in part 2. There is concern that there seem to be two sets of standards. The committee is right to ask the minister to address and clarify that issue. The BMA and GPs raised specific concerns about access to information by children's services. The bill is about the inspection of past cases. We know that the minister and the chief medical officer have written to all those involved in children's services to say that child protection trumps any other issue in live cases—that is the norm. At issue is the introduction of processes for retrospective checks. We have to look at the logic of the Executive's approach. I understand the concerns of the BMA and GPs that openness in the inspection of children's services generally may lead to an expectation that social work and education inspectors will check services willy-nilly. Those concerns are mistaken. We need to clarify that the bill allows very specific inspections to take place when information about individual cases can help to illuminate previous problems. There is a further lack of logic in the Executive's approach. We support joint inspections, and the committee recognises that by looking at broader children's services we may identify vulnerable children who do not receive the services that they deserve because they are not on the at-risk register. Sometimes it is easier to track children who are on the at-risk register and the services that are provided to them than it is to track children who are not on the at-risk register, but who also have problems. The committee raised concerns that England is much further ahead on the inspection of children's services than Scotland is, although England started the process after we did. The committee heard that that is because Scotland is examining child protection in more detail and more robustly. It was argued that it is only by examining children's services in the round that we can identify failures in connections, but the fact that the Scottish Executive has chosen to focus only on child protection gives the lie to that point.

I appreciate the minister's point, but the issues need to be aired. When we were presented with the bill and when we first heard evidence on it, particularly from Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education, we were told that it would allow access to records without consent. However, I detect that the minister is moving towards the use of implied consent. There is an important difference between no consent and implied consent, and it is important to articulate the change to GPs, many of whom do not know of the existence of the bill. I hope that, when they are made aware of the bill, that will be done on the basis of the minister's movement towards adopting implied consent. The committee recognises that the Scottish Executive has agreed the code of confidentiality—which will bring in the concept of implied consent—with the Scottish general practitioners committee of the BMA. I am not sure how many people read the notices in GPs' surgeries but I suspect that putting the notices up might be more a matter of convenience than a matter of import. The committee received strong evidence from ChildLine, from GPs and from people who work in sexual health advice services about cases in which people want to provide support to their children who are misusing drugs. In such circumstances—for example, in a case in which someone's 17-year-old daughter has used drugs in the past—confidentiality is important to practitioners in the field, and the involvement of the police in joint inspections could throw up a load of issues. The committee made some important points about that. I am conscious of the time. The public do not know much about the bill—it has not grabbed the headlines—and I fear that GPs do not know much about it either. It would be helpful for information on the progress of the bill and the changes that have developed to be communicated to a wider audience before the bill is considered at stage 2 in January.

I thank the minister for his suggested amendments, but will he clarify the point that he made about the protocol being subject to regulation?

Will the minister confirm that it is not the numbers of teachers in training or on the register that matter, but the numbers of teachers in the classrooms? The minister should bear in mind that head teachers told him that meeting the target of 20 pupils per class in S1 and S2 for English and maths is not achievable. Will the minister admit that that target is no longer a target but an aspiration—a welcome one, but an aspiration nevertheless? The minister cannot realistically hope to meet the target and he knows it.

Will the member give way?

Iain Smith and I have just returned from Finland, which has a top-performing education system. We were looked at askance when we talked about the testing that goes on, particularly at primary level.

On the point about increased funding, would the member support an extension of the hours that three and four-year-olds experience in early education from the average of one and a half hours a day in order that they can benefit in the very way that he suggests?

The member talks about rural schools and composite classes and it is clear that education is delivered well in that way. The problem is that when the Executive cut primary class sizes from 32 to 30 pupils a few years ago, there was a mushrooming of composite classes, but the teachers were not trained in how to deal with such classes in an urban context. Even now at Jordanhill, student teachers are not being taught how to develop fully composite teaching in an urban as opposed to a rural setting, where it is par for the course.

I understand that Barrhead High School is one of those schools that is using the creative industries and culture to drive forward ambition. The member referred to the schools of ambition budget of £100,000. Does he think that it is appropriate for that money to be used to employ additional teachers? I understand that at Barrhead it is used to fund an additional English teacher and an additional drama teacher. If there are shortages of teachers generally to pursue excellence, why do schools have to bid for money from the schools of ambition fund? Should the issue not be dealt with as part of the regular management of education?

Does Iain Smith acknowledge the concern that those experts are being brought in precisely to allow non-contact time and that they will teach their subjects without the class teacher being present? Class teachers are frustrated that they cannot then take up the issues that come up in PE or drama with the class for the rest of the week.

Will Iain Smith give way?

Scotland is at a crossroads in relation to its sense of identity and purpose. We want a progressive Scotland for the 21 st century—a country that has a belief system and is confident about the future—but how do we know where we are going if we do not know where we have been and how will we know whether we have got there if our cultural compass is lost or confused? The situation is serious. Why otherwise would 500 writers and 500 of their peers have presented a petition that calls for Scottish culture, heritage and history to be embedded in our curriculum for primary, secondary and tertiary education? Alarm is the response to the minister's confused message on history and the teaching of history and to a leadership that sees the grass-roots evolution of the curriculum as a reason to abdicate leadership and drive in the championing of the interests of Scottish culture, heritage and history. High up on a wall above the rostrum in the main hall of Ayr Academy—the school that I went to—engraved in gold on marble, a biblical quote is cited: "Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom: and with all thy getting get understanding." I admit that some of us are still getting. Nonetheless, we have to reflect on what we want our children to get from their education. The debate is not just about knowledge, content and detail, but about understanding and wisdom. Much of the thinking behind the Executive's education policy comes from the national education debate. Of course, the Parliament's Education Committee had its own purposes of education inquiry. The point on which we all agree is that, in a changing world where detail and content can be accessed at the flick of a switch, we must strive for knowledge, wisdom and understanding. Connections, context, consistency and coherence are essential if pupils are to create their own world view. The Scottish National Party's contention is that, after generations of neglect, the time is right to promote a Scottish world view in our education system. For example, in languages, we should promote the French-Scottish enlightenment; in science, we should promote our past and current inventors; and in literature, we should promote our wealth of talent, past and present.  The Executive motion smacks of "Groundhog Day"—it is a mechanistic motion about delivery one year on. I worry that the Executive has decided to have such annual or regular debates at a time when issues such as domestic abuse and criminal justice need to be debated. Will our Parliament just become a matter of annual debates in years 2, 3, 4 or 5 of any number of subject reviews? The Executive's message is about the mechanics of driving forward the leadership and ethos perspectives in schools. That is fine in detail and of itself, but targeting 20 schools out of 400 is hardly ambitious. We have to remember that, at one point, the programme was about targeting schools that needed support and not about stretching excellence. However, it is right that the programme should be about exploring and discovering excellence and I have no doubt that the schools of ambition will do that. It is interesting to note, in the bids for national funding under the scheme, how many schools decided to choose a cultural route to explore self-esteem and leadership issues. I congratulate the schools and wish them well. However, perhaps the message that the Executive should take is that nine of the 20 schools decided to choose cultural connections as their vehicle for expressing excellence and ambition—and this at a time when the Executive seems to be drifting on its cultural policy and curriculum development. I agree that the grass-roots, bottom-up, evolutionary approach to the curriculum has merit, but it can also lead to a reinforcement of the same. I also agree that it is absolutely essential for teachers to grasp the opportunity to take the lead in ensuring that cultural, historical and heritage perspectives are built into the curriculum. If that does not happen, teachers will wait a gey long time for the Executive to grasp the thistle and ensure that a Scottish world view is on offer to our children. The talk in the 21 st century is of the need for creative and confident Scots. How can someone build a sense of self and self-esteem if their national consciousness is shaped and informed by perspectives that may not be about their country's experience? How can someone know something, let alone understand it or gain wisdom from an understanding of it, if they were not taught it? In a world in which the importance of emotional intelligence is recognised, a sense of self becomes increasingly critical, as does an appreciation of the prism of understanding through which one's identity is shaped. The debate is about Scotland's window on the world; it is about a bridge to an international identity, understanding and wisdom that can judge the merit and demerit  of huge world decisions such as whether our country should go to war.

As someone who was a student of economic history, I can say that it is quite something for a member of a unionist party to give a member of a nationalist party a perspective on Scottish history. The SNP has consistently called for Scottish history to be the bedrock of our curriculum. A key concern of Labour and the Tories is the language of choice—for them, choice is all. However, flexibility and an extended range of choice can dilute the content of a curriculum and make it strong on range but light on depth. They want consumer choice in education and to motivate pupils by choice rather than content, but is that choice at any price? Is it flexibility that loses focus? Is it teach everything but teach nothing? Flexibility and choice may lead to inconsistency, incoherence and a lack of understanding. We should remember that most other countries teach history to the age of 16.

I am not arguing that. I am arguing about making the connections and ensuring that history can be taught as a discrete subject in S1 and S2. As the Minister for Education and Young People walks from the chamber—

The minister may want to reflect that he has yet to confirm that he believes that history should be taught as a discrete subject in S1 and S2. Shonaig Macpherson, chair of the National Trust for Scotland, said this week: "By celebrating Scotland's past we can build a better future". However, we have to know what we want to celebrate in the first place. I am not talking about culture, history and heritage as entertainment; I am talking about fulfilling people's potential. The minister caused alarm when he retracted a statement that he had made. He said:  "I believe history will always be taught in secondary school, and rightly so." He also said: "I am quite clear that history, as a distinct discipline, has a hugely important role to play." Which years was he talking about—S1 and S2 or S3? Will he tell us—because Scotland wants to know—whether our children will learn about their history in S1 and S2 as a discrete subject?

The minister has not convinced the 500 of our writers who e-petitioned the Parliament, or the academics and everyone else. We have to suspend our disbelief when listening to him. In the spirit of making constructive suggestions, I will tell the minister about the SNP's five-point plan, which could be taken up and delivered. We should use the curriculum review to embed Scottish history, culture and heritage in the curriculum. We should engage the experts. We have a wealth of talent in the academic, cultural and heritage fields to help to develop appropriate materials to inspire pupils. We should build Scottish education's academic spine. Robert Brown asked where we can do that. We can do it in science, languages, mathematics and a range of subjects. Other countries have developed their own national view of the world. We want a Scottish world view. We should support the providers. We need specialist history teachers teaching in our classrooms. We must ensure—the minister will have to do this with the curriculum review—that initial teacher training addresses the issues. Continuous professional development, the McCrone opportunities and non-contact time also open up huge possibilities for delivery.  We must move from studies to qualifications, which means that appropriate exam options must be available to those who have studied. The Scottish Qualifications Authority must develop a range of options, including stand-alone Scottish history exams and the inclusion of Scottish history papers in other history exams. One day on from this year's St Andrew's day, the Parliament can vote to ensure that, one year on from this year's St Andrew's day, Scotland will have moved on decisively from the crossroads at which it finds itself in determining how our culture, history and education are embedded in the curriculum. The mediocrity of the Executive means that it is not making history. I appeal to the minister not to make history history. I move amendment S2M-3658.1, to leave out from "the significant progress" to end and insert: "that all schools should be Schools of Ambition; notes the objectives set out in Ambitious, Excellent Schools and, in particular, the cultural emphasis of a number of the successful bids for schools of ambition status but, in doing so, notes the general concern that Scotland's culture, history and heritage lack national support from the Scottish Executive in the education system; notes with serious concern the proposals by the Executive to make history history in S1 and S2; asserts the importance of children in Scotland having a firm understanding and appreciation of Scottish heritage, culture and history; recognises and supports creative ways to weave this into every subject in the curriculum providing a Scottish perspective; rejects, however, any attempt to remove the stand-alone subject of history from S1 and S2 in schools in Scotland, and regrets any suggestion of this by any Scottish minister, reflecting that such a move would not be even countenanced in other countries who have a pride in promoting their nation's history."

The minister made an important point about the concentration in deprived areas of those young people whose performance is in the bottom 20 per cent. Does he acknowledge that some schools in those areas achieve successes and that, although we must target the schools that are underperforming and underachieving, we must recognise that there are success stories out there?

It might be helpful if the minister could explain what arrangement has been made with the Treasury, what responsibilities the Executive has in securing that and when it was agreed.

I congratulate Colin Fox on securing tonight's debate. Given his offer of Ovaltine, I should mention that our business manager, Alasdair Morgan, pointed out that although this might be a late debate for us, such a debate in Westminster would take place at half-past two in the morning. We should be grateful for small blessings. As Colin Fox's motion is quite wide-ranging and covers not only the situation in Midlothian but Edinburgh's stock transfer, I will try to cover a variety of issues. Compared with the rest of Scotland, the Lothians are unusual in that we have a growing population. Like the rest of Scotland, we have a great demand for housing but, especially in places such as Midlothian and West Lothian, the pressure for affordable rented accommodation comes very much from young families. Increasingly, such families are moving out of Edinburgh. The City of Edinburgh Council is seeking to close a quarter of its primary schools at a time of population growth  because schools rolls are falling. That is because young families who cannot afford to live in Edinburgh are moving out. The issue, therefore, is affordability, but the problem with much of the discussion on affordable housing is that it concentrates on provision of housing for home ownership rather than on social rented accommodation. I know that Midlothian faces major challenges. In Loanhead—which recently elected an SNP councillor, Owen Thompson, whom I congratulate on that achievement—the council is looking to have 200 houses built but, as I understand it, none will be council houses. Pressure is also being felt further down the A701 in Bilston—another vibrant community—where there is an issue about whether new-build developments will contain any social housing. I raise those points because young families should be able to live in the communities in which they were brought up. If we want community and social cohesion, that point is very important. Another point on which the minister should reflect is that in places such as Shawfair—where there is to be a massive development that I assume will include council housing—people must have access to democratic accountability and representation, regardless of whether such developments are of council housing or housing for home ownership. However, both in Shawfair and in Suttislea, where social housing is being provided, the local councillors are saying—I hope the minister is listening to this point in particular—that they cannot represent the interests of their community because the council has a vested interest. That is happening increasingly, especially in Midlothian. Such a situation does not serve democracy well, especially when people who go to their MSP find that their voices are not heard there because she is also a minister. That is a particular concern in areas where new build is taking place. However, I congratulate Midlothian Council on taking steps to ensure that 1,000 new houses will be built. I remember that several years ago I suggested to Parliament 10 alternatives ways of funding social housing other than by stock transfer. Given the variety of different ways that should be available, why are we left with the big-bang solution of stock transfer, as if it were the only game in town? Getting back to basics, we know that the reason is Gordon Brown's Treasury rules, which aim to ensure that social housing is taken off the balance sheet so that he can effect his economic policy for England. We should always remember that that is the reason why. I urge the people of Edinburgh to take part in the ballot. I believe that the tenants' voice should be heard and that the tenants themselves should  decide. The idea that the only way in which debt can be written off is by voting for stock transfer is an unbalanced proposition. I urge the people of Edinburgh to look at the experiences of Glasgow. Colin Fox made a very good point about the lack of progress, even though the process was started in 1997. My concern is that Labour administrations, both local and national, have put hundreds of millions of pounds into Glasgow's housing, not just in the past decade but over many decades. The problem is that no progress has been made. Scotland's social housing is at a standing start. We have lost time and opportunity and we have lost houses through the right to buy. We must try to make up the shortfall. I look forward to examining a variety of ways of funding. I would welcome small-scale stock transfers if the tenants want them; that is a way forward. I welcome new council house building, but we need a variety of forms of housing if we are to ensure that we have homes that are fit for the future, and communities that are fit for the families of Scotland.

I am not sure whether the minister heard the answers that were given following question 1 on education and young people, tourism, culture and sport, but it is clear that the 60 per cent capacity rule in schools, which was determined by the Accounts Commission in relation to best value, runs counter to much of the guidance on rural school closures. Will the minister liaise with his counterpart, the Minister for Education and Young People, to pursue that issue with the Accounts Commission?

It is essential that there is no hold-up in the reopening of the line, whether as a result of consultation or legislation. Is the minister prepared to accept the Scottish National Party's offer, which was first made by Fergus Ewing during the Borders rail link debate, of the SNP's assistance in the passing of a fast-track transport and works type bill? To take such action would ensure that the line reopens. We do not want any legislative problems to arise, as is happening with the current system of private bills.

The city of Dundee was known for jam, jute and journalism and, of course, the city of Edinburgh is known for print, publishing and pints. Those traditions have continued, although not on the scale of the past. In particular, Scottish book publishing has been a success story that has perhaps not been celebrated as much as it should have been. In addition to previous generations of writers, we also have the current generation of writers, including A L Kennedy and J K Rowling, I am pleased that Kenny MacAskill mentioned one of my favourite authors, Robin Jenkins. We should also recognise the publisher Canongate Books, which is the publisher of the award-winning novel "Buddha Da" by Anne Donovan. Members have received in their in-trays the publication that I have with me today, which is Anne Donovan's short story "But". It explains a carer's life in fictional terms and will touch everyone who reads it. Literature does not sit only in a historical context or outside this chamber; it can reflect our current state of affairs and our soul as a nation. I implore the minister to consider the motion; the issue is not one from which the Executive can stand back.  One of the Executive's targets is to achieve a 3 per cent increase in cultural successes. I am not sure how it will measure cultural success in terms of its quantity; surely the issue is more about quality. If a 3 per cent increase in cultural success is Government's target—I understand that there are measures by which to judge the increase—the takeover that we are debating could have a detrimental effect on the target because of its effect on Scottish publishing. If the minister is looking for a reason to get involved, I suggest to him that one reason is that publishing is part and parcel of Scottish life and so the Executive should take a lead role. I agree that the argument can be made that the subject of the motion is a commercial venture and that Government should therefore not intervene. People will say that takeovers will happen because we live in a global marketplace. I am sorry—I would say to those people that protection of a national interest is an issue on which, even in this day and age, Government can have an impact. I congratulate Kenny MacAskill on the motion and for his suggestion that we involve the Competition Commission. That avenue is real and we should pursue it. As I said, it is not possible to judge culture by the quantity of its production but by its quality. It is also not possible to measure the soul of a nation in terms of pounds, shillings and pence. One can ensure only that there is the political leadership to do something about it. Members may have heard of the publisher Itchy Coo, which is not a Friesian with skin problems but a Scottish book imprint. It was established in January 2002 to specialise in books in Scots for children. The books are also very entertaining for adults, however. I need only mention titles such as "Blethertoun Braes: Manky Mingin Rhymes fae a Scottish Toun" and the "The Hoose o' Haivers". Itchy Coo's publications bring a cultural resonance to young families. I am reading its counting book with my 16-month-old baby at the moment. The books' Scots perspective makes an important and viable contribution to publishing. The Itchy Coo website says that its books are available online and also at "all good bookshops". I hope that the success of its publications mean that bookshops continue to stock its titles and those of other Scottish publishers. However, if the main book-buying centre of the start-up company or a future new start-up company is located in the south-east of England, will it give that guarantee? I have my doubts. If we are to ensure that we can have a culture to encourage and protect in future, Scottish book producers need suitable outlets for their titles. I have looked at its management structure and I commend Ottakar's for embracing and taking on board the need to include local markets. Ottakar's  has seen its market share increase by 3.5 per cent over the past year as a result of that policy. Scottish culture can be a success. It is not something that stands outside the chamber in a commercial world; rather, it is a living, breathing part of the political life of Scotland. On that basis, I urge the minister to take whatever action he can.

The issue is serious, the recommendations are stark and there is frustration—which has been acknowledged—that previous recommendations are being implemented slowly. Will the minister give an assurance that implementation of the recommendations will address people's concern that, although there must be care, protection and support for children, the ability to pursue prosecutions in future must not be affected?

I offer my apologies to Lord James for missing his speech, but I had transport problems coming into Edinburgh this morning. It is important that we debate special needs education. I thank the Tories for bringing the motion to the chamber. Unfortunately, like many members across the chamber, I regret the terms of the motion. We see that the Tories want to look backwards, whereas the rest of the chamber recognises the progress that has been made. We accept that great progress has been made and we want to take stock, consider the reality and the experience and then consider where we go from here. An element of debate has arisen about whether there is a mismatch between experience and intention. The intentions behind the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000 and the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004 are correct. I do not dispute the deputy minister's motivation, but he should reflect on the fact that a whole section was added to the 2004 act at the request of the Education Committee to ensure the child-centred approach that John Swinney and others have talked about. The committee recognised that a child does not need to have a co-ordinated support plan to be justifiably in receipt of additional support for learning and that that should be in statute. We must consider the reality. Time and again, I have come across desperately anxious parents and teachers who support mainstreaming and want it to work but who do not have support on the ground. They worry that they are letting down children. Margaret Ewing and Rosemary Byrne, among others, mentioned teacher training, which lasts for only a short period. The recent report on initial teacher training shows that one anxiety of young teachers is about their lack of experience of, or training on, additional support needs. Those perceptions are carried into schools, where we hear unfortunate comments such as, "I didn't realise I would have to deal with children like these." That is by no means the situation  throughout Scotland, but it happens. Unless we face up to the challenges, we will not make progress. We must reflect on the May 2003 HMIE report "Moving to mainstream: The inclusion of pupils with special educational needs in mainstream schools", in which senior educational managers in each of the local authorities state that they expect a 39 per cent reduction in special school rolls. That does not fit with what we have been told about the provision so far. We must recognise that the issue is not necessarily about special schools that have closed; some special schools are under threat. For example, Richard Lochhead has lodged a motion about the Raeden centre. I agree with Scott Barrie that we should not confuse school closures with the special needs mainstreaming agenda, but I ask the minister to reflect on the fact that some areas, particularly Aberdeenshire, have carried out a whole-authority analysis of the school estate with the special schools thrown in. We must ensure that the future of special schools is treated in an analysis that is separate from the school estate management process. The Netherlands introduced mainstreaming legislation in the 1990s—the policy was called going to school together. However, a programme called going to school together: the next phase was also introduced, which dealt with a variety of issues that we must consider, such as personal budgeting. At the end of the day, the issue is about resources. The deputy minister says that £95 million will be provided but, only last week, when we asked Peter Peacock in the Education Committee about the resources that are going to front-line services for the 2004 act, he could not tell us but said that he would come back to us. We know that the additional support for learning budget of £14 million is for administrative purposes. There is a consensus among the parties, except the Conservatives, that we need to make progress. The presumption of mainstreaming should be supported, but we need to consider the next phase. The reality and the bottom line are that we must ensure that sufficient resources are put in on the ground. For all the wonderful words about children being at the centre of the process, they will not be at the centre unless sufficient resources are supplied. That is the agenda that we should focus on next.

The former Social Justice Committee produced recommendations on that point when it reported on drug misuse and deprived communities. It said that family support needed to be identified, particularly for young children of drug-misusing parents. The Parliament has already supported that point.

I congratulate Mary Mulligan on securing the debate. This could be one of the most important of all members' business debates, because if the Parliament is to do anything it must reach out and speak for those whose voices are perhaps not heard as often as they should be. Mary Mulligan talked about the  debate being a reflection of the new politics and I think that it must be seen as that. Too often, young people's voices are heard only in anger. They are sometimes heard only when there are problems. It is true that young people who are looked after have problems, but the thing that I found most striking about their presentation was their positive attitude and their desire to provide solutions. We should provide a bridge for the young people in West Lothian to help them to make contact with parliamentarians and the Government so that progress can be made. When the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People was convener of the Education Committee, he was passionate about trying to pursue the agenda for looked-after children. Now that he is in an elevated position, he should take up the issue and pursue it vigorously. We know that there are difficulties with the educational attainment levels of looked-after children and problems with them going into further education or employment when they leave education. The problem is that although we have known about the problems, little progress has been made and there has been no tangible change. It is all very well to have spotted the problems in the past—Jack McConnell as First Minister produced a report in 2001—but there is still no movement. What is striking about the report is that there are many practical, simple ideas that, if enacted, could make a major difference to young people's experience. Those ideas relate to issues such as transport, the regularity of taxis and the homework club. Another point that was raised is the number of times that young people have to move schools. Councils could seriously consider that issue. When a young person has to move from one set of carers to another, should they have to leave their school? I would be interested to hear from West Lothian Council—which I congratulate on its work in this area—about the challenges that it faced in implementing some of those ideas. Best practice could be shared. I congratulate the young people on their delivery. I understand that this is their third or fourth visit to the Parliament—the way that they are going, they might get a season ticket. The good thing is that they not only speak on their own behalf, but they speak up for the other looked-after children in Scotland. That is a great responsibility. If we hear what they say and ensure that they give evidence to the Education Committee's inquiry, that will be a valuable contribution and will ensure that the Parliament listens and learns. One of the most striking things about the presentation was the video. The first scene, in which the young girl wakes up and is not sure where she is, is particularly memorable. We have all done that when we have gone on holiday or  have gone somewhere else—there is a moment of panic. I ask members to imagine what it is like to experience that regularly. We owe it to those young people to say that we want to provide some stability and some ways in which they can feel that they are valued and can contribute and that their potential can flourish in Scotland. That would be one of the most valuable things that this Parliament has done. I thank Mary Mulligan for securing the debate and I thank the young people for their report. Some of the practical, simple proposals that are contained in the report could make a huge difference and I hope that we can support them in the months ahead.

We are told by the Executive that one in 50 babies born in Scotland is born to a drug-misusing parent. Not all of those children will be on the at-risk register. Even if they were, not all of them would have an allocated social worker. Is the Deputy First Minister aware of the sheer scale of the issue and the extent of people's concern? Is he aware that an emphasis on criminal justice can sometimes hamper child protection and that the Education Committee is monitoring child protection on a six-monthly basis because some of the Executive's recommendations in that area are taking far too long to implement?

Student teachers must get a training placement to enable them to get the experience that they need. Meeting the targets—however difficult that will be for the Executive—requires more teachers. What guarantees can the minister give students that they will get such placements? What work is he doing with schools to ensure that all schools co-operate to ensure that teachers are trained? Is he aware that some councils are causing difficulties in providing placements for student teachers?

I will be very brief. The Kerr report is frank, refreshing, realistic and creative. The challenge is for the minister to match that effort with effective political leadership. The key issue will be implementation. What happens next? The workforce and the public have invested much confidence, trust and good will in the process. We have now had our first cut at how to progress the recommendations. I will reflect on a few matters, including implementation. The minister will know that I have an interest in St John's hospital. St John's provides a good case  study of what the Kerr reports means. Everyone says that the report can be interpreted in different ways. We could consider whether hospitals such as St John's match level 3, what core services are needed and how we ensure that we keep enough intensive therapy unit places to make other services sustainable. If shared networking of children's and cancer services took place elsewhere, what would be the impact on local provision? As we know, there is a domino effect. The Executive's report contains a phrase about activity and the case mix. Time and again, in all services, we return to professionals saying what is needed for activity and the case mix. We should drill down into what implementation of the Kerr report means, to ensure that we have sustainable services. We must have safe and sustainable futures for our services. The aim is prevention, but the trust, confidence and good will must be realised in practical implementation. In several months' time, I would like us to debate what has happened and what will happen next. Perhaps we are now on a new platform for debating health, which is to be welcomed.

The theme of prevention is important. Is Euan Robson aware of the report that the United Kingdom working group on primary prevention of breast cancer published in September? That could make a useful contribution to the preventive agenda.

Iain Smith said that politicians should not tell teachers how to teach. Over the course of the debate, we have heard contributions from at least six former teachers: Margaret Ewing, Bill Butler, Robin Harper, Rosemary Byrne, Dennis Canavan and Margo MacDonald. I apologise to any member that I have missed. Some of the most hard-hitting contributions came from those former teachers. It is also interesting that the importance of respect for the teaching profession, which became the common thread in the debate, was raised in contributions from the non-teachers—perhaps that is how it should be. "A Teaching Profession for the 21 st Century" was, of course, based on the McCrone report. In his time, Gavin McCrone has written other documents for ministers. His original report was on oil, which is one of the main drivers of Scotland's economy and his latest was on teachers, who are another major driver of the economy. A well-educated workforce is key to productivity and growth, which is one of the reasons that every child in Scotland deserves the best start in life. That means cutting class sizes, an improved use of resources and—most definitely—well-trained teachers who are happy in their jobs. That is why we have to look at the implementation of the full McCrone report—the second one that is—in order to ensure that we have the supply of teachers that we need. My reference is to the report and not the agreement. Elaine Murray and Wendy Alexander should reflect on the fact that there are times when the Parliament can reach cross-party agreement. Although the McCrone report came at a very difficult time for Scottish education, it achieved a real strength of cross-party support. If we had implemented the ideas in the first McCrone report, we would have had enough money to implement the second McCrone report many times over. Scotland faces serious problems of teacher supply, and that must be acknowledged. The latest statistics show alarming increases in the number of vacancies in Scotland's schools. Scotland appears to be already 1,200 teachers short; vacancies in maths have doubled; vacancies in English and in modern languages have more than trebled. That is despite, as the  minister said, almost 3,000 teachers going through the probationer induction programme. Meanwhile, we hear stories of teachers who cannot get jobs. There is a real danger of a probationer bottleneck. I agree with Bill Butler that probationer mentoring is vital. There is a desperate need to place probationers who have to vacate their position to make way for another probationer, but who cannot get another job. Elaine Murray mentioned the problem of people not knowing which are councils' responsibilities and which are Government's. However, the serious problem of workforce planning must be addressed, and the minister has acknowledged that. We are doing the right thing in recruiting more teachers. We warned the Executive in 2003 that it would have to start recruiting in 2003 and doubling or trebling numbers in order to meet its targets. Dennis Canavan is right that we could be in trouble. Rosemary Byrne asked why we have shortages of supply teachers. Many new teachers are coming into the profession, yet there are still vacancies that cannot be filled. There is obviously a link between what the councils can do in their workforce planning and what the Government is doing. Scotland's teaching workforce is the oldest it has ever been. If we do not get it right, the problems of lack of workforce planning that beset the hospital sector will visit the education sector. None of us wants that. I hope that the minister will read the McCrone agreement and consider its sensible suggestions. We desperately need to get new teachers into the profession, as 40 per cent of teachers are about to retire. Why do we not look at the wind-down agreement in the McCrone settlement to see whether we can get a phasing in of new teachers so that they can benefit from the wisdom and experience of the older teachers before those teachers leave? We should be able to do that in a sensible and planned way. Perhaps local authorities by themselves may struggle to meet those requirements, but the issue is worth addressing. We should also look at the changing face of the workforce. We want to encourage more people to return to teaching. Some people do not want to go into teaching, having been at school or at university in an education environment. The come back to teaching initiative is one way of making sure that we attract the talent that is already out there by telling them that a change of career is possible and may be desirable. I would like the Executive do more on that. Continuing professional development has to be addressed. The problem with McCrone in many ways is that it missed the generation in their late  20s and early 30s, those with young families. They are the ones being asked to fork out the money for continuing professional development. We have to be careful when reflecting on education that we do not blame the Executive for everything and that it does not blame the Opposition for everything. Brian Monteith talked about year zero. The five-year-old who started primary 1 in 1997 is now 12 or 13 years old and is part of the generation that is underperforming in maths and science, according to the OECD. It is not necessarily the 15-year-olds who are underperforming. Neither the present Executive nor the previous Conservative Government can claim that it is the custodian of performance and success in education. The people who can legitimately claim to be the custodians of quality in education are teachers: they have been the subject of the debate today.

rose—

Anybody listening to this debate and hearing the celebration of a 274 per cent increase might wonder whether the base was awful low in the first place.

Does the member share my concern about reports of teachers in Glasgow who want to wind down under the recommendations of the McCrone report but are being asked, in the very last years of their teaching life, to move schools in order to take advantage of the winding-down scheme so that they can retire before 60?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

Are the PE teachers who have been recruited specialist PE teachers, or do they teach PE and other subjects?

The minister might care to enlighten Murdo Fraser about the Tory councillor on Moray Council who voted against the presumption against closure at the council's recent meeting, at which Labour and Liberal Democrat members supported the SNP's position. I want to pick up the minister's point about a blanket policy. The problem for rural communities is that the Executive has imposed blanket school estate management requirements. Although the guidelines have been revised, they still do not connect with education and rural development policy. I invite the minister to reflect on the hurt, anguish and concern that are being experienced by the many communities that face a rolling programme of threats to schools. Perhaps the school estate management programme that is being pursued nationally should be married with the important desire of communities to protect the quality of education that small schools provide, as well as the rural development benefits that they bring.

I am interested in Elaine Murray's theme of ambitions for the future. We have to address lifelong learning, which we need for the future. Perhaps she will develop that point.

Does the member recognise that one of the problems with fizzy drinks in schools is the public-private partnership and private finance initiative construct, which places severe restrictions on the public promotion of health in our schools?

Joint assessment also means sharing information about assessments. Does the member agree that it is critical that resources and finances for shared computer systems, which are held centrally, are deployed sooner rather than later?

When I heard the First Minister's statement on the programme for government yesterday, I was reminded of the wedding ritual of presenting the bride with something old, something new, something borrowed and something blue. We recognise that the children's hearings system legislation and the adoption law are old and need to be updated. The issue is what the Executive is bringing to add value to the necessary updating process. The parental involvement bill is new, but I am not sure how school board legislation can be abolished and school boards can be kept. Perhaps arguing that will be a challenge for the minister when the bill is scrutinised in committee. Issues, policy proposals and legislative proposals have been borrowed from other parties. The nutritional standards proposals have much to do with Shona Robison's work on nutritional standards and with the Scottish National Party's action plan for fit and healthy young Scots. I refer to Jack McConnell's late conversion to legislation on business rates. Stewart Maxwell's smoking legislation drive must be recognised and we all know that Conservatives, Liberal Democrats, Labour and the SNP have argued for school-college links. I had difficulty finding something blue, but there is a heavy justice theme. Much could and should be said about policing. We support much of the justice legislation, but the issue will be its implementation. I hope that the voice of the police will be heard when legislation is reviewed. Much of the programme for supporting children and families is worthy and needed, but the programme is not about preventing children from being vulnerable in the first place—it is about supporting children and families after the event. That is symptomatic of where Scotland stands. A catalogue of concerned and worthy bills will cope with the consequences of the failure of the economy and society. Scotland must deal with children who are damaged by deprivation and with depressed, suppressed families who are oppressed by poverty of income, opportunity, hope and ambition.  We live in an increasingly polarised world. The fact that one in 50 children is born to parents who misuse drugs is a portent for the future, and services for vulnerable children must address that. We need a system that is fit for purpose but also a system, policies and legislation to prevent people from falling into such traps in the first place. Some matters require legislation, but some issues that we are discussing require policy rather than legislation. That the legislation is about dealing with failure is striking—it is about dealing with damaged families, children who enter the children's hearings system and vulnerable children who are up for adoption. We must think about a future in which legislation promotes success rather than simply dealing with the failures of today's families. Until and unless we can liberate economic drivers for success in all our communities, Governments will increasingly be forced to cope with damaged communities. Devolution can do some things, but unless there are fundamental drivers for change in our society, we will be stuck in second gear rather than driving at full throttle. I want to consider specifics of the legislation. The children's hearings review is welcome and input into it must focus on the child. There will be a fundamental resource issue to do with social workers. If powers are to be given to children's hearings panels and there is to be legislation relating to different organisations, the resource issue will be under question. In respect of adoption, we are dealing with changing times. I hope that members will focus on the plethora of changes that are required to the adoption law rather than specifics that will hit the headlines. Parental involvement should be less about the management of schools and more about the management and role of parents in respect of the individual child's education. At a meeting that I attended last night, looked-after children in West Lothian called for carers to have a better understanding of the curriculum so that carers are able to support the children in their homework. The looked-after children probably do not realise that most parents do not know what the curriculum is or what their children are doing. It is not legislation but innovative and continuous improvement in schools that is required. Is legislation required for head teacher annual reviews and updates? I know about schools that do such things at the moment as best practice. Some of the issues that we are discussing are not about legislation but about continuous improvement. Last year, the Government said that there would be the most comprehensive modernisation  programme of our secondary schools for a generation. Yesterday, the First Minister talked about schools for ambition. Some 5 per cent of our schools are benefiting. That is not a comprehensive figure—a selective number of schools are being affected. A striking thing about the programme is that it is about leadership, motivation and continuous improvement, for which legislation is not needed. The nutritional standards proposals are to be welcomed and I hope that the committees will scrutinise the proposals well and that there will be cross-committee scrutiny, as health and education are involved. I have not heard much so far about sport, but we should look innovatively at what can be done. Not selling off playing fields would be a good start, which would ensure that there are active and fit young children in the future. There are inhibitors to progress. I appeal to the minister to consider a presumption against the closure of rural schools. We need to nurture success in our rural communities and promote excellence in small schools. I also ask that the issue of early years intervention be addressed. If success is nurtured early, we will not have to deal with failure later. In a changing world of different lifestyles, in which parents pick up and deliver children, school transport needs to be changed. In relation to congestion charging in Edinburgh, the removal of the school run would make a big difference. Legislation may be required. I return to the theme of how we can change our society for the better. I look forward to a future, alternative Government that aims to legislate for success rather than one that has to legislate to cope with failure.

Would the minister care to comment on the parental involvement bill's relationship to school boards? Originally, the consultation considered the abolition of school boards. Has the Executive had a rethink about supporting those school boards that are successful, which many of our constituents and school boards have told us they are?

I am very pleased that, at this very last moment before the recess, we still have the chance, rearranged though it is, to debate this motion. I thank the Presiding Officer for ensuring that, following today's incidents, the Parliament's democratic business has continued and we are able to have the debate. I also thank the minister for staying on to respond and members for remaining in the chamber after what has been a very long day. I thank members from across the political parties for signing the motion, which is the culmination of the efforts of Lothians MSPs to register and raise publicly their concerns about the public interest in the economic, rural, transport and planning aspects of the Westminster Government's aviation white paper and its impacts on the west of Edinburgh and, specifically, on the Royal Highland and Agricultural Society. I will focus on the economic issues, but I trust that other members will address the rural, transport and planning aspects of the matter. I congratulate the society on last week's very successful royal highland show, which more than 150,000 people attended. However, the show is only one of 150 events that take place at the society's site at Ingliston. With 1.2 million visitors during the year, the society's site competes with  Edinburgh castle as a contributor to visitor numbers and bed nights in Edinburgh hotels. The Scottish motorcycle show, trade shows, large-scale rock concerts and gardening Scotland reflect the range of events that are staged there and all are serviced by excellent public transport to Edinburgh for the provision of hotels. The society also has 33 tenant companies, which add to the site's economic impact. The debate is about two success stories that are close to each other in the west of Edinburgh and whose influence extends far beyond that limited area into the rest of the country. Their core businesses may differ, but they share the attribute of success and I want both to be successful. The white paper has been produced, but we are still at a stage prior to legislation. As the draft consultation on the airport master plan was published in May, there is now an opportunity, even if it is at the very last moment, to pause and consider whether there remains any possibility of co-existence at the site. The debate is not about opening up the white paper, but minor alterations can still be made if the parties concerned are agreeable, and the secretary of state could be persuaded by any potential consensus. As a Lothians MSP, I am absolutely convinced that expanded usage of Edinburgh airport is essential to the successful development of the Edinburgh economy, which in turn is essential to the development of the Scottish economy. I have absolutely no doubts about that—the airport's expansion must not be unnecessarily hampered—but that does not mean that we should ignore the RHASS and the role that it plays. Creative and co-operative thinking from all agencies and parties must be explored to make a final assessment of whether, with the offer of 100 acres to be taken by the airport, which would provide the aircraft apron capacity that the airport needs, there is any last remaining possibility of the society remaining on site. We currently see the conduct of two, parallel, debates—one, on the Government's decisions on Edinburgh airport, is coming to an end; the other, on what should happen to that wider part of Edinburgh that is undoubtedly prime business development land, is starting. I have visited the new and impressive global headquarters of the Royal Bank of Scotland. I do not know whether the minister has; I urge him to do so if he has not. The potential for further international business park developments in that area is significant. The RHASS is caught in the middle of those two debates. The Parliament must not become involved in the private transactions, positionings and counter-positionings of the airport and the society as part of any bargaining, pricing or negotiation process, but the issue is not just about  the interests and concerns of two private organisations. The huge public investment in transport in the area that is due in the next few years, with rail, tram and road links, will be enormous. I have already touched on the economic significance of the area, and that is before we come to the importance of the society's site to the economy and rural life of Scotland. The motion refers to the economic impact assessment report by Roger Tym and Partners that calculates that the society contributes £100 million to the Lothian economy and £250 million nationally. Not all of that would be lost on any relocation, but Ingliston is the ideal site. That fact must not be lost. The society has looked at other sites, but there are real concerns about their suitability and infrastructure requirements. Those concerns must be addressed. That is why, even at this last moment, a reassessment is needed. I understand that the society will submit further proposals over the summer. I hope that they will get a fair hearing and that there will be co-operation in considering those matters. Today's debate is an opportunity to register the on-going public interest. I hope that the debate will reflect the various perspectives and strands, and that they will not be lost on the Executive as it reflects on its own accountability in the matter and on its need to reflect on issues that are not just about planning but which also touch on rural, environmental, transport and enterprise issues. The debate is not just about the relocation of a one-week-a-year event: it is about a growing and vibrant enterprise. We need to be up front and ambitious for what we want for that special part of the economic and enterprise geography of Edinburgh and of Scotland. I note Mary Mulligan's proposed amendment to the motion and I know that other members would be keen to attract a relocated showground to their constituencies, but I hope that, for the most part, the debate will reflect on the national significance and future of two of Scotland's success stories. With the Executive's co-operation, we can seek a window of opportunity to consider the possible continued co-existence of two of Scotland's success stories. I look forward to hearing speeches from members and, in particular, the Executive's response.

I am opposing Robert Brown's appointment not on personal grounds—having served on the Education Committee under his stewardship, I can testify to his hard work and dedication to the subject—but because I want to protect him from the possibility that he will be held responsible for Government education policies that are failing to make the grade. I note with interest that the last parliamentary questions that Robert Brown lodged as a back bencher were on allotments. I do not know where his sudden interest in allotments came from on Monday. Was he cheekily preparing the ground for Jim Wallace and his new-found spare time or was he perhaps putting the knife into Euan Robson, whom he is replacing? On the subject of knives, I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him. I always thought that Robert Brown—who, like me, is a Latin scholar—had the air of a Roman senator. I am sure that he will be missed by the other members of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, which is the  nearest that this place gets to a senate of the great and good. I am worried about the welfare of Mr Brown and his potential fall from grace. Only today, two stark facts emerged that demonstrate the creaking nature of the Government's education policies. We are told that 30,000 out of 50,000-odd teachers are not teaching for a variety of reasons, whether it is because of the demands of their families, stress, retirement, better opportunities becoming available elsewhere or whatever. The bottom line is that we know that, at the chalkface, there is a shortage of teachers and that our pupils are losing out. It is four years since the McCrone report, which was intended to make the teaching profession more attractive. After almost £1 billion of investment, however, more than 50 per cent of registered teachers are choosing not to teach and we have shortages in the classroom. The number of teachers who are in front of pupils is what matters, not the number of teachers who are registered. The move throughout the country to faculty curriculum management is undermining morale. We have indiscipline and stress in schools, yet as recently as last year the First Minister said that teachers had exaggerated the problems of indiscipline. The Executive's refusal to adopt a policy of presumption against closure of rural schools is causing concerned parents to seek to save their local rural schools. I note that the Liberal Democrats were the only party that did not provide a speaker at yesterday's rally by parents on the subject. Only today, we heard that 50 per cent of schools are in a shocking state of repair. The Government has moved too slowly and with an expensive scheme of financing that does not provide the value, or indeed the value for money, that is required. The Executive started to invest heavily in schools too late—not only that, but it did so via expensive public-private partnership schemes that provide less but cost more. No wonder the pace of investment is so poor. I cannot help thinking that Robert Brown is letting himself down by allowing himself to be put forward today as the Deputy Minister for Education and Young People. Perhaps it is a case of the appointment of a fall guy as political cover for previous education ministers whose failures are coming to light. Who might they be? They are a certain Nicol Stephen, who is a former Deputy Minister for Education and Young People; Cathy Jamieson; and, of course, the First Minister himself. However, I say to Robert Brown that he should not worry. They are not the type who would leave him out to dry when education policies start to unravel.  I supported Robert Brown during his tenure as convener of the Education Committee, but I cannot support his demotion to Deputy Minister for Education and Young People. I hope that he will reconsider but, should he not do so, the Parliament should save him from himself. I move amendment S2M-3042.1, to leave out "and Robert Brown".

Has the minister considered examining international examples, such as those from France, which has a different shape to the school week? In Scotland, we send our children to full-time education for longer than most other countries but give them less physical education and language teaching. Has he considered looking at the approaches that are being pursued by some schools in Glasgow, where an afternoon a week is dedicated to other activities that are usually out of hours and which expand young people's range of experience? When he is thinking about the flexible curriculum, perhaps he could consider some of the international examples, such as those from France.

I, too, congratulate Karen Whitefield on securing what is quite a refreshing parliamentary debate. Too often, our debates in the chamber have been about young people's criminal and offending behaviour, so it is fit and proper that we should also spend time congratulating young people on the positive things that they contribute. I thank Karen Whitefield for giving us that opportunity. I also thank the young people who produced the DVD, of which I saw only 30 seconds, because, for some reason, it would not work on my computer. Unfortunately, as I need to attend another event tonight, I will not be able to see the showing later on, but I hope to see more than just the first 30 seconds of the DVD at some point. As someone who is subject to the conspiracy of the ages, I can testify that the ganging up of grannies and children is alive and well. That perhaps reflects the fact that, in reality, more common cause exists between the generations than one might expect. However, the issue is what happens in our communities. As Cathie Craigie said, it is also about perceptions and fear of the unknown. We live in a society in which we engage less in collective activity than people used to. People now have fewer opportunities in which to carry out the same social activities together. Indeed, we live in a world where there is so much selection of social activities that, perhaps, never the twain shall meet. I might be wrong on that, but I think that I am simply reflecting where we are.  I also congratulate North Lanarkshire Council. I understand from my colleague Linda Fabiani—unfortunately, she cannot be here today—that tribute should be paid to the work that the council has done. Linda Fabiani attended a 50:50 event in Motherwell, where 50 per cent of the audience was composed of young people, with the other 50 per cent being composed of older people. Issues of the day were discussed and voted on with a hand-held voting device. Linda Fabiani was particularly impressed by how close the views and opinions of the two sides in the audience were. However, that probably reflects the perception of the middle generation, which assumes that young and old will have differing views, with no connections between them on issues. She also mentioned that the young people were, if anything, slightly more conservative than the older people. I am not sure whether that means that older people who live in Motherwell live long, bad and dangerously or whether it just reflects a change in society's perceptions. I believe that young and old can make common cause on many issues. In my constituency work, I am often struck by the common concern among young people and older people about issues such as the lack of availability of buses and other means of public transport in the evenings. Making common cause on such issues is an approach that needs to be developed. As others have mentioned, so much resource can be gained from that exchange. I am aware of projects in West Lothian that take that approach, but they mainly involve older people going into schools to talk about poetry and games, for example. However, the more often that such connection work can be started, the better. As has been mentioned, the problem is that we engage in crisis management so often that such projects are not seen as valuable or important. When politicians and ministers have to allocate budgets, things that are perceived to be soft work are not placed higher up the agenda. We should probe the connection with the justice agenda. I agree with Cathie Craigie that such work is about fostering a sense of community and belonging, so one would expect it to be supported by a communities budget line. Increasingly, there are parallels between the targets and aims of the communities and justice budgets. I would be interested to know whether the older people at Gartlea Gardens sheltered housing complex ever stood around chatting to one another at street corners and, if so, what view they take of dispersal orders, for example. Perhaps the issue is debated on the DVD. Anything that can be used to generate and foster mutual respect and understanding is greatly to be welcomed. I hope that in future debates in  the Parliament—during both Executive and other time—we can reflect on some of the things that bring people together. We hear too often about divisiveness in society. Perhaps we do not spend enough time reflecting on the commonality between generations and the common cause that they can make. I am pleased to have taken part in today's debate and thank Karen Whitefield for initiating it.

Will Donald Gorrie give way?

The subject of integrated community schools has not been raised. All schools are meant to have access to health and social work services. Perhaps the role of the school nurse should be considered in that context.

My question to the minister is, "Why are we having this debate?" Is it just to announce the formation of a committee? If that is the reason, it is a bit feeble. If  the purpose of the debate is to give members the opportunity to repeat what many of us have been saying since 1999, when it was first suggested that we should have a sexual health strategy, is that the best use of parliamentary time? The speech from the Conservatives was, to be quite frank, from out of the dark ages and will leave many young Scots in the dark about relationships education as much as about sexual health education. If the debate is not about just repeating positions that people have held previously, what is its purpose? If it is about announcing progress since the statement in January, perhaps it would have been courteous and informative to Parliament to have provided members with some documentation—a photocopied report announcing progress to date would have been helpful and would have moved the debate on. Some of us are a bit tired and weary of having to return to the chamber time and again to repeat concerns about the appalling sexual health record of Scotland. However, this is a time when we should be at our least tired and weary, because the momentum to ensure that action is taken is needed more than ever. Subjects such as relationships and self-esteem have been mentioned repeatedly in the debate. Sexual health is not the only concern we have about our young people. Perhaps the minister should discuss with his colleague Peter Peacock in the Education Department how we can ensure that self-esteem and self-respect are part and parcel of our education system, because tackling those issues will help to tackle many other issues. On parental involvement, on page 80 of the report I see an interesting comment from somebody who attended one of the consultations. He said: "When my son started going with a girlfriend I spoke to him and I said to him 'watch what you're doing and go to the chemist and just be careful'. But with my daughters—my wife asked me if I was going to talk to them, but I said no. I don't feel it's the man's place to talk to the daughter—but maybe it is?" Just over a week ago we had a conference in the chamber with parliamentarians from Africa, G8 countries and Europe. The subject of much of the conference was HIV and AIDS. In one of the workshops, a Ugandan parliamentarian said: "One of our biggest problems in tackling HIV and AIDS is that men don't want to talk to their daughters about sex and sexual health, and politicians and public servants don't want to talk about sex and sexual health." If we have achieved anything, perhaps we have moved on in that public servants and politicians are talking about sexual health. However, as the report says, perhaps there is a problem in how parents talk to their children and how men and  women relate differently to their sons and daughters. I would like to hear more about the McCabe report's recommendations on parental education. We have glossy documents such as "Ready Steady Baby!: A Guide to Pregnancy, Birth and Early Parenthood" to help people know what they should do with their children. I am not suggesting that the Executive should go out and produce masses of glossy documents, as it is prone to do, but perhaps a "Ready Steady Teenager!" document might be helpful. Also, although I see points about parental education in the report, I have heard nothing about what is happening. On consistency of information, I remind members—particularly the Conservatives—that article 24 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child states that no child should be deprived of the right to access public health education and services. I welcome the Roman Catholic Church's movement on education services, but I ask the same question as I asked in January: Who will monitor the quality and provision of sex education in non-denominational and Catholic schools and report to Parliament on whether they are satisfied that the points that have been made about public health and access to information are upheld? I look forward to hearing an answer to that. I am concerned to read that some surveys suggest that the lack of information is still prevalent. A survey by Developing Patient Partnerships tells us that 45 per cent of young people in Scotland "mistakenly thought that they had to see their GP before they could access sexual health services". We are six years on from 1999 when we said that we needed a sexual health strategy. We need to ensure that we monitor our progress robustly to see where we are going. I ask the minister to address online access to sexual health information, because that is what young people want. In the Developing Patient Partnerships survey, 78 per cent of young respondents cited online information as a need. However, we know that blocks on websites mean that young people who want to access such sites might not be able to do so. We need to address that technological impasse. On funding and the provision of resources, we know that John Reid provided £300 million for the strategy in England and we have heard the minister's announcement of £5 million a year over three years, but is that enough? The briefing that we have received from the Scottish NHS Confederation suggests that "Shortages of suitably trained staff in some areas will mean that many aspects of the strategy will take longer to  implement than others". We are talking about a national strategy, so I would like to hear from the minister what services in what parts of the country will not be able to implement parts of the strategy because of resources. Rather than being tired and weary about progress to date, we should say to the minister that we are watching him, that we expect results and that we expect the momentum to be continued rather than slowed down. If the purpose of the debate is to ensure that he knows that, perhaps it will be useful.

To ask the Scottish Executive what guidance it intends to issue on the use of pesticides, in light of the findings of the Geoparkinson study. (S2O-7025)

I thank the minister for his considered response. Does he support the view of David Coggon, who is the chairman of the British Government's Advisory Committee on Pesticides, that such research should track individual pesticide usage, given that the Geoparkinson study that has just been produced said that high-exposure users such as farmers are 43 per cent more likely to develop Parkinson's disease? Campaigners such as Alex Horne of Armadale who have pursued the issue for many years would like not only more research, but guidance and advice to farmers and gardeners about exposure to pesticides and the potential dangers.

The minister may be aware that one of those statistics is me, as I gave birth at St John's last year. I very much welcome the news about the permanent appointments. Is the minister aware that more than 1,000 deliveries a year at St John's are of women who live in Edinburgh and choose to travel to West Lothian because of the quality of care that they receive? Will she ensure that the health service extends that message of support directly to the hospital so that it knows that there is a strong future for maternity services at St John's?

Will the member join me in congratulating the conference that met here on Monday on including the need for women to be at the heart of development policies in the Edinburgh declaration, which members can read at the back of the chamber?

Is the minister content with Scotland's current representation under existing treaties with regard to European education, and science and technology education in particular? Previously we have not been represented properly, because United Kingdom  Governments have not addressed the issue of science and technology education in Scotland. Did he address that issue at his recent meeting with ministers from other European countries?

Will the member take an intervention?

St Andrew's School and Carronhill School draw children from a much wider area than their local communities. It does not make sense for consultations for such special schools to be carried out in the same manner as those for other schools. Will the minister reflect on that?

I congratulate Richard Lochhead on securing the debate. The motion focuses on Aberdeenshire, but it raises national themes. I have met parents from St Andrew's and Carronhill schools and the minister should reflect on the pertinent points that they raised. We have to respect the fact that local authorities must manage the education services in their areas. However, some key points must be addressed. The case for special schools must continue to be made. The Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000 encourages the presumption of mainstreaming, but ministers have said time and again that special schools should not close as a result of mainstreaming. We welcome the funds that are available for estate management, new build and refurbishment, but arguments for those funds could conflict with the arguments on the need for special schools. We should be more creative in using the talents and expertise of the teaching staff in special schools. Staff could be exchanged with mainstream schools. Those schools could learn a lot from working with staff who have experience of special needs children and children who need additional support for learning. We have to address the consultation process and the guidance. The minister will know about the petitions from Argyll and Bute and from Midlothian and he will know that revised guidance was finally produced last year. That guidance is still not satisfactory, however. When special schools have a wide remit and a catchment area that is far wider  than the local community and local schools, their cases should be referred to ministers. Unfortunately, the guidance treats special schools just like any other schools. I am glad that there have been changes and I welcome the movement that we have heard about today for St Andrew's School, Carronhill School and other schools in the Gordon area. Because there were specific proposals for Carronhill, the parents of the pupils there were in a different form of consultation process from the one in which the parents of the pupils at St Andrew's were engaged. It had not been decided at that point what association Carronhill would have with any other school. The Carronhill parents were perhaps more involved in the process than the St Andrew's parents, but the consultation process is still woefully lacking. There has to be a debate about the merits of co-location of special units with mainstream schools. That should not become the orthodoxy just because it is simpler to administer and cheaper from an estate management point of view. The sell-off of stand-alone sites means that people can make money through public-private partnerships and can save money for other purposes. A choice must be offered. There has to be movement between mainstream and special schools when that is desirable for individuals, but the choice should not be between having stand-alone schools and mainstream schools with special units attached. The option of co-located schools is being pursued throughout Scotland, not just in Aberdeenshire. Just as the estate management argument runs counter to the special needs agenda, the rural development policy is being largely ignored when it comes to the case for rural schools. The Education Committee made that quite clear to the Minister for Education and Young People when he appeared before us about a year ago. There should be a presumption against the closure of rural schools, but that does not mean that no rural school will ever be closed; rather, it indicates that educational merits must be put at the forefront. Time and again, when I hear from campaigners throughout the country, I worry that that is not happening. Very special individuals support children with special needs. Their work needs to be acknowledged and supported and the parents of the pupils who attend such schools need to be reassured by the Parliament and the minister that they will not continue to be treated in the way in which they have been treated so far. I welcome the changes that have been announced today, but I think that we will have to return to the issue repeatedly during this session of Parliament.

Will the minister confirm that graduate debt and its impact on the wider economy will also be considered, as Jim Wallace promised?

Will the member give way?

The member said that individual  students should never have to pay back more than they borrow in student loans, but is he aware that graduates who earn less than £22,000 are paying more in interest than they are in debt repayment? Many such graduates are paying nothing towards the repayment of their debt and unless their earnings increase significantly over the piece they will end up paying more in interest than on debt repayment.

Is the member aware that of the people who graduated in 1997, the year that Labour came to power, 34 per cent have yet to start repaying their loans. Some 34 per cent of graduates are deferring payment, which is a significant number.

Will the minister give way?

We are approaching graduation season, so it is fitting that we should begin the debate by acknowledging the academic talent and hard work exhibited by this year's graduands in earning their degrees. We congratulate them and wish them well for the future. They leave university determined to be all they can be and to achieve. They are Scotland's indigenous fresh talent and the people who epitomise a smart, successful Scotland. They are also the people most likely to leave Scotland, according to the registrar general for Scotland—Scotland's fresh talent off to make another country smart and successful. I am glad that they have the opportunity to spread their wings and travel the world. I only hope that they are not being forced out in an attempt to pay off mounting debt more quickly. The Scottish National Party has brought the motion to the chamber today in the hope that, cross party, we can examine the very real problems facing students, graduates and Scotland in general. We want the Executive to acknowledge a problem and be prepared to examine all the options—even the Conservative one, but also the SNP proposal to replace loans with grants. At the very least, we must agree to have research on the table and some options to examine. The Executive amendment mentions research into student poverty and graduate debt. That research was expected in January this year. I understand that it has been delayed at the request of the researchers, but we desperately need it. We should note that the National Assembly for Wales, where the Opposition defeated the Labour  Executive only this week on top-up fees for Wales, is ahead of us in having a standing committee and research provided on student and graduate debt. I wonder whether the minister will be kind enough to give us a date for the publication of the research and to confirm that it will contain graduate debt information. We need some common determination from the Scottish Parliament that the issues need to be addressed, and I hope that we can secure that in the debate. I look forward to hearing contributions from other members. We need to examine the public purse bill of more than £100 million annually for the Scottish Executive simply to service the debt on the loan. The prospects for the sustainability of that burden, should interest rates rise, are grim. Replacing loans with grants of the same value would save the public purse money, because of the perverse but extensive debt servicing and loan subsidy legacy. The Executive has the chance to step off the conveyor belt of debt before it becomes completely unmanageable. The damage to the Scottish economy that is caused by that massive aggregate personal debt needs to be acknowledged and tackled. This year, around 48,000 Scots will graduate from Scotland's universities. After four years of study, they will be making their way in the world. They may be looking to buy a house and get on the property ladder, they may want to start a family, or they may want to borrow to start up a new business, although such borrowing is becoming increasingly prohibitive. They will do all that with a millstone of debt hanging round their necks from the student loans that they took out when they were studying.

This is where I disagree with the Conservatives. I acknowledge that credit card debt is highly significant, but if there is state-sponsored debt to start with, that makes the credit card debt worse. The Conservatives' idea of commercialising all debt would compound the debt problem and make it worse, rather than resolving the situation. Eighty per cent of students take out the full loan. That means that, this year, if we add in the £2,000 graduate endowment bill, their total debt will be £19,000. Students would have to graduate and earn almost £22,000 in their first year just to pay off the annual interest on that debt. Below that  amount, they will just be whistling against the wind of interest on the debt and will not even begin to pay off the debt itself. There are two thresholds in the system: one at which students earn enough to service the debt and one at which the payments that they make will have an impact on their indebtedness. The average salary for a graduate who is recruited by a member of the Association of Graduate Recruiters does not reach either of those thresholds. The Executive's own graduate recruitment programme does not pay enough—not even for fast-stream graduates, who also come in below both thresholds. Graduates will start having to pay 9 per cent extra tax on all earnings over £15,000. That tax is regressive, not progressive, because the less one earns the longer one has to pay it and the more one will pay in the long run. Some graduates will never clear that debt, which will continue to grow in spite of the payments that they are making. One graduate put it to me rather well. She said, "This is just like the private finance initiative. When I retire, I'll still be paying for the lunch that I had in first year." She was not laughing. There is a growing consensus that the student loans system has failed and cannot be rescued and that it is, in essence, a flawed system. I note the United Kingdom Conservative position, which admits that the system is costing the UK £1 billion each year in loan subsidy alone. I disagree with the replacement that the Conservatives intend, as it would compound debt on commercial rates, but I believe that we should debate the issue. On selling off the debt, I say to the Conservatives that the Scottish Executive has already shelled out £77.5 million in interest subsidy for the £200 million tranches of debt that Gordon Brown sold off in 1998 and 1999, and we are still paying. Selling off the debt still costs, but I believe that we should debate the matter nevertheless. It is interesting to note that the Conservatives would use the savings from scrapping the current loans system in England to abolish top-up fees. With no top-up fees in Scotland—as yet, although they have been legislated for—the SNP argues that the savings should be used to reintroduce grants. Just as interesting was the Liberal Democrat commitment in the recent Westminster election to return to student grants, in England only. I am glad to hear both contenders for the Liberal Democrat leadership talking about ending the graduate endowment bill, and I think that there is scope for debate in that area. The current Labour Executive pledge is to keep the system, but I urge ministers to reconsider that pledge in the light of the research that is due and to appraise with an open mind all constructive suggestions—from the SNP, from the Conservatives and even from Mike Rumbles.  This year's Scottish graduates alone will be carrying on their backs a debt bill of £731 million. The current graduate debt for all of Scotland's students is £2 billion. The debt, the interest on it and the repayments are damaging us all. Deferrals are huge and repayment periods are hitting 14 years. It is unsustainable. Loan money goes out faster than payments come in, and the taxpayer picks up the tab. The removal of so much disposable income is a massive drag on the economy. Whether members supported the student loans system or not—and the SNP was agin it—I urge the Parliament to acknowledge the potential problems of that scheme for the future economic prospects of the country. For the sake of our students, present and future, for the sake of our graduates and for the sake of our economy, we have to end the debt. Let us unshackle the debt and liberate the future wealth creators of Scotland. I move, That the Parliament notes with concern growing student and graduate debt in Scotland, which not only hinders opportunities for the individuals concerned, but also damages society and the wider economy generally; further notes the spiralling cost to the taxpayer of the expensive and bureaucratic student loan system and the growing consensus that it is unsustainable, and calls on the Scottish Executive to come forward with a constructive review, incorporating a number of proposals to address this growing problem and encompassing an assessment of replacing student loans, including the graduate endowment repayment, with a universal system of grants.

The point that Robert Brown was making was that we know that that funding will be withdrawn in 2006. We also learned that the determined to succeed money is very much part and parcel of current funding. I would be interested in the minister's thoughts on whether  the new money that he is announcing today will displace that current funding, or whether we can expect it to continue so that we have added value rather than circulation of funding pots.

I agree very much with what the member says. There is a shortage of domestic hospitality workers in Edinburgh in particular. Therefore, increasing the number of places for school pupils must not happen at the expense of places for older students, particularly for those whose training could serve the important needs of the Edinburgh economy.

Before I come to the substance of my speech, I must reflect on the circumstances of the debate. It is not acceptable for members of the Parliament not to have the document that they are supposed to be debating. Back benchers might have more reason than I have to be outraged and angered by the situation. It is perhaps ironic that the debate is on a subject about which there is consensus. I have had an opportunity to read the document, which is actually very good. However, it is unfortunate that other members have not had the opportunity to read it and so are not able to make a more constructive contribution to the debate. My more serious concern is that, as was advertised, ministers chose to launch the document at the same time as the debate in the Parliament. The Parliament is where constituents and members of the public expect their views to be heard. Strategy launches should not be organised as photo opportunities for ministers. Moreover, the Conservative education spokesperson and I both represent the Lothians constituency. On any other occasion, we would have been more than delighted to welcome the minister to the Lothians so that he could find out about the good work that is going on in colleges. To add insult to injury, the strategy is to be launched at the meeting of the College Liaison Association with Scottish Schools—CLASS—which is taking place this morning at Telford College. That might have been appropriate if the strategy was about university entrance, but not in the context of this morning's debate. The minister's launch of the strategy has been flawed, which perhaps detracts from what is an important subject matter.

I am pleased to hear of the minister's change to his previously advertised plan. A great deal of consensus exists in the Parliament on the subject of today's debate. In the summer of 2002, my party launched the concept of having greater links between schools and colleges. In the autumn of that year, our proposal was adopted by the Conservatives at their party conference. The policy then found support from the Liberal Democrats and, before the end of the year, from the Labour Party. Therefore, the policy is one of those issues that attract commendable cross-party consensus and agreement. As Education Committee colleagues who visited Glasgow yesterday will confirm, some outstanding work is already taking place in respect of greater involvement of schools with colleges. All 29 of Glasgow City Council's secondary schools have embarked on a school-college liaison along the lines that are promoted in the strategy that is being launched today. The strategy document also highlights the situation in Banff and Buchan, where many pupils are able to attend their local college thanks to the well-organised articulation that exists between schools and colleges, as well as between schools and higher education institutions further on. However, given the document's reference to the fact that those links grew out of the lack of technology teachers in the local schools, we perhaps need to reflect on the figures that were released yesterday, which show a shortfall in the number of such teachers and a drop of 15 per cent in the number of technology students since 1997. Perhaps those warning bells need to be heard. Our amendment highlights three issues that will be critical to the policy's success: college capacity, pupil accreditation and lecturer training. I acknowledge that those issues are addressed in the document, but our amendment simply identifies that they are key areas on which the policy will stand or fall. I very much welcome the additional funding that is being made available to address college capacity, but that funding must reflect the differing experiences of colleges in different parts of the country. I suspect that Glasgow colleges have been able to provide some opportunities because of the falling population there, although the city has skills shortages in certain areas. However, in other parts of the country, colleges are bursting at the seams because they are oversubscribed. That  is certainly the case here in the Lothians. A big challenge is to ensure that the opportunities that we provide for school pupils do not displace students in subject areas to which additional numbers of older students need to be attracted to meet the urgent skills capacity issues in areas such as the Lothians. For example, Jewel and Esk Valley College will need 8,500 student units of measurement if it is to return to the SUMs per head of local population that it had in 2001. That is a good example of an oversubscribed college in an area that has a growing population. In plumbing, the college is providing an example of good practice by aiming to have 20 school pupils and 20 apprentices on its introduction to plumbing course this coming year. However, the industry wants 35 apprenticeship places. We do not want a situation in which school pupils might displace prospective apprentices, who would be able to contribute to the local economy by putting their skills into action within the next year or two. I very much hope that the resources that are being made available will address those capacity issues, especially in areas such as the Lothians, Perth and Kinross and Aberdeenshire where the growing population is placing increased demands on the colleges. In that regard, I know that West Lothian College in my area has particular problems. As the minister will know from the Auditor General's report, the problems stem from a damaging private finance initiative contract, under which 13 per cent of the college's revenue is automatically siphoned off to pay for the PFI. The college now has problems in developing new courses and in increasing capacity, because of the way in which its original construction was treated for capital purposes. I hope that that issue is addressed. On pupil accreditation, I am pleased to see the progress that the SQA has made. One issue might be the pace of change, as we need to ensure that the courses are available in time. As the minister mentioned, it is also important that the articulation with higher education is considered. It strikes me—my colleagues who visited Glasgow yesterday will no doubt agree with this—that, as the minister also mentioned, employers want to see confident individuals who can work together and who can communicate their ideas and express their suggestions with confidence. That is an obvious contribution that pupils should be able to gain from their experience of college. I must say that I was a bit disappointed with some of this morning's media coverage, which suggested that the strategy is about only the disengaged and disaffected and how those with behavioural problems might be displaced from the school to elsewhere. The striking thing about the  young people from whom we heard yesterday was that they believed that their experience in subjects such as horticulture or construction could help them to re-engage in their studies in other subjects. That needs to be considered. Another concern that must be wrestled with is the accreditation of college lecturers by the General Teaching Council for Scotland. Indeed, the issue of the relative status of lecturers and teachers, not least in relation to pay, will also need to be addressed. I believe that GTC accreditation is the right idea, but it will need to be carried out with a light touch, especially in the early stages. I am glad to hear that that will be the case. However, there is an issue with the optional status of the proposed professional development award for lecturers, which perhaps should be made mandatory during the programme's roll-out. I recognise the concerns of the colleges, which feel that they should be more aligned with higher education by being affiliated with a professional body for higher education lecturers rather than coming under the auspices of the GTC. Such bureaucratic and administrative issues are probably far removed from the experience of the pupils, but they will be critical to the programme's success. We welcome the funding streams that have been announced. Already in 2003-04, the Scottish Further Education Funding Council was allocating 6 per cent of its budget to provide for some 44,000 pupil enrolment places in colleges. The additional resources will be helpful, but we need to consider some of the key issues that will be critical in making a difference. I very much welcome the support that has been announced for the implementation in colleges of the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004. As the minister will recognise, the Education Committee pushed for that. I also took up the issue with Jim Wallace latterly in respect of the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Bill. We need to think about the transition issues for pupils with special needs who transfer from schools into colleges, so I am glad that those issues are being addressed. We still need some alignment of volume and quantity under the policy, given that an estimated 120,000 pupils—the minister might have the more accurate census figures—could benefit from it. The success of the scheme in Glasgow seemed to come from the fact that all pupils rather than just those who were perhaps underperforming were able to benefit from the experience, which provided a window into the world of work. It was also impressive that teachers recognised that the scheme had expanded their own experiences, which had perhaps been limited.  Partnership between schools and colleges helps to make the curriculum flexible, although it does not replace the need for further curriculum flexibility, which needs to be pursued. It does not replace the wider skills strategy for the economy, but it gives young people an opportunity to see the world of work in a way that is responsive to their education needs. By making their subject relevant to the world of work, it provides a window into that world for them. I am pleased that there is cross-party support for the future provision of such valuable experiences for our young people. I move amendment S2M-2793.1, to insert at end: "but, in doing so, recognises that the success of the strategy will depend in particular on the effectiveness of measures that address college capacity, pupil accreditation and training of lecturers."

I am interested in what the minister is saying, but, if there is to be an impact on the world of work as well as on pupils, will he indicate the quantity of pupils who he expects will participate in college courses during the next few years? What is his vision of the situation in five or 10 years' time?

Further to that point of order, Presiding Officer. Mr Peacock and Mr Wallace are due to launch the document this  morning at Telford College. It is questionable whether that is appropriate during a debate in which members will want to express their views to both ministers. Does the fact that the document has not been produced for the Parliament mean that it will not be available for the launch? If so, will the ministers not have every opportunity to stay and listen to what members have to say about the content of the review?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to review legislation on the environmental impact of, and environmental safety in relation to, demolition activity. (S2O-6539)

I am disappointed by the minister's response. Perhaps he will review his decision in light of the demolition activity at Motherwell Bridge Ltd in my constituency, where asbestos was involved. The agencies to which he referred refused to take responsibility for that activity. The Health and Safety Executive takes responsibility for workers during demolition, SEPA takes responsibility for removal of waste after demolition and local authorities pass on responsibility to the private contractor involved. Will he review his decision, because serious public health and environmental impacts can result from demolition activity, especially when asbestos is involved, as in the case that I have highlighted?

Tapadh leibh, Oifigeir-riaghlaidh. Tha Pàrtaidh Nàiseanta na h-Alba a' cur ar làn-thaic ri Bile na Gàidhlig an-diugh.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  Thank you, Presiding Officer. The SNP welcomes and gives its full support to the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill.  The member continued in English.  I will quote.  The member continued in Gaelic:  "Mura tig 's ann theàrnas mi a Hallaig, a dh'ionnsaigh sàbaid nam marbh, far a bheil an sluagh a' tathaich,  gach aon ghinealach a dh'fhalbh. Tha iad fhathast ann a Hallaig,  Clann Ghill-Eain 's Clann MhicLeòid, na bh' ann ri linn Mhic Ghille Chaluim: chunnacas na mairbh beò -" Leanaidh mi orm sa Bheurla a-nis.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  "If it does not" come, "I will go down to Hallaig,  to the sabbath of the dead,  where the people are frequenting,   every single generation gone. They are still in Hallaig,  Macleans and Macleods,  All who were there in the time of Mac Gille Chaluim: the dead have been seen alive -"  The member continued in English.  I apologise for my Gaelic. I quoted Sorley MacLean's poem "Hallaig" because it talks of the voices of the past; what we want to hear is the action of the present and the call from the future. I hope that the call from the future will be from the voices of young people, who will increase the Gaelic population and replenish the language. In supporting the bill, I pay tribute to all those, including activists of the past, who campaigned for a Gaelic bill. The SNP has introduced three such bills and I pay tribute to Mike Russell, who presented a bill in the previous parliamentary session. Activists of no party and of many parties have pursued Gaelic, so we must pay tribute to them. We are saddened to hear today of the death of Gwynfor Evans, the first Plaid Cymru member of Parliament, who was an inspiration to the Welsh nationalist movement and was a strong fighter for the Welsh language. When we hear John Farquhar Munro talk of a Gaelic television station and about the language, we must remember that Gwynfor Evans went on hunger strike for a Welsh television channel. In passing the bill, we should pay tribute to him and to all language activists throughout the world today and in the past. The bill is just one part of a journey. Obtaining the legislation was a journey in the first place, but we are on a journey towards action. I disagree in many ways with Ted Brocklebank's comments. The challenge now is action and the bòrd and the act will be judged by that. There is a job of work to do. The bill is a landmark; it is an historic staging post, but it is a staging post. When we look to the future, we must ensure that the Gaelic language survives—that is essential. It must be put on a firm footing. If the bill has had one point, it has been the move to recognise the potential of the Gaelic language. I pay tribute to the minister who is responsible for Gaelic, Peter Peacock, because he has co-operated exceptionally with the Education Committee. The bill has provided a good example of how legislation can progress. If we have had differences, they have been in trying to achieve the same policy end. We want rights for Gaelic speakers and for the Gaelic language in the future. The bill might not provide that, but this staging post is an important development and I have great pleasure in supporting the bill.

The minister will recall that I, too, complimented him on his actions on Gaelic in general and in relation to the bill. Does he not agree that, if the Executive's responsibility for producing a national strategy was prescribed in the bill, even if the scenario that he has mentioned came about and a minister followed him who was not as acutely responsible, that minister would still have to provide the strategy to comply with the legislation, regardless of his personal preferences?

I agree with those points and the points that Elaine Murray made. I do not expect that the guidance that the bòrd produces will say that, as of day one, every single authority will have to provide Gaelic-medium education. There will be flexibility, in which case there would not be a conflict between amendments 40 and 48.

I, too, make reference to the tenor of the debate that we have had as the bill has progressed through Parliament. The process has been constructive and I thank the minister for the responsive manner in which he has dealt with the queries and concerns of the committee and members, particularly in relation to education. During the progress of the bill, we have seen a gradual knitting together of the educational measures that have been introduced in the bill and those in the Standards in Scotland's Schools Act 2000. The minister made an important reference to the mainstreaming of Gaelic. I propose to ensure that we mainstream Gaelic-medium education in the education system. Education will be a vital part of the preservation and promotion of Gaelic. The purpose of amendment 1 is to identify the Scottish Executive as having the lead responsibility in setting out a national strategy for promoting and developing Gaelic education. That position was supported by the committee at stage 1 and is supported by Highland Council, which has made constructive proposals and is, perhaps, the lead authority in the promotion of Gaelic-medium education. It should be congratulated on that.  The reasons why the Scottish Executive rather than the bòrd should take the lead on Gaelic education are practical. The bòrd should produce advice in the context of wider Gaelic issues. However, we should remember that the bòrd as described in the bill will have only between five and 11 members. It will not have responsibility for the Scottish Executive Education Department's budgets, the funding that is available to local authorities or the provision of education generally. It cannot advance changes to legislation or to statutory regulation. The bòrd will not have the same number of staff or the same knowledge or experience as the Executive has. It will advise on devising a plan or strategy, but resources should be mainstreamed in the Education Department.  The bòrd will not have responsibility for organisations such as the careers service or for co-ordinating among the Executive's departments policies on training, workforce planning, economic development, equal opportunities, culture, transport, lifelong learning, colleges or universities. Why is that important? It is important because the promotion of Gaelic-medium education is not just about advice and guidance on aspects of implementing legislation. In Edinburgh, it is about school transport. That is why the Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department is important. Universities, colleges and training are also relevant. We had questions today and a debate yesterday about the involvement of part-time and second-degree teachers. We have a shortage of Gaelic teachers. I recognise that the minister has produced a national action group on teacher recruitment, which is welcomed, but nationally, we need at least 30 primary GME teachers and we are about to have only 20 this year. We need at least 10 secondary GME teachers, but only two will graduate this year. We also need at least 10 secondary Gaelic teachers nationally, whereas a maximum of five will graduate in 2005. The bòrd may recognise the scale of what is required, but there is no way that it will have the power or influence to deliver on the strategy, so the Scottish Executive is the right place for the responsibility to lie. The Executive's national strategy could feed into the bòrd's provision and national plan as set out in the bill, but the bòrd should not take the lead responsibility for Gaelic-medium education or Gaelic education generally. That must lie with the Executive. I appreciate the minister's amendments, but they and my amendment 48 are not mutually exclusive. He is right to add the promotion of Gaelic education—its absence from section 2 was notable—to what must be in the national Gaelic language plan, so we will support amendment 11. I welcome the minister's movement on that. However, the central issue is whether we expect every local authority at some point to be able to provide Gaelic-medium education and Gaelic education. I think that the Parliament's message is that it does expect that. I accept the minister's argument that that must be practical and deliverable, and I do not expect every local authority to have to provide that from day one. Any provision would be in the context of an authority's language plan as provided to Bòrd na Gàidhlig for approval by the minister. I argue for planned obsolescence for a provision in the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000 that sets out the circumstances in which a local authority provides Gaelic-medium education. That would not disappear overnight. Amendment  48 says that, when each local authority has provided Bòrd na Gàidhlig with a plan on the provision of Gaelic-medium education, the opt-out in the 2000 act, which discusses the circumstances in which local authorities provide Gaelic-medium education, will disappear over time. Eventually, the provision in the 2000 act would no longer be relevant. Amendment 48 would send out a strong message. It is practical and sits in the context of Peter Peacock's amendments. The shift in the course of the bill's consideration towards putting education more centre stage in the bill is welcome. In that frame of mind, I also accept John Farquhar Munro's point about how we manage the national strategy. His points are well made. If the Parliament wants to send out the clear message that Gaelic-medium education will not just be preserved in the few local authorities that can provide it now but will continue and will develop, my amendments would allow us to take a step further towards making that commitment. I speak in favour of amendments 1 and 48.

Yesterday, the minister may have heard Jim Wallace commit to reassessing fee issues in relation to part-time and second-degree students. If we are to attract people from other careers to teaching—especially to become maths teachers—what input will he have to that revaluation of the fee regime for people who seek to study for second degrees or to shift vocation to become maths teachers, for example?

First, I pay tribute to those who have been involved in the preparation and scrutiny of the bill. It has been transformed during its passage; the early proposal for specified tertiary education providers has been removed and a great deal of progress has been made in certain areas on the general principles of the bill. I also pay tribute to my colleague Alex Neil, who is convener of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, and to members of the committee. Through its consideration of the bill, there has been substantial movement and development on academic freedom, part-time and second degree students and the skills committee, and the addition of social and cultural perspectives and sustainable development. We now have a much-needed framework for legislation, but it is with real regret and concern that I will move what is called in procedural terms a reasoned amendment to regret "the creation of a legislative framework for imposing variable top-up fees in Scotland's tertiary education system." The bill should never have been allowed to be hijacked and used for the purposes of addressing issues that are to do with Westminster's legislation on top-up fees. Why should the Scottish further  and higher education system be manipulated to deal with problems that were caused by Westminster's vote for top-up fees in England? That is not the way our education system should go, and that is why it is with real regret that I rise to move the amendment in my name. It is procedurally bad to make decisions before a consultation has ended, but to do so in the middle of a consultation is quite irresponsible. The fact that there are two on-going consultations that have major impacts on the legislation shows that the provisions on top-up fees in section 8 should have been considered separately. We are now in a ludicrous position whereby a statutory instrument that is subject to the super-affirmative procedure is being proposed and accepted by the Parliament. In a sense, that is so bad that we should have had a separate bill for the provisions. The Parliament should not necessarily follow that precedent in future. It has been cobbled together at the last minute as a panic measure by the Liberal Democrats, who realise that top-up fees and variable fees, as proposed in the bill, are starting to hurt them politically, as well they should. On a practical point, the British Medical Association was against the proposals in the bill. Committees of the Parliament and I harried the Executive about the Westminster top-up fees and their implications for Scotland, but the argument was primarily about the revenue that universities would lose. The minister has admitted that the bill will not increase or decrease the amount of money that is available to universities. All that the minister will do is try to influence the behaviour of English medical students who come to Scotland, which he admits has not worked in the past and is unlikely to work in future. I say with sadness that we are left in the position that a good piece of legislation that should guide the higher and further education sectors has been hijacked by an irresponsible and ill-considered provision on student fees. I urge the Parliament to support my amendment and to register our serious concerns and reservations about section 8. I move amendment S2M-2666.1, to insert at end: "but, in so doing, regrets the creation of a legislative framework for imposing variable top-up fees in Scotland's tertiary education system."

I too welcome amendment 12. The Education Committee recommended such an amendment at an earlier stage and it will serve Scotland well. Alex Neil has mentioned some of the issues that the skills committee should address on the demand for certain skills in Scotland. I suggest that the minister also considers what opportunities the establishment of a joint Scottish further and higher education funding council will afford for thinking about some of the supply issues. In particular, all parties in the Parliament want early years education and child care to be developed comprehensively and extensively throughout Scotland. Given the important role that education departments in universities and further education colleges play in supplying nursery nurses, early years education could be a good example of an area on which a skills committee could work effectively to address the need for nursery nursing skills throughout Scotland. That would be an innovative approach and a good testament to the work of the joint funding council's two predecessor bodies.

I press amendment 19.

I am pleased to hear the minister's comments and am also pleased about the implications that they might have for the charitable status of colleges. Will the minister explain the timescale and the steps that will be  involved in making this change and recognising the further independence of colleges?

I am struck by the way in which we are adopting many innovative procedures. I am sure that the part-time and second-degree students who would be affected by amendment 19 will appreciate the Parliament and the Presiding Officer exercising the new right. I hope that amendment 19 will bring some light after the heat of the discussions so far. It relates to part-time students and students pursuing second degrees. Pauline McNeill raised the issue earlier and, in its stage 1 report, the committee was concerned about such students. The minister has already announced that he might want to increase the level of funding in order to tackle the situation with top-up fees down south and the across-the-board increases that we expect will follow. However, the proposals will hit part-time students and students pursuing second degrees disproportionately. I recollect that the minister has indicated that he will look sympathetically on the position of such students, but we have yet to hear any details. It would be useful if the bill contained a commitment that the minister and the Executive would address the consequences for those students. Why is that important? The days of self-funding students or part-time students studying for pleasure have, perhaps, long since gone. I see that the Minister for Children and Education, who has responsibility for Gaelic issues, is sitting at the back of the chamber. He has been trying to encourage more Gaelic teachers through part-time arrangements with the University of Aberdeen. For such teachers, part-time courses are absolutely essential. Some people want to change their vocation and become teachers or social workers and there have been campaigns to encourage people with families or with previous experience in other jobs to switch to the caring professions. Because of the fees, those people find it very expensive to pursue a second degree. We should support people who are trying to pursue careers in social work and teaching. Amendment 19 is simple. It does not commit the minister to any particular solution. It acknowledges the importance of the issue and asks the minister to come back and report to the Parliament in relation to section 8 of the bill. That would be a useful mechanism to include in the bill. Members who are interested in housing matters will recollect that, when we were considering the bill that became the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001, the Parliament requested that the minister should come back with a review of the right to buy. That was a recommendation in a report and it went into  the legislation. We acknowledge that the review of the right to buy is an important development in housing legislation, provision and policy and we should consider having a similar mechanism to address the issue of part-time and second-degree students. The issue has not received as much attention as the more contentious matter of variable top-up fees. However, we have a responsibility towards people who may be concerned about the impact on part-time and second-degree students. I understand that there are about 5,000 such students in Scotland, although the minister may wish to correct me on that. Amendment 19 is a simple provision, which I hope will attract the Parliament's agreement. That would send a strong signal about our support for those students and our willingness to address their concerns. I move amendment 19.

rose—

What is the prime driver of the bill? Is it revenue raising, to pay for the costs of Scottish students going down south, which will increase because of Westminster top-up fees, or is it stopping cross-border flows? If it is the latter, why in June last year did the minister say that making it more expensive for English medical students to come to Scotland would not be a deterrent? He is completely inconsistent.

What did it recommend?

Will the member give way?

I agree with what Pauline McNeill has said so far. Universities' admission policies and wider access policies could ensure that more Scottish students study medicine at Scottish universities, which would help to improve the national health service. Does she agree that we need to increase the number of medical places in order to encourage such wider access?

Will the member give way.

On a point of procedure rather than of stratospheres—although any Subordinate Legislation Committee vacancy will interest me when it arises—the fact that the consultation on  medical students' fees will not conclude until after the bill has been passed is a serious issue. Does the member agree that her Government and party have a serious problem with making decisions on health issues before they are put out to consultation, since such consultations never inform the decisions that are taken? That is happening not only in connection with the bill but on many other issues throughout Scotland.

Will the member comment on my amendment 18, which I did not have the opportunity to speak to? It proposes that more than one student body should be consulted, which would allow CHESS, which represents student bodies, as well as the NUS, to participate. It does not prescribe only one organisation to consult.

Education should be based on the ability to learn, not the ability to pay. That should be an underlying principle of education policy in Scotland. However, I ask members to consider that this is a D-day for fees in Scotland. Legislation matters, not policy statements or manifestos; as we know from the Labour Party's Westminster manifesto in 2001, those can be reneged on later. Legislation matters; what is agreed to in the Parliament today matters. The bill is drawn far too widely. I ask members to read section 6, which will allow Scottish ministers by order to specify any courses for any class of student that they wish. We have a political contradiction. Down south, the Liberal Democrats are voting against variable top-up fees; in Scotland, a Lib Dem minister is legislating for variable top-up fees. They are all over the place on the issue. What is the clear policy that is driving the bill? Let us listen to the ministers. Allan Wilson said during stage 2: "I have responded generally to the points that Fiona Hyslop made, but on the question of there being a financial incentive, I totally refute the proposition that any revenue raised would be used to supplement loan revenues to students studying in England. There is no financial incentive involved."—[ Official Report , Enterprise and Culture Committee , 22 February 2005; c 1654.] The Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Jim Wallace, said: "we intend to ensure that the first call on the extra revenue that is generated by increasing the fee levels for  non-Scots who come here will be on meeting that extra cost."— [ Official Report , 24 June 2004; c 9489.]  Jim Wallace says, "Hang on, it's about revenue raising. It's about trying to deal with the Westminster top-up fee legislation", but at stage 2 Allan Wilson says that it is not. The ministers, too, are all over the place. We have a catalogue of confusion and a catalogue of contradictions. It is about revenue raising, resulting from the legacy of the Westminster Parliament's vote for top-up fees. The cost is cited as £6 million. Perhaps Murdo Fraser can tell us why his party's sole MP sat on his hands in a £6 million vote at Westminster. We should consider which amendments in the group would help to defend the principle of free education in Scotland. Amendments 14 and 16 would do a variety of things: they would lock out variable top-up fees by course, so that they could not be extended to dentistry and engineering; and they would lock out variable fees by nationality. The minister is being anti-English. Why should not English students in Scotland be treated the same as any other student in the European Union? An independent Scotland would ensure that that happened. Most important, if members do not wish to see the introduction of English-style top-up fees by institution, they had better vote for amendment 15; if they do not, the Scottish National Party will ensure that their constituents know that they have refused to lock out English-style top-up fees in Scotland. The measure is seen as a deterrent. The idea is that somehow, if we up the top-up fees for English medical students, they will stop coming here. Murdo Fraser asked an important question on 24 June last year, to which the minister, Jim Wallace, replied: "I do not think that the situation will necessarily lead to English students not wanting to come to Scotland."— [ Official Report , 24 June 2004; c 9492.]  If the Executive has no clear policy directive and no understanding of what it wants to do—it does not know whether it wants to raise revenues or affect cross-border flows—how on earth can members vote on the issue today? That is what is so worrying. Not only was there no clear policy direction when the bill was introduced, but there are now two consultations: one on medical students, which will not report until May, and another on other aspects of the bill, which will report after the bill has been passed. The Executive is not only confused with regard to its policy direction; it is being premature in how it proposes to deal with various issues. It should lock out variable top-up fees by course, by nationality and by institution now. The Executive's reaction to the issue is knee-jerk, unresearched  and unsubstantiated. If the Executive wants to recruit more doctors to the national health service in Scotland, it should ensure that students can study five highers at once. It should tackle the issue of recruitment by universities. It should tackle career prospects and the retention of doctors. Shona Robison has a raft of proposals. Let us ensure that we keep in Scotland doctors who have been trained in Scotland. If a golden handcuffs training bond opportunity from the Executive is good enough for dentists, it is good enough for doctors. Amendment 17, in the name of Mike Pringle, is a white flag, which can be interpreted as an extra hoop. It is a panic measure. The Executive has realised, at this late stage, that there is a problem. The super-affirmative instrument that the amendment proposes has flown in from the stratosphere of statutory instruments; the procedure has never been used in the six years of the Parliament. If there is no problem with the bill, why was the amendment lodged? Amendment 17 is harmless; I do not think that it will do what people want it to do. If the amendment is necessary, does that not tell members that we should delete the sections about fees and ensure that, if the Executive wants to introduce variable top-up fees in the future, it will have to do so up front in a piece of primary legislation? Chris Ballance's amendments are similar to an amendment that I lodged at stage 2—imitation is the best form of flattery. However, deleting sections 8(5) to 8(10) would leave the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act 1992 in place, which would allow ministers far more scope than I think we would want to give them. It would be absurd to pass such a wide-ranging bill with section 8 in its current form. Apart from section 8, the bill is fine and I ask members not to agree to section 8 unamended. We have positive, constructive ways of locking out variable top-up fees by institution, by nationality and by course. I urge members to grasp the opportunity today, because their constituents—parents and students—are watching.

Amendments 6 and 10 show how a committee can work constructively when there is a degree of consensus. At stage 2, members of the committee from the Executive parties—the Liberal Democrats and the Labour Party—were opposed to including the concept of academic freedom in the bill. I am pleased that the Executive has now embraced the majority view of the committee, which was that academic freedom should be extended to post-1992 universities and colleges. For technical reasons, the minister is removing the amendment that was lodged by my colleague Michael Matheson and moved by me at stage 2, and replacing it with a more extensive and considered amendment, on which agreement has been reached. I am pleased to support amendment 6 on behalf of the SNP. Academic freedom, which is very important, allows academics freedom to express their views and opinions. Not including the post-1992 universities earlier was, perhaps, an oversight. I am pleased that the Parliament has taken the opportunity to do that very rare thing—to include something positive and constructive in a bill. I congratulate the ministers but, in particular, I congratulate the committee on recommending an amendment at stage 1 and then voting for it at stage 2. I hope that the Parliament will support amendments 6 and 10 at stage 3.

Does the minister agree that if we are to have a public that understands the challenges facing us, such as ethics in life sciences, technology education must be taught and supported in our schools?

Does Phil Gallie acknowledge that the study of technology may be the vital bridge between science and maths education at school and the study of engineering at university and which would encourage engineering students in the future?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Could you take the opportunity to remind  members, perhaps at decision time, that it is appropriate for members to remain in the chamber to hear the closing speeches in a debate? I know that Mike Pringle gave notice of the reason why he could not be here now, but at least three other members who participated in the debate are no longer here for the final speeches. Although we cannot all be life sciences anoraks, I think that it would be respectful if members returned to the chamber for the close of the debate.

In the Lothians, we are conscious of the life sciences as contributors to our understanding of the world and to the local economy. Life sciences in the Lothians also drive the national life sciences agenda and contribute to the national economy. It is right and proper that we should celebrate the successes, identify opportunities and debate Government policy on the issue. We have the institute for stem cell research at the University of Edinburgh, the Beatson Institute for Cancer Research in Glasgow, and, as we have heard, the Wellcome Trust biocentre in Dundee. In my speech, I will touch on the importance of life sciences to the future of Scotland's economy, the contribution from Scottish universities and the challenges facing our education sector. The target set by the Barcelona summit in 2002 was for 3 per cent of gross domestic product to be spent on research and development and on innovation. The United Kingdom has set a target of increasing business and public investment in R and D from 1.9 per cent of GDP to 2.5 per cent—less than the Barcelona target—by 2014. We face major challenges. Only 2 per cent of the UK's 48 publicly quoted biotechnology companies are Scottish, which shows that we require more companies of significant size and scale in Scotland. We have a reputation for world-class research in life sciences, with one of Europe's most concentrated biotechnology clusters. In 2002-03, our higher education institutions filed 212 new patent applications—17 per cent of the UK total. We are punching above our weight, but the key issue is the development of that research and extending it into commercialisation. I want to touch on the potential of our universities and on where we should be. In  Finland, Sweden and Spain, more than one in six foreign students are engaged in highly theoretical advanced research programmes. Sir James Black, our only living Nobel laureate and chancellor of the University of Dundee, recently warned that low Government investment in science, combined with the mounting debts that students face, is threatening the future of scientific development. We must celebrate our successes, but we cannot be complacent. I appeal to the minister to reflect on the challenges that foreign students face, particularly at the University of Edinburgh, in financing their studies. Will he ask the Home Office to address the issue of the increase in visa fees that is being imposed on our foreign students? That increase will deter foreign students; indeed, it is already deterring them. We want that fresh talent to study in Scotland, to stay here and to contribute to our collective future. We want investment—and we welcome the moves on that so far—but on the world stage Scotland has to compete not only with Europe, but with the big United States market. We must make major strides in order to do that. I am excited about the life sciences alliance and, like Alex Neil, about the ScotCHEM and SUPA provisions. The collaboration that the Scottish National Party has called for is starting to come to fruition. That is to be welcomed. One of our biggest challenges lies in our schools. As much as we want to attract foreign students, we must also grow our own. I acknowledge that the Executive has recognised that in its science strategy and its overhaul of the science education curriculum, but science classes in Scotland are being cancelled because of a lack of equipment and increasingly stringent health and safety guidelines. I do not know about other members, but I remember with excitement the phosphorus glows when we had major experiments in our classroom. However, such activities have been unnecessarily restricted by over-stringent health and safety guidelines, which can put off students from what is an attractive area to study. Only last week, a report by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education on improving science education for five to 14-year-olds stated that school science in Scotland is improving in some respects, but is failing to achieve its potential. Graham Donaldson stated that too many pupils leave school with little interest in science and insufficient awareness about its influence on their lives. Science and technology literacy is essential to modern citizenship. On the day that a report from Westminster talks about approving sex selection of embryos, we need a population that understands that science. We need a population that understands that technology.  The HMIE report also says: "The lack of any national mechanism to deliver high quality professional updating to all science teachers is a major barrier". We must acknowledge that primary 5 to secondary 2 is the real problem area in science education and I appeal to the minister to talk to his colleagues about the schools of ambition programme. If we are encouraging schools to specialise, which can be done in the comprehensive system, why not have a school specialising in science in Dundee? That would be a major step forward. The minister is asking everyone else to do things, but why did he not attend the European conference on recruitment into science, technology and mathematics in Finland last year when every other nation from the European Union was represented? If science is the pursuit of truth and technology is the pursuit of control of the world around us, it is essential for our country's future development that we have people who are educated to understand the issues. We need the review of the science curriculum and updating for science teachers, but we also need changes to initial teacher training and technology education that is related to, but separate and distinct from, science education. The future of life sciences is exciting and we need Scotland to flourish in that respect. We must improve and have firm foundations in education to sustain us and to ensure that we have the students, the ideas, the workforce and, most important, the informed citizens that are necessary for the development and commercialisation of projects in biosciences and life sciences.

Page 13 of "Scottish Life Sciences Strategy: Achieving Critical Mass for Sustainable Growth" mentions the financial community. The document states: "Scotland's investment community and the local life sciences industry are poorly connected. We will seek to improve this through dialogue between our communities to reduce the barriers to investment." What are the barriers to investment? What is the Executive doing about them?

In relation to the review of other initiatives, will the minister consider the genuine concern of staff in the City of Edinburgh Council about the integration of education and social work and the potentially excessive and undue responsibility that is being placed on junior staff, both in education and social work?

Without wishing to be the ghost of Government future, may I suggest that cutting class sizes for children between the ages of three and eight would make a big difference to literacy and numeracy levels in Scotland?

Does the member share my concern that, for some reason, there is difficulty with schools in Dundee achieving the level of attainment of schools in similar areas, or even that of schools in areas that are even poorer? That is a major challenge. I welcome what is happening in Dundee to address the problem—

—but it should have happened far sooner. Does the member recognise—

—the work of Joe Fitzpatrick, in particular, in raising this—

Having watched the Scottish people defeat the policy of forcing schools to opt out of the system in the 1990s, the Tories now seem to want individual pupils to opt out of the school system. The Tories failed to get schools to opt out, so now they are trying to make individual children do so. If at first a Tory in Scotland cannot succeed, they should just give up. Whom are the Scottish people most likely to believe about the figures for the proposed Tory cuts—the honourable Lord James Douglas-Hamilton or Hatchet Howard? Hatchet Howard was a minister in the Tory heyday of the 1990s, when 30,000 people protested on the streets of Edinburgh about Tory education policies. The Tories brought our teachers within touching distance of industrial action, which was only averted by the Scottish Parliament and the McCrone settlement. The Tories left the fabric of our schools in disrepair because back to basics never meant the basics of school buildings. Labour and the Liberal Democrats have addressed the fabric of our buildings, but they have mortgaged our children's futures to the hilt with the financial millstone of  dangerously expensive public-private partnerships. The Tories want market choice in education. The SNP rejects on principle a free market in education. The idea of using children with special needs as some kind of commodity to be traded at a premium in an education marketplace is absolutely disgraceful.

I believe in a comprehensive system of places for three-year-olds based on the system used in the Scandinavian countries and not based on the free-market operations that the Tories propose. I believe in a comprehensive, universal system that provides free education and, where possible, child care for all. That is a genuine option and opportunity that the Tories would deny young families in Scotland. The new Tories down south—by that, I mean the Labour Party—have adopted the choice agenda. We have to address the competition agenda, but Scotland is not England. It is not a country of large conurbations and small villages. By and large, Scotland is a country of large county towns with one, or perhaps two, local schools in the area. Even in Perth, which I visited yesterday with the Education Committee, there are only four secondary schools. Even if we were sold on the free market of the Tories' so-called choice agenda, which we certainly are not, that system could not apply to Scotland in practice. Parents want their children to get the best education possible and to reach their full potential at school. The Tories want parents to be detached from schools; they see them as consumers with purchasing power rather than as part of the wider school community. The Tories would have parents shopping for schools when most hard-pressed families want to have confidence in their local school and do not want to worry about whether they have made the right choice. The wider school community needs to be addressed. The sense of ownership and belonging among parents is not as strong as it might be. I acknowledge the Government's efforts in relation to its proposed legislation on school boards reform, but I appeal to the Government not to throw the baby out with the bath water. Statutory parental powers must remain, in whatever format the Government ultimately proposes in its bill. If pupils and parents are to have a sense of the school community, there must be a shared understanding of what the school and the  education that it provides are for. I fear that the idea of the purpose of education has been lost in the current education generation. National priorities in education exist in statute and the minister talks about them, but does the nation know about them? What happened to the great education debate? It turned into a monologue in Victoria Quay. If we want to achieve a stimulating, motivated education system in Scotland, we need a shared understanding of that vision, which requires leadership from Government. That is critical. We want dialogue, not drift; we want focus, not a frenzy of initiatives. I do not know how some teachers have the time to think, let alone teach, after they have filled in the forms for the man in the ministry. Above all, education policy must be shaped and driven in Scotland for Scotland. It must not be dictated by an English agenda and a Government whose priorities must always be determined for the bulk of the population that lives in England and whose votes decide the future Government of the British state. The greater good of the greater English interest does not serve Scottish education and the greater good of the greater English electorate does not serve Scottish education. We need a Scottish vision, not a hand-me-down from a Labour chancellor whose contribution to the education debate in Scotland is to throw down the bawbees. Blair and Brown represent two sides of the same Westminster-hewn coin. The Westminster Government holds the purse strings. The SNP amendment mentions pupils' need for "sufficient time and attention". Smaller class sizes have been SNP policy for many years. The Executive finally took up the policy, but it did so haphazardly and it knew that it could not meet its own target. Class sizes in English and maths for S1 and S2 were to be reduced to 20 pupils, but the minister has already dumped that target. He was bailed out by head teachers, who knew that the target was not deliverable when it was set.

If the minister has not dumped the target and will meet it, why did he tell us that he listened to head teachers and would offer more flexibility because he would not meet the target? He should reflect on the comments that he made. We want more flexibility, but the Executive should have listened to head teachers when it reduced class sizes in primary schools from 32 to 30 pupils and introduced composite classes throughout Scotland, to the detriment of education for children in their early years. In the current context, the Executive should reflect on its commitments: either it has a target or it does not have one.  We should consider the vision of the school in the community. There are proposals for community schools in which pupils would receive social and health support, but perhaps those proposals ignore the role of the school in the wider community. We must support schools in the community and there must be a presumption against the closure of rural schools. As our amendment says, schools should provide a peaceful environment. At First Minister's question time on 20 January, I raised the serious issue of the proposal to end the publication of annual indiscipline statistics and to replace them with a three-yearly survey. A couple of weeks later, the Conservatives woke up, smelled the coffee and realised that the matter should be taken up—I applaud them for doing so. If we regard indiscipline as a serious issue, it is important that regular statistics should be produced so that there can be accountability. The production of statistics every three years is not good enough. Indiscipline is to do with poor behaviour and lack of motivation and I am glad that the Education Committee is addressing the issue. We must reflect on the inclusion agenda. I certainly do not blame children who have social, emotional or behavioural needs, but if support is not provided we grind down teachers' spirits and strip from pupils the time and attention that they need. In 2003, I warned that that could happen and, in September of that year, in a debate on an Executive motion on better behaviour, the Parliament agreed to an SNP amendment that called for more resources. Additional support for learning requires far greater resources than are available just now and I warn the minister that the code of practice relating to the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004 will probably be more important than much of the primary legislation that the Parliament is currently considering. I appeal to the Presiding Officer to ensure that the statutory instrument that will introduce the code of practice is given the time and attention in Parliament that it needs. That is essential. The Headteachers Association of Scotland has commented on funding and expenses in relation to initiatives. Similar schools in different parts of the country receive different levels of resources and I welcome the minister's investigation of that matter. Wendy Alexander and I asked for such an investigation when the Education Committee considered the budget in 2003. We must examine the role of education authorities and consider local accountability. Is the function of education authorities the duplication and regurgitation of guidance from the Executive or can they provide a furnace in which new ideas can be forged before  being piloted and shared? We must examine those issues properly. The Executive should do three things—four, if we include ignoring the Tories, although, to be fair, I should add that we live in a democracy and the Tories have the right to make their case. First, there should be a serious, deliverable class-size reduction policy. Secondly, there should be a real examination of how resources reach the chalkface and of local authorities' involvement. Thirdly, there should be an assessment of how to make social inclusion work, instead of hindering the progress of the mainstreaming policy. We should acknowledge and celebrate the hard work, dedication, professionalism and enthusiasm of the thousands of teachers in Scotland who help to shape and inspire our children. If learning is the liberation of the mind, teachers are our freedom fighters. I move amendment S2M-2597.1, to leave out from "acknowledges" to end and insert: "recognises the efforts of teachers to deliver a quality education for pupils in increasingly challenging circumstances, the potential of Scotland's pupils to succeed and the need for national government resources, which directly impact on the classroom experience, to provide sufficient time and attention for pupils from teachers in a peaceful, stimulating environment with a relevant, flexible curriculum for them to achieve that potential, and calls on the Scottish Executive to, in particular, develop policies to cut class sizes, to examine the plethora of initiatives and complexity of competitively bid-for funding streams and to reassess the impact of, and support given to, its social inclusion and mainstreaming agenda to ensure that all children can get the most out of their time in school education."

Does that mean that the target of 400 additional PE teachers might include existing primary school teachers who have PE expertise?

I confess that I was good at sport. Perhaps there is a gender issue; the women who have contributed to the debate participated in sport at a reasonable level. I was a sprinter and I played netball. I was lucky enough to play on a sprung wooden floor, which meant that when, in later life, I won a Scottish universities cup medal for netball, I had a rather large spring for somebody who was small compared with her competitors. I also played hockey. We have heard recently about the old racecourse in Ayr, where I played  hockey. That is another playing field that is under threat because of a public-private partnership expansion of a local school. I understand that—luckily—the old racecourse has had a reprieve. Government policy has a serious conflict with our aspiration to encourage more pupils to participate. On PPP, I was alarmed to hear in the recent debate on free school meals about schools where the dinner hall is doubling up as a gym hall. It takes time after lunch to clean up squished potato and so on—valuable time that could be used for PE. That issue must be addressed. Some good points have been made in the debate. I want to reflect on the mini-Olympics concept, which is about participation. Michael Matheson gave a good example from Falkirk Council. An event involving 1,800 pupils is not elitist. For pupils to qualify for a Scotland-wide competition, provision would have to be made for them to compete in local areas. I am pleased that in my home town there is a cluster of schools that does that on a regular basis. It is also important that primary school pupils should mix with secondary school pupils. We must ensure that we have the coaches and teachers who are needed. The minister may want to work with her Cabinet colleagues to ensure that we have those people in place. Unfortunately, in answer to a parliamentary question from my colleague Michael Matheson in February this year, Jim Wallace pointed out that the number of people who are graduating in PE went down in 2002-03, compared with the previous year. As Margo MacDonald said, there is a commitment to provide 400 PE teachers, but I am not sure where they are, where the capacity to train them is, and whether they will come through in time. In Scotland, we send our pupils to school for longer than most other developed countries do, but we are ranked 27 th out of 29 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries for the time that pupils spend on PE. That is very serious when combined with the concerns about health that were mentioned earlier. Healthy bodies mean healthy minds. PE brings respect for one's body and oneself—a point that has not been made in the debate, but which is very important, for hormonal teenagers in particular. We should capture that point, which tends to be lost in the debate about nutrition, health and fitness. We should examine the shape of the school day. There are some interesting examples from overseas that we should consider. The French structure the school day to allow the sort of community participation in schools about which Michael Matheson spoke. We need to be creative and innovative, but we also need to ensure that we have the basics right. That means having the  necessary playing fields, gym halls and teachers, and, as Donald Gorrie said, having the political will and support to drive sport up the political agenda, to ensure that we can make a difference. That difference would be valuable—not just to the individuals concerned, but to society in general. I am pleased to have been able to participate in the debate.

Why not?

Does the minister agree that the graduate endowment will add to the already heavy burden of student loans and that it will further exacerbate the problem of graduate debt? Will he take this opportunity to explain why the publication of the research on student poverty and graduate debt, which was  supposed to take place in January, has now been postponed until the summer? Has the publication of the research been delayed because it will show that graduate debt is a millstone round the necks of individuals and an unsustainable drag on the Scottish economy?

Will the member take an intervention?

Choice means services being available. It is not possible to have choice if there are no services, and the state can help to provide the services.

I will attempt to provide a link from the previous debate to this one by complimenting the Executive—I admit that I do not do that very often. This week, at his eight-month check, my baby son received a toothbrush and toothpaste from the health board. I am not sure about access to dental services for all babies who were born last year, but my son also received, in a canvas bag, baby books from the book store initiative, which is supported by the Executive. I therefore acknowledge that universal access to support for an early start in education is already part of policy. Some children start nursery having never had a book in the home, and having never had the love and nurturing that most children receive. It is not only the child's development that can be supported. Early years policy supports working families and society in general. However, in the Government's policy, there has been too much emphasis on getting single mums back into the workforce. Tackling poverty is crucial, but there is a danger that the Government, in doing that, has lost sight of the primacy of the development of the individual child as the driving force behind policy. Developing motor skills and cognitive understanding is about more than simply improving later results; it is about enhancing the child's ability to understand the world, delivering for the child the magic of discovery and learning, and creating a wonder that will continue to feed interest and to create a hunger for learning to last a lifetime. What about societal benefits? The abecedarian project in the United States, which offered intensive pre-school education, concentrated on children from low-income, multirisk families. Studies at age 21 of young adults who had attended the project produced impressive results. Those young adults were more likely to have attended tertiary education, and the study results showed a reduction in the number of teenage pregnancies and the use of illegal drugs. The US Perry pre-school project pointed towards a cost-benefit analysis: for every $1 spent on the US abecedarian project, society saved $4, while every $1 spent on the Perry pre-school project saved $8. Where stands Scotland? I understand that we expect to see the Government's national early  years strategy soon, but it was first consulted on in 2003, it was promised by March 2004 and it has been delayed in publication. It is right and proper that, in the absence of such a strategy, the Parliament should state its views on what it can expect. In the meantime, the issue of the recognition of the work of nursery nurses still awaits long-term resolution. Scotland is ahead of England in many respects in early years education, and all that Labour in England is promising at the forthcoming election is 15 hours a week of education by 2010. In Scotland, if the Executive heeds the Scottish National Party call, we could increase provision to 3.25 hours a day for 38 weeks, starting now. That would mean an extra 200 hours of early years education this year for more than 100,000 children. The Government currently provides 12.5 hours a week for only 33 weeks a year, which is equivalent to only 11 hours a week over a normal primary school year of 38 weeks. A move to full half-day provision, as called for by the SNP, could be started this summer, where staff and accommodation capacity exist, rather than by some distant target in 2010. Our ambition for young Scots does not stop there. The SNP would seek that increase as part of a commitment to move to eventual full-day provision for education and child care. Denmark and Sweden spend 2 per cent of their gross domestic product on early years education and child care, while Scotland spends only 0.5 per cent. Only 8 per cent of five to 10-year-olds in Scotland receive formal out-of-school care; in Sweden, the figure is almost 75 per cent. Schools should become children's centres for the community, and there should be a presumption against the closure of rural schools such as those that are currently under threat in Aberdeenshire; their use should be expanded to provide community child care. If we want to tackle fundamentally the inequalities and if we want to cultivate the cognitive skills that the future economy will need—as an increasing number of economists, from Nicholas Crafts to Professor Heyman, have said—early years is the place that will make the biggest impact. Until we have the powers over the tax and benefit system that would come with independence, we are restricted here in Scotland in what we can do. We are operating child care policy with one hand tied behind our back.

No Trident; no illegal wars; no identity cards; and by investing in children rather than bombs. The SNP policy of early education and child care for all would mean a universal, comprehensive system in which there would be a fundamental and radical policy shift; public money from the state would be moved from subsidising the demand side to subsidising the supply side, or child care providers. Instead of operating an expensive, bureaucratic taxation system that subsidises parents' access to expensive, often inaccessible, child care, the Government would subsidise the providers of accessible, quality, affordable child care. For the Tories, that could mean parents. In short, if we are to emulate our Scandinavian cousins, instead of subsidising a few parents for 70 per cent of the 100 per cent of child care costs that they pay, the state would subsidise child care provision so that parents would have to pay only 30 per cent of the cost in the first place. No one would lose out and everyone would benefit. What better way to spend the benefits of an independent Scottish economy, growing at 4 per cent a year? That is real ambition. That is a real smart, successful Scotland. The power of early years development and education in young children is staggering; the power for damage to be done at such an early age is frightening. If we want a strong, confident nation we need to build firm foundations for our future generations. I move, That the Parliament recognises the vital role of early years education and the importance of quality, accessible childcare in stimulating children's development and supporting working families in particular and the wider economy and society generally; notes with concern the delay in the publication of the national strategy for early years with provision for a national settlement for nursery nurses from the Scottish Executive; supports the immediate extension of free nursery education for three and four-year-olds to a full half day from the current part-time provision and the extension of "nurture groups" across Scotland for vulnerable young pupils, and recognises, however, that in order for Scotland to be able to shape and deliver comprehensive early education and childcare the Scottish government needs to have powers over tax and benefits in order to provide a universal entitlement to emulate the provision of Scandinavian countries who spend four times the proportion of their GDP in support of children in the early years as Scotland.

I welcome the committee report. I confess that I have always thought of Oscar more of as a dog or an award. I suppose that our job is to ensure that our OSCR is gold plated and not easily tarnished.  The bill was a long time in coming. I pay tribute in particular to the McFadden commission and to MSPs Jackie Baillie and Tricia Marwick for keeping up the pressure on the Executive to introduce a bill. The stage 1 report correctly focuses on the central tenets of the bill, as well as on its potential weaknesses, and it does so in a constructive manner. In supporting the Scottish National Party amendment, I draw the attention of John Home Robertson and Mary Scanlon to paragraph 150 of the committee report to which they signed up. That paragraph says: "The Committee recognises the importance of ensuring that only those organisations which have as their overriding purpose the provision of a benefit to the public should qualify for charitable status." In the report, the committee also "suggests that the Executive should consider placing greater emphasis on the need to meet the public benefit test on the face of the Bill." I am not a committee member, but I am struck by the fact that public benefit has been the main focus of the debate so far. It is quite proper for the SNP to lodge an amendment at this stage. I say to Karen Whitefield that, had today's debate not been the proper time to lodge an amendment, the Presiding Officer would not have accepted amendments for debate and vote in the chamber this afternoon.

No. I want to move on. In the past, I have said that it would be unforgivable if the private schools agenda were to delay the provision of much-needed support to charities. There are far more important areas of Scottish life than the public schools, although that was not understood in the case that they presented. Those schools would pass the education test and the independence test, although the minister might want to reflect on the provisions in the School Education (Ministerial Powers and Independent Schools) (Scotland) Act 2004, which could cause problems. However, some private schools might find difficulty in meeting the public benefit test, so it is right and proper that each school should have to state their case. The main focus of the bill should be the £250 million of charitable donations. Three qualities are central to a successful charities bill: consistency, clarity and confidence. We need to have consistency of treatment by the regulator, clarity of interpretation by those who operate charities and confidence on the part of the public that they are supporting bona fide charities. I will concentrate on consistency of treatment by  the regulator. I appreciate the comments that the minister, the SCVO and others have made about the importance of independence. However, it is on that issue that the principle falls foul of the practice. The public will find it bizarre if a private school gets charitable status but the local further education college does not. If that happens, it will be because the independent schools are precisely that—independent—whereas the colleges are not. The report addresses the issue of independence in paragraph 24, with its reference to section 7(3)(b) of the bill. The committee highlights the problem that colleges in particular will face. If the regulator strictly interprets the bill, colleges could lose their charitable status, which could mean that they will lose £15 million of income. Charitable status also acts as a passport that attracts other donations. Currently, corporation tax is low for colleges because their surpluses are small. However, the bill could provide a disincentive for colleges to become more successful and grow their surpluses. The bill will have unintended consequences. That is why, on 1 March, I lodged an amendment to the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Bill—[ Interruption. ] I am not sure what is creating the hum that we can hear in the chamber, but I will keep going. It sounds as though the ceiling is being lowered down on us. Provisions in the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Bill are specifically about direction to ensure collaboration with fundable bodies. Yes, independence has a place, but so do probity and accountability for public money. Colleges could be made independent but, frankly, given the recent history of the management of some colleges, I am not sure that the time is right for that to happen. Even if it was, the governance of colleges should be driven by the strength of the sector, not by a loophole in the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Bill. As the Presiding Officer knows, our problem is that we have two bills running concurrently. However, the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Bill is nearing stage 3, whereas the Charities and Trustee Investment (Scotland) Bill is just completing stage 1. One solution to the problems of tax relief and the Treasury is to have a subsidy. I note that the minister states in the policy memorandum that the Executive wants to subsidise those NDPBs that lose their charitable status because of the bill. The Scottish Qualifications Authority, the General Teaching Council for Scotland and Learning and Teaching Scotland have said that the amount of subsidy could be £6 million to £7 million. That raises a key question: what discussions have there been with ministers to recoup from the Treasury tax relief that is forgone by former charities? From the Communities Committee's  excellent report, I do not see that the Inland Revenue gave evidence, but I suggest that it should do so at stage 2. Tommy Sheridan might like to reflect on the fact that the Inland Revenue could decide to give VAT and other tax relief to private schools, regardless of whether OSCR decides that those schools should have charitable status. If we are going to get so hung up on private schools, the minister and the Communities Committee might want to reflect on the role of the Inland Revenue. The bill is much needed, much anticipated and much welcomed. It deserves close scrutiny at stage 2 to produce a piece of legislation that is worthy of the hundreds of thousands of Scots who selflessly give their time and energies to charities and voluntary organisations for the betterment of their fellow Scots.

The minister referred to the non-departmental public bodies and colleges. The second half of the SNP amendment repeats the  committee's own recommendation in paragraph 150 of its stage 1 report.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister take the opportunity to pay tribute to the vast majority of pupils, who behave well in school? Will he also acknowledge the low-level, constant, daily disruption that many teachers experience? Does he acknowledge that, like it or not, the Executive's social inclusion and mainstreaming policy, however desirable it is, is having a negative impact? Will he face up to that fact and listen to the teachers' concerns about that issue?

I appreciate the point that is being made, but Robert Brown should remember that only 20 per cent of children are getting free school meals although 30 per cent of Scottish children live in poverty. How do we close that gap?

I welcome this further opportunity to debate what is a very important issue. I particularly welcome the tone of both the motion and the Executive amendment, which focus on the health agenda, on which we can take all of Scotland with us in addressing the issues. I recognise the developments that have taken place since we last debated the subject, such as the Dundee study. We have had several such debates: on an emergency bill from the Executive and on a member's bill from the SSP. The central issues, which we will come back to, are targeting and universality. In general, the Parliament should engage in a debate as to what is appropriate for targeting and what is appropriate for universality. There is an argument for tackling pensioner poverty through a universal pension, and as far as school meals are concerned, there is possibly an argument for universality on health grounds. However, I wish to emphasise the factual inaccuracies in both the motion and the Executive amendment. If we are going to have a debate on such an important issue, it is vital that members who lodge motions or amendments have the correct facts. Frances Curran's speech did not mention Glasgow City Council's commitment to extending free, nutritious school lunches to all its primary school pupils. Perhaps that is because the council is not in fact intending to do that. Euan Robson mentioned the Executive's action to promote physical activity through, among other means, the employment of 400 additional PE teachers. Employment means giving people contracts, which means getting people signed up. However, those additional teachers have not been signed up,—they do not exist, and that number merely represents an aspiration for the future.

My understanding is that there are currently no proposals for Glasgow City Council to extend free, nutritious meals to all primary school pupils. There is a genuine issue around what is being done here and now, and there are immediate actions and steps that could be taken. I think that we should pilot universal free school meals for primary 1 to primary 3, not least because that is deliverable; it would also address the issue of early palate formation. Anyone who has watched Jamie Oliver's programmes recently will realise that that is a critical issue to tackle. The Finnish model gives us many lessons, and the social aspects of young people sitting with teachers form  an important part of their general development and should be encouraged. We need to consider the matter in the round and in an holistic manner. I do not think that there is a big-bang solution to childhood obesity simply through implementing universal free school meals; we have to consider the matter in the context of palate formation, health, education and sport. That is why the Scottish National Party has a constructive proposal for an action plan for fit, healthy young Scots. There need to be annual fitness checks for school pupils, we need to remove fizzy drinks and unhealthy foods from vending machines and we need to have free, nutritious school meals, which we should pilot in primaries 1 to 3 so that we can produce evidence for the sceptics and so that we can assess the practical challenges for kitchens. We also need to extend access to the children of those who claim passport benefits, as they are becoming known, so as to tackle the poverty issue. We need free fruit in primary schools and for pregnant women. If young mothers are to address the palate issue as they feed their young children, getting free fruit—in a country that produces it—is very important. I will end on the subject of physical education. Scotland is 27 th out of 29 countries in the developed world for the amount of time that we spend on compulsory PE, despite the fact that we send our children to school for longer than just about any other country in the developed world. We must address the physical education side of the issue. Together, we can comprehensively tackle the ticking time bomb of childhood obesity. I welcome this opportunity to debate the matter. I move amendment S2M-2507.1, to leave out from "and the councils" to end and insert: "and calls on the Scottish Executive to support the piloting of nutritious free school meals in P1 to 3 in order to provide evidence of the potential benefits of such a policy and practical evidence of delivery and as part of a comprehensive plan to tackle health and fitness in young people covering issues of palate in the early years, health, education and sport to encourage Scottish children to become fit, healthy young Scots."

To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has carried out of hospital services that were centralised in 2003. (S2O-5183)

Will the minister confirm that he is responsible for monitoring the boards to which he refers? As part of that assessment, will he investigate the probity of the decision-making process in respect of the closure of the emergency surgery and trauma orthopaedics departments at St John's hospital at Livingston? In particular, will he investigate the role of Brian Cavanagh, the chair of Lothian NHS Board? Mr Cavanagh wrote to me on 24 May 2004 to state that any proposed closure would be subject to consultation, yet within a matter of weeks the services had been closed with no scrutiny, no consultation and no public accountability. Will the minister ask for publication of the minutes of the meeting at which the decision was made?

Tapadh leibh, Oifigeir-riaghlaidh. Chaidh a ràdh uair is uair ann an aithisg na comataidh gum feum am bile a bhith na dhòigh air a' Ghàidhlig a shàbhaladh agus a h-àrdachadh. Tha Pàrtaidh Nàiseanta na h-Alba a' cur fàilte air a' bhile agus tha sinn a' cur ar làn thaic ris an-diugh. Ged nach dèan a dhà no a trì fhacail diofar mòr bho neach aig nach eil Gàidhlig, faodaidh am bile a bhith air a neartachadh a thaobh inbhe, còraichean agus cleachdadh airson na Gàidhlig. Leanaidh mi orm anns a' Bheurla a-nis.  Following is the simultaneous interpretation:  It is said time and again in the committee's report that the bill needs to be a means to preserve and promote Gaelic. The Scottish National Party welcomes the Gaelic Language (Scotland) Bill and we give it our full support today.  Although two or three words from a non-Gaelic speaker will not make a big difference, the bill can be strengthened with regard to status, rights and practice.  The member continued in English.  We must pay tribute to all those who have campaigned over the years for a Gaelic bill. For our part, the SNP has produced a Gaelic bill twice in the past 25 years. I welcome the latest bill, which—Parliament willing—will reach the statute book. We have all come a long way and we should reflect on that. Indeed, Elaine Murray and Wendy Alexander have done so. I am pleased that the minister accepts many of the committee's recommendations, and perhaps the committee will be able to take things a little further to strengthen the bill at stage 2 with Executive support. The bill should probably be known as the Gaelic board bill, because it is more about the facilitation of plans to preserve and develop Gaelic than about a comprehensive rights-based approach to the use and promotion of Gaelic. That distinction was made time and again by witnesses, who were critical of the lack of equal rights for the language, including the lack of rights to education and the lack of rights to speak Gaelic in court. The fragility of the language and the need for immediate action to protect and develop it cannot be overstated. Should we focus on intensive care or rehabilitation into the wider community that is Scotland? The committee was unanimous that it wanted both. The committee notes that sections 3(3) and 3(5) refer to "the extent to which the Gaelic language is used". That wording is critical, as the committee believes that it focuses simply on preservation of the current situation, rather than emphasising the equal importance of the future development of the Gaelic language. We ask the Executive to consider amendments that would allow us to emphasise the need to take into consideration the potential for development of the language as well as the existing extent of use. We return to the debate about official status, secure status, equal status and equal validity. The committee notes that the term "equal status" implies that Gaelic and English must be equally available. Unfortunately, but realistically, the minister is concerned that he could not deliver that in practice. In contrast, "equal validity" seems to indicate that both languages are equally valid when and where they are used. John Farquhar Munro emphasised that there needs to be equal status when the languages are used in the delivery of public services, and we must come back to that point at stage 2.  The committee recommends that the Scottish Executive should consider an amendment to place a duty on the bòrd in relation to progress on Gaelic and the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. That point was made by my colleague Tricia Marwick. The central issue of the debate must be Gaelic education. We have moved on considerably from the first draft of the bill, but we must remember that there are only 284 secondary school pupils in Gaelic-medium education. That figure represents a sevenfold drop off from the numbers in Gaelic-medium primary education. Only 60 teachers teach in Gaelic-medium education—consider their age profile and the restrictions on choice of subjects for pupils. The committee recognises that education policy is essential in determining the success of preserving and promoting Gaelic, to the extent that it recommends, at my suggestion, that the Executive must establish and execute a national strategy for the delivery of Gaelic education. The national action plan that was announced today is a step in the right direction, but we may need to reflect on the statutory responsibility at stage 2. The SNP supports a right to Gaelic-medium education for primary children in the first instance where there is sufficient demand. The long title confines the bill—in effect the Bòrd na Gàidhlig bill—to the operation of the bòrd, but I think that there is room in the scope of the bill to find some way of locking in, in a double lock, the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000 and the responsibilities of the bòrd. I support Highland Council's concerns and its perspective that we must keep responsibility for Gaelic education with the Scottish Executive, Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education and local authorities rather than give it to the bòrd, but the bòrd's advisory role must be strengthened. Gaelic education must not be ghettoised; it must be mainstreamed in the operation and delivery of authorities that are responsible for education.

I acknowledge Robert Brown's point. That matter was subject to great debate in the committee, because there is an issue about where that right to education can come from. It is limited within the scope of the bill, but the duty and  responsibility for councils to provide Gaelic-medium education must not and should not be ignored. I say to Ted Brocklebank that the bill is not about force-feeding Gaelic to everybody in the country.

No. I am short of time. Rather, the bill is about having plans for local authorities to ensure that, when they are ready and able to, they provide Gaelic education not only for people who want Gaelic-medium education but importantly—this has not been mentioned in the debate so far—for those who want to learn Gaelic as a second language. Gaelic-medium education on its own will not preserve and promote the language, but the teaching of Gaelic as a second language will. I raise concerns about some of the matters that are absent from the bill. It is ironic that although the two most important areas for the survival and development of Gaelic are education policy and broadcasting, for obvious reasons neither is central to the bill. I recognise the minister's point about workshops with Whitehall. That sounds like an interesting concept to enable progress to be made with the UK bodies and we look forward to hearing more about those workshops. The point in the Welsh act about third parties to which any public bodies contract out being liable to be responsible for delivery is important. In a world that is getting increasingly smaller and in which global brands and communication dominate, our cultural differences must be celebrated, held dear and promoted. Gaelic language is both precious and special. Our duty as stewards of our country and its languages is to support and promote Gaelic and to ensure that success, however perilous it is, is realised. The bill is an important step in the right direction. The Parliament must grasp the opportunity, but the bill will not and must not be the last word on Gaelic in this Parliament.

I thank the minister for displaying good faith in his statement and by taking on the leadership of the national committee. However, does he still think that £15 million is a sufficient amount of funding for all local authorities? Secondly, how will the strategy be implemented in our schools? After all, the Minister for Education and Young People has indicated that all schools are to become community schools, with access to health and social services. What role would HMIE play in carrying out joint inspections with social work and health? How will the Minister for Health and Community Care ensure that local authorities provide all pupils with equal access to services and who will judge whether any similar information on such services should be used to ensure that access?

I should declare interests; I am a member of the committee of the Scottish Parliament Burns club number 1, as we are now called and I was brought up in Alloway. I say to John Scott that, in this east-coast MSP, he has an ally in his attempt to repatriate the works of Burns to Ayrshire. He has my support in that effort. I congratulate Adam Ingram on bringing the debate to Parliament. The number of members who have stayed behind for the debate is testament to the strength of feeling across the parties. We have probably had debates to celebrate the work of Burns in January every year, but this is the first time we have had a responsibility to do something to ensure that his heritage is promoted. We can do that by ensuring  that the Robert Burns national heritage park has the support that it needs. I regard Burns as a lens through which we see Scotland. He gives us a window on the past and he gives us values as a touchstone for the present, but he also gives us an opportunity for growing our future. We need to make sure that we bring together the cultural strands, the historic strands and the economic strands to make the most of that valuable heritage. Given the terms of the motion, the debate is about stewardship. Burns's heritage is not just for Scotland or for those of us from Ayrshire who are passionate about and proud of him. Burns's work is world heritage, and our duty in protecting and promoting Burns involves stewardship of that heritage. Adam Ingram made the point that people from all over the world make pilgrimages to Ayrshire. When I was a child, I caught my bus to school from outside Burns's cottage and I saw at first hand the attendance there of people from all around the world who were deeply passionate about Burns. We must also represent their concerns. I reflect on the point that Donald Gorrie made about films. How many films do we know of that include the song "Auld Lang Syne"? I am reminded of "When Harry Met Sally" because the song is sung at the end of that film, although the film is probably also remembered for other parts. There are far more statues and monuments to Burns than to any other figure in world history, and if the world knew the position that we face as far as his heritage is concerned, it would be appalled. For that reason, we should look to see what can be done. On protection of Burns's work, I stress that it is not just his songs and poetry that contribute so much to our heritage, but his written documents and manuscripts. I finish on the opportunity for the future. Burns is exciting and his work attracts enthusiasm in Scotland and all around the world. If we can get our act together to address the difficult issues of local and national stewardship, we will do Scotland proud and make sure that the Scottish Parliament does what the people expect it to do: to speak up for and stand up for Scotland.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive has any plans to make tackling indiscipline a sixth national priority in education. (S2F-1365)

The First Minister should understand that priority 2 in education also includes the continuing professional development of teachers and school buildings. Whether indiscipline is lumped in with those or is a separate, sixth national priority, it is still one of the biggest barriers to teaching and learning in Scotland. That being the case, is it not right and proper that the Parliament should scrutinise the Executive's policies and progress? Why then has the Executive moved from producing an annual survey of indiscipline in Scotland to producing one every three years? What does the First Minister have to hide?

rose—

The minister argues that the issues that are raised by the introduction of variable top-up fees down south need to be addressed in Scotland. However, his argument has been limited to medical students. If the introduction of top-up fees down south will cause a problem of cross-border flows, why does the minister not see the logic of addressing the issue in total? Why is the Executive focusing solely on medical students, when it could be argued that there will be a problem of cross-border flows in all subjects?

Jamie Stone says that legislative buses do not always come along when we might want them to, but I suggest that the problem is that we have not even seen the report of the working party on cross-border flows and that, if it is decided that that proposal should be pursued, it would be far more appropriate to do so in a separate piece of legislation than it would be to hijack the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Bill.

Donald Gorrie raised an important point, which is of concern. All that it would need for a future Government to introduce top-up fees for Scottish students—variable by course—is an affirmative instrument. That is not satisfactory as it does not involve a three-month consultation or proper legislative process.

The problem of students from the University of St Andrews having to go to Manchester that Brian Monteith identified is important. I understand that that situation has been addressed and that arrangements are in place whereby those students can take up positions that are offered by Lothian NHS Board. That is an example of the alternatives that should be provided to ensure that we keep more doctors—particularly junior doctors—and medical students in Scotland. That is the key issue and the policy objective. Let us have policy answers that meet that objective and do not interfere with the higher education system.

I congratulate the minister on taking steps to make what was originally a poor and misguided bill into one that is now, for the most part, fit for purpose. I say "for the most part" because a section that was introduced in the second draft of the bill is an exceptional problem and is completely unacceptable. I am glad that the minister took steps to remove from the bill STEPs—that awful policy development of specified tertiary education providers. "STEPs"—the shortest-lived acronym in the history of public policy—has been binned. The term "STEPs" had a shorter shelf-life than the pop group of the same name; it has been disbanded and is busted. The lesson of the bill, which the Enterprise and Culture Committee described quite generously, is that starting with a particularly bad bill and making a mess of it can mean that stakeholders redraft the bill into something acceptable. Members can call that a success of the parliamentary consultation process if they want. I judge it to be a triumph of the higher and further education sectors over the adversity of an initially problematic bill.

If the member listened to me, she would know that the position could be interpreted in two ways. Starting with something extremely bad allows that to be redrafted to make sense. All parties acknowledge considerable movement from the draft bill to the bill as introduced.  The minister needs to think seriously about section 8. In essence, the bill concerns the administrative functions and merger of the two funding bodies, which are uncontroversial. The committee produced a focused and comprehensive report that contains key recommendations about parity of treatment—I listened to the minister's points on that—in relation to academic freedom; the division of competencies, an important matter to which I am sure that we will return at stage 2; additional support needs; and who is eligible to chair the governing bodies. I have no problem with the general principles in relation to merging the funding councils. However, the SNP has a serious problem with the sudden insertion, under a tenuous association, of powers to enable the minister to introduce additional top-up fees that are variable by course. Section 8 is a cuckoo in the nest of an otherwise reasonable bill. The minister who said that tuition fees were non-negotiable is playing an active part in introducing legislation that will allow the charging of top-up fees that are variable by course. The minister's Labour colleagues were quite keen on tuition fees in 1999 when he said that the issue was non-negotiable and they are using him to produce primary legislation for any future move to charge top-up fees across the board. Parliament deserves to be told about that. By presenting section 8 in such a form, the minister is auditioning for the part of minister for top-up fees. Placing the section in the bill is out of order. If its inclusion is covered by the bill's "connected purposes", that connection is by a tenuous string; the provision is certainly not central to the general principles of the bill. Top-up fees are wrong in principle and in practice.

I hope that Brian Adam will have the opportunity to speak in the debate. He is right to say that we must address the problem of medical students in Scotland—I acknowledge that. We must increase the number and percentage of Scottish students, but if we want to tackle a health policy and get more doctors to stay and  work in Scotland, the issue is not the initial stage of decision making. We want to keep doctors who are at the senior house officer stage, when they are looking to move away. We want to increase the total number of medical students by 100, and to increase and improve access and the decisions that universities make about who they take and when they take them. The issue of wider access must certainly be addressed, particularly by the University of Edinburgh and the University of St Andrews. Pricing poorer English students out of medicine in Scotland is not the right way forward. Top-up fees are wrong in principle and in practice. Access to education should be based not on ability to pay, but on ability to learn. If it is unamended, the bill will provide the primary legislative mechanism with which to introduce the principle of having additional top-up fees that are variable by course in Scottish universities.

I want to move on. Mr Wallace confirmed to me during an Enterprise and Culture Committee meeting that we are talking about the introduction of a top-up fee. He said: "The same fee would apply to everyone".—[ Official Report , Enterprise and Culture Committee , 16 November 2004; c 1271.] The minister has made commitments, on behalf of the Administration, for Scotland-domiciled students, but including a provision in the bill that will allow an open season later for another Administration is problematic. The bill provides the legal gateway to top-up fees for any course for any student in Scotland—that is not in dispute. The minister can bluster and protest until the cows come home, but the proof of the bill's real intention is there in black and white in its text and in the policy memorandum, paragraph 35 of which states: "subsections (5)-(10) outline the way in which Ministers can use a condition of grant to set maximum fee levels ... On 24 June 2004, the Deputy First Minister made a statement to Parliament, outlining the Executive's policy to increase fee levels in order to control demand for places in the Scottish HE system from English/Welsh/Northern Irish students once variable fees are introduced in England and Wales. This plan also raises the possibility that in specific areas such as medicine, where demand is especially high, fees could be raised to a higher level again." We must determine what is in the bill and what is in the policy memorandum. What is in black and white leaves open a legal opportunity to have top-up fees that are variable by course throughout Scotland. The purpose, as stated in the policy memorandum, is to increase fee levels to deter  cross-border flows in general, with the possibility that fees could be raised again to a higher level. That has been decided and legislated on before the working group that the Executive established on potential cross-border flows has reported publicly. The minister is responsible for the content of section 8 and the policy memorandum. The NUS, the AUT and the British Medical Association have all expressed concerns about the section. Why, therefore, is it included in the bill? The Executive has made a smokescreen argument about justification for English medical students. We must blow that argument away, because it is wrong in practice. If the minister wants to tackle the problem of there being too few doctors as a result of bad workforce planning by the Government, that issue should be addressed properly as a matter of health policy and not used as a Trojan horse to ensure that there is a legal opportunity for top-up fees in the future. We must increase the total number of medical students and the percentage of Scottish students within that total, as they are more likely to stay, but there are better ways of achieving such policy objectives. My colleague Shona Robison has set out positive and constructive proposals. There should be 100 extra medical student places. Admissions policies should be addressed, taking into account wider access factors. There should be a widening of access generally, and Scottish pupils should be allowed and encouraged to take five highers at one sitting if that is a requirement of the admissions process. There should be a fast-track graduate entry programme. There should be more generalists, rural medicine faculties, and exit interviews should be held at different stages of people's careers in order to influence decisions that are made at the SHO stage in particular. We urge the minister to examine the possibility of contractual golden handcuffs, rather than trying simply to price English students out of the system. If we train 14 per cent of Britain's doctors, why do we not try to keep more of them here, particularly when they reach 27, 28 or 29? That is the fresh talent that we should have in this country.

It is important to ensure that those who are trained in Scotland and whose training is paid for by the taxpayer should have the opportunity to contribute to the national health service in Scotland. I am saying that, in principle, golden handcuffs at the latter stages of training  are far better than a policy that introduces top-up fees at the start.

I am conscious of time and must move on. It is already more expensive for English medical students to study in Scotland, but that does not deter them from doing so. They come for the quality of teaching.

The minister and I know the reality of the situation. We are trying to address the issue of students who train in Scottish universities, benefit from that training and then go off to private practices, particularly in England, where there is a far more active private practice situation. That is where the real problem lies, and it is far better to face up to that than to make spurious points about our contribution to the wider world. We train more medical students than we keep. We must ensure that we keep them for the right reasons. If people want to contribute to the wider world—I absolutely support that—there is no way that the SNP would put barriers in their way. It has been established in answers to parliamentary questions by Bristow Muldoon, David Davidson and Richard Lochhead that the issue that we must address comes later in the medical graduate's life. If we want to recruit and retain more doctors for the Scottish health service, there are better ways of doing so than what has been proposed. Not only is the concept of top-up fees wrong in principle, but top-up fees are wrong in practice. The reasons for the Executive wanting to apply such fees, and the way in which it wants to do so, are seriously flawed, and the bill will be seriously flawed unless the minister commits himself to amending it and addressing the serious concerns that have been expressed. As the committee report states, a minister's verbal assurances in the chamber can be presented in a court if the act is challenged, but in the final instance—as the legal officers acknowledged in evidence to the Enterprise and Culture Committee—it is the wording in the bill and the wording of the act as  agreed by the Parliament that count. If Jim Wallace does not want to go down in the annals as the minister for top-up fees, he must amend the bill. I urge him to amend it accordingly.

Does Mr Wallace acknowledge that it is the students themselves—through the National Union of Students—who have been most vocal in their opposition to section 8 of the bill and that the Government has not persuaded them that there is no cost for university study? Students know that they will have to pay fees, but at the back end of the course, not the front end. That is not helpful.

I, too, congratulate Cathie Craigie and Whitelees Primary School, which must be a special school to be the 100 th school in Scotland to be awarded a green flag, although I feel sorry for the schools that were 99 th and 101 st . A striking feature of schools that are involved in the eco-schools initiative is the sheer enthusiasm and energy that one feels from the pupils and teachers. The initiative has captured the imagination of schools throughout Scotland. The sheer momentum and pace of development, which have been reflected in a number of speeches, testify to that. I want to put to the minister the opportunities from an educational point of view in particular. Obviously, the eco-schools initiative is a practical example of what the national priorities are in relation to lifelong learning and active citizenship. The whole-school approach and the ethos approach are important and the democracy in pupils' councils and the eco-schools committee embodies active citizenship at an early stage. The auditing of the local environment, practical and effective links with local councils and links with other organisations are obviously important. Some 50 per cent of schools in West Lothian are involved. Eighteen schools have received a bronze award, 15 schools have received a silver award and five schools have received green flag status. One thing that strikes me about the pupils' democratic involvement in deciding the priorities for their schools is the understanding that sustainability and environmental protection are ultimately about power and decisions. They are about local powers and decisions in schools, but they also reflect the global responsibilities that all of us have. It is a matter of learning from experience and what one does rather than simply what one says. The eco-schools programme is a classic example of how principles can be infused through the ethos, management and activities of a school rather than through things being taught and learned in the classroom. When I have spoken to eco-schools, their message has been that they want to progress and do more. With 100 schools having received green flag status, schools are now looking to emulate the school to which Iain Smith referred. Lowport Primary School, which achieved green flag status recently, contacted me about what it would like to ask of the minister, who might be able to help in his summing up. The school is keen for us to take a national perspective on eco-schools and to put in place a national eco-schools  co-ordinator. Its concern is that although local authorities have appointed co-ordinators in their local areas, the designated officer already has a large remit in other areas of education and the environment. The school wants to ensure that there is some national co-ordination as well. Typically, the children want to know what the next step is and what they can do next. Having achieved green flag status, they are keen to see future development of the programme so that they can go beyond that. As somebody who is related to an eco-schools committee member, I think that the perspective that they bring to the home environment is very important. Perhaps we should look at the budgets for environmental sustainability on a national level and think about the most effective way of reaching the people who make decisions about recycling in the home. If we really want to get Scotland into recycling mode to meet the targets that we have set, what more effective way could there be of doing that than by giving eco-schools the momentum, power and resources that they need? They seem to have achieved more in the past few years than many programmes in the environmental sector have achieved in a long time. There is much educational as well as environmental value to the programme and I congratulate Cathie Craigie on bringing the debate to the chamber.

Does the minister acknowledge the need for a step change in the number of teachers who are recruited and trained? Is he aware that Aberdeen City Council education authority is writing to parents of pupils at Northfield Academy and Kincorth Academy to tell them that their children might have to be withdrawn from those schools because of a lack of teachers over a sustained period? The minister mentioned flexibility. Will he guarantee that, in his struggle to ensure that there is a sufficient number of teachers in Aberdeen and throughout Scotland to teach our pupils and to teach them well, he will not reduce the standards that prospective teachers must meet?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I am sure that the chamber will want to express its concern about the well-being of the orphans of Indonesia and Sri Lanka and their vulnerability to malevolent people who seek to transport them for the purposes of exploitation and abuse. The young are the most vulnerable during any time of crisis and we must use whatever influence we have to ensure that the well-being of children is placed high on the agenda of the support mechanisms that are being established in that disaster area.  The crises that make children the most vulnerable group might emerge from man-made or, as we have seen, natural disasters. However, many children in this country are placed in such vulnerable positions because of a social crisis in which endemic poverty in communities leaves them open to continual risk. As Robert Brown has pointed out, the impact of drug abuse in deprived communities and the sheer scale of the number of children in homes that have drug-misusing parents are staggering, and we must reflect on and take action to deal with the matter. The committee's report arises from its specific scrutiny of "It's everyone's job to make sure I'm alright" in the light of certain recent and very sad cases. The Executive's document was substantive, provided an important snapshot of the state of children's care, welfare and protection needs at the time and made many major policy commitments; however, I am concerned about whether the Executive's clear cross-departmental commitment to children has the same priority as it had in the early post-1999 Administration. That said, I acknowledge the minister's personal commitment to the matter. If the committee's report has a message, it is that ministers in other departments must not lose sight of that commitment. Child protection must always be at the forefront of our political agenda and, although progress has been made, we still need to push things forward. The impetus to do so might come from the experience—and unintended consequences—of the current disclosure arrangements, which must make us think more broadly about how we support those who work with children while protecting children from people who seek to exploit them. The recent emergence of historic institutional child abuse might have policy implications. Moreover, the potential for retrospective checks under the Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003, in which one in eight of all Scots might require disclosure checks, should provoke a debate about the relationship between bureaucracy and the information system as a means of closing legal loopholes. Our response to the risks faced by organisations that help individuals must be proportionate. However, even with the best will in the world, the fact that there are disclosure checks on people who work with children does not mean that children are not at risk. We must not lose sight of the fact that parental abuse is a major concern, particularly when we compare the incidence of such abuse with the incidence of abuse by strangers. The neglect and abuse that too many children face are the result of adult behaviour and action, not of bureaucracy or the lack of it. Because we must tackle not just the results of abuse and neglect, but their root cause, I draw the  minister's attention to recommendation 9 of the committee's report, which mentions developing children's services plans in line with the national priorities set out in "Building a Better Scotland". We must also question the current use of the term "protection of children", which seems to refer more often to crisis intervention after an event than to protecting children from the risk of something happening in the first place. For example, the number of children at risk without a designated social worker is a continuing disgrace. A strong theme of any approach to this matter must be our collective attitude in our personal and working lives towards assessing and dealing with the risk to the children around us. Another strong message in the committee report is that momentum must not be lost. In that respect, I welcome the minister's statements on child protection committees. I also believe that agencies on the ground have made considerable steps towards improving working practices and carrying out the Executive's recommendations. However, there are some shortcomings. In particular, recommendation 15 highlights the lack of linked computer-based information systems to include a single assessment, planning and review report framework. We must return to that issue. In November, Sarah Boyack hosted a meeting with health, social work and education officials from Edinburgh, who talked to us about their experience of implementing changes since the O'Brien report. The challenges that they drew to our attention included the problem of information technology, round 3 of the modernising government proposals and the release of funds being on hold. They came back again to the sharing of information and to issues of confidentiality and a shared understanding of what should and should not be confidential. The lack of a validated risk-assessment tool, the need for adequate resources and the issue of substance abuse also came up again. The national issue that they referred to us for consideration is resourcing and the need for long-term, rather than short-term, resourcing. Where provision is made for initiatives that require a lot of recruits, the emphasis is on youth justice issues and recruitment of and career progression for social workers in that field, while care and protection, which could prevent youth offending in later life, is perhaps put on the back burner. That is something that we have to address, and the City of Edinburgh Council has made major strides in recruiting social workers for care and protection, which is to be commended. I conclude by mentioning a number of themes. We need a public debate about risk. Risk is not about bureaucracy and management systems. Risk is about people's behaviours and about  adults' behaviours towards children, and we should not lose sight of those issues. The Executive's policy must be driven forward and it should not be hampered or impeded by lack of cross-departmental support within the Executive. We also need to address some of the issues on the youth offending agenda. We must return again and again to the issue of child protection. The policy momentum must not be lost. We owe it to the children of Scotland and to the many people who, in their professional and personal lives, give so much in difficult circumstances to support children. I pay tribute to those people.

Is the minister aware of a parliamentary answer that I received, which said that the schools fund that he mentioned to Maureen Macmillan was available in capital plans for PPP projects only? Will he reflect on that and his answer to Maureen Macmillan? Will he also confirm that the £100 million that is currently available to be spent on privatisation and profiteering through PPP projects would build 10 primary schools, cash on delivery? Does he agree that that argues the case that real value for money lies in using public money to build public schools?

The Protection of Children (Scotland) Act 2003 was intended to close an information loophole that paedophiles could exploit. We acknowledge and welcome the 11 th hour deferment of implementation of certain aspects of the act. However, will the First Minister ensure that his officials learn the lessons of the past 22 months and listen to volunteer organisations? Unlike his Minister for Education and Young People, is the First Minister prepared to review the act in the light of the unintended consequences for the voluntary sector? In particular, will he ensure that organisations that provide volunteer experience for young people are not deterred, so that we can ensure that volunteering and active citizenship help to develop modern Scotland?

We have just passed a bill about emergency workers. Nurses who used to work in the emergency surgery unit at St John's hospital in Livingston and who now have to travel to Edinburgh because of the health policy of centralisation will have to pay the price if the vote goes in favour of tolls. The impact on people who travel from West Lothian will be immense. Many of those people are low-paid workers who  live in West Lothian because they cannot afford the house prices in Edinburgh. They staff the Edinburgh economy and they have a right to have their views taken into account. It is wrong for politicians to say that this debate is a smokescreen for those who are against the congestion charging scheme. We will return to the issue of local government and referendums again and again. David McLetchie's speech was measured, and the minister must take back to the Cabinet the fact that we will face the issue again and that we will have to consider it properly and fairly. Members should remember that the wording on the ballot paper was decided by one vote. One vote can make all the difference, which is why referendums have to be fair and have to be seen to be fair. Even those who support the scheme would feel that their case was strengthened if a fair referendum was held. The impact of congestion charging will not be trivial. The scheme will undoubtedly have a major impact on low-paid workers and it will affect the Edinburgh economy. The City of Edinburgh Council cannot be seen in isolation on this issue. I agree with Susan Deacon that we must argue the case about why Edinburgh is not only central to the region, but central to the Scottish economy. We cannot have the situation that has gone on for decades, whereby every time that a scheme is proposed, it disappears. There must be consensus that this is about not party-political point scoring, but driving the local and national economies. However, we have a problem because people are disengaged from politics. They see a major decision being taken even though there are questions about the referendum that should not have needed to be asked. People would take the issue far more seriously if they had respect for the decision-making process. Last year, the Scottish Executive explained the need for fair treatment of those who would have to pay the charge and those who would benefit from any improvements. I appeal to the minister to acknowledge—I see that he is returning to his seat—that that fair treatment should not just be about the scheme; it should also apply to the decision-making process. The Parliament can make a useful contribution to the debate. We cannot put off considering the issues any longer. The issues of congestion charging and revenue raising should be separated. The aim is to reduce the congestion level in Edinburgh to that which exists in the summer holidays. I do not want West Lothian commuters to have to pay for the Edinburgh school run. Let us be a bit more imaginative. Let us try to build consensus and drive Edinburgh and Scotland forward.

Will the minister give way?

For many who are involved with redress for victims and survivors of institutional abuse, the journey to this day in Parliament to hear the words that were spoken by the First Minister and the commitments that the minister has just given has been long and often dark. I pay tribute to the petitioners for bringing forward their case not only on their own behalf, but on behalf of the silent souls who will watch and wait to see whether Parliament listens, learns, respects and acts. I mean those silent souls whom none of us yet knows, but who may be given the courage to come forward and tell their stories in the pursuit of peace in their lives. However, there can be no peace until there is justice and I pay tribute to the perseverance and patience of the petitioners in pursuing their case. The petition had two aims: to achieve an apology and a public inquiry. I, too, welcome the First Minister's apology. It should not have been difficult because it was the right thing to do; however, it has been difficult. That part of justice that the survivors sought has been achieved today and demand for their other aim of establishing a public inquiry has gained cross-party support. As someone who supports such an inquiry, I listened with interest to what the minister said. His proposals need hard examination concerning the status of the reporter, what teeth the reporter will have, what scope the inquiry will have, what redress the survivors will have and—importantly—what recourse to law and justice they will have as a result. In this instance, I welcome the comments that were made about lifting the 1964 time bar, but I echo Marilyn Livingstone's question about the timescale for implementation of the change.  We need to pursue specific questions. Will successful pursuance of one case—established in the report—enable other cases to be pursued? Will the public interest be taken to mean that one successful pursuit of a case will negate the need for pursuing others? I welcome the information commissioner's role and want to know what powers he will have, particularly in respect of organisations that are outwith the state's statutory responsibility. I also want to know about the ability to pursue subsequent legal cases and what role the survivors will have in the support and counselling that has been announced. A reporter, however, is not a public inquiry. Until and unless those questions can be answered to the survivors' satisfaction—we all need to hear their response to the minister's announcement—it may be too early to give up the aim of there being a public inquiry. If we as a Parliament, after listening to the survivors, still want to pursue a public inquiry, it will possible to bring the issue back to Parliament. I will explain why a public inquiry is desirable. I will not use my words but those of a survivor who contacted me when he knew that the debate was being held. He wrote: "I am a 66-year-old man living in Scotland who, as a child, was subjected to ten years of physical abuse from the nuns and priests in catholic care homes in Ireland. I have recently finished a 3-year long claim for compensation from the Residential Institutions Redress Board set up by the Irish Government to make good the suffering that I and other children experienced. The Irish Redress Scheme allowed me to tell a story that I never thought I would be able to tell. More importantly, the scheme allowed for my story to be believed. For 50 years, I have been unable to express, not even to my family, the hurt and pain that I suffered day on day for 10 years but now I can close the chapter on that period of my life. While I will never forget or forgive those who abused me, I am more at peace with myself. I urge all MSPs to listen to the Scottish survivors of institutional child abuse and support the petition being put to you today. By agreeing to an inquiry, do not think you will be re-opening the old wounds of survivors, believe rather that you will be actively helping these old wounds to heal. I call on you all to show the same courage of the Irish Government and put pressure on the Scottish Executive to tackle this issue so that survivors of abuse in Scotland are given an outlet for the years of abuse from those who they thought they could trust." It has been a long and dark journey for many of the petitioners. This debate is only part of that journey—a staging post. When Parliament was established, it was said that it would shine a light into the parts of Scotland that had been ignored for too long, but the problem with shining lights into awkward places is that we may not like what we find. We should be under no illusion: the Executive was forced to respond to the issue by dint of the Public Petitions Committee's bringing the debate to the chamber. I, too, pay tribute to the  committee's doggedness in doing that. It has shown that, with the strength of the whole Parliament at its shoulder, it can force changes that could be life-changing for many people. The minister will be aware that I first pursued the subject of the First Minister's announcement in May 2002, when I asked Mr McConnell for assistance in securing support for compensation for former pupils of one institution. I reminded the minister's office about that in September 2003 and I reminded the minister using parliamentary questions in October and December 2003. I eventually received a response in July 2004. Why is that relevant or important? It is because today we heard announcements and are being asked to trust that they will be delivered on successfully by the same Administration that failed to respond promptly to me over the past 18 months. We are right to be cautious rather than enthusiastic, we are right to scrutinise rather than simply to embrace and we are right to monitor rather than to congratulate. The minister must know that if he pursues the issues with vigour and intent he will have the firm backing and support of Parliament. He knows that Parliament keeps returning to child protection. I hope that scrutiny of the Education Committee's report on its recent child protection inquiry will shed light on current issues around multi-agency inspection. Scotland is slowly emerging from a time when the culture was that children should be seen but not heard. We have a long way to go, but this debate is part of the process. The debate is about the story of the stolen childhood of too many of yesterday's children. We do not know the numbers or the sheer scale of what might lie beneath the petition, but Scotland must own up to its past if it is to face the future with confidence. The debate is only a staging post, but it is important not just for survivors but for Parliament as an institution. We would take an important step in our reborn democracy if we as a nation were prepared to open up the past to scrutiny, to face the consequences, to tell the stories and, by telling those stories, to help the survivors to find the peace and justice that they so desperately need.

I see that we have another loyal Labour back bencher. There is cross-party support for a number of measures in the programme, but the programme will rely on the professionalism, enthusiasm and good will of teachers if it is to be implemented successfully. Bearing in mind the fact that there is disquiet about the roll-out of the McCrone agreement by some local authorities, does the minister accept the constructive suggestion that we need to review the roll-out and implementation of McCrone if some of the measures in the programme are to be implemented successfully?

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive intends to review the partnership agreement commitment on class sizes. (S2F-1234)

I welcome the fact that the Government has taken up the Scottish National Party's agenda on class sizes, just as Lothian  NHS Board has taken up SNP proposals for improvements to services in West Lothian, although Labour members have made not a single point about the options and we still do not have accident, emergency trauma, orthopaedics and emergency surgery—

Is it not the case that the Executive knew that it would never be able to meet its pledges on class sizes and that it would have to increase intakes for teacher training in English and mathematics by 100 per cent to do so? Will the First Minister admit that those pledges represent a betrayal of the trust of parents and pupils in Scotland? Will he admit that he knew from the start that the pledges on class sizes would be broken?

I realise that we need flexibility but, in my recent experience, many young women have real problems with the latching-on process. That might not be possible until the milk comes in, which might happen several days after a mother has been discharged, if she has been discharged within a few hours. There is an issue about early discharge, which Jean Turner also raised.

There are breastfeeding facilities in this building. I encourage Conservative members to inspect them as part of their research. The point that I was making is that a workplace nursery is much more conducive than a visitors creche to continuing breastfeeding.

I pay tribute to Elaine Smith for introducing the bill and, more important, for presenting the bill and arguing the case in a way that has persuaded people who might have been reluctant to support the bill at the start of the process. That is a tribute, because any member can progress a bill on proposals that have people's initial support, but the test is to persuade people during the process. During the debate on the stage 3 amendments, I talked about the compromises that many people have made to make the process work. I should declare an active interest as a current breastfeeding mum of a five-month-old baby—don't wrinkle your nose, Deputy Presiding Officer. That is the point; we must address attitudes. As a breastfeeding mother, I know that my child is at less risk of gastrointestinal infections, respiratory infections, urinary tract infections, ear infections, allergic diseases, eczema, asthma, wheezing and insulin-dependent diabetes. I also know that I am at less risk of breast cancer, ovarian cancer, hip fractures and bone-density problems. I say to anyone who reports the debate that if they think that the issue is frivolous and should not be addressed by the Parliament, they should consider those statements. This is a serious issue. The solutions for public health are not necessarily easy. We have to consider whether to pass laws that lay us open to accusations of a nanny-state approach. We must also consider whether law can lead public opinion. Elaine Smith has demonstrated that the progress of legislation can lead and persuade public opinion, which is an important point. I want to talk about life-changing experiences. Not only did I have a baby earlier this year, but I passed a significant birthday. A few weeks after the birth of my baby and after my birthday—[ Interruption. ] It was my 21 st birthday. A few weeks after that, I was mightily surprised to be asked to take part in a health promotion exercise for breastfeeding awareness. I was to star in a calendar. Before members start anything, I explain that I am talking about an alternative calendar, which will be launched at Livingston Football Club on 2 December. It shows ordinary women from West Lothian—including me—breastfeeding their children in ordinary situations. The best picture was taken at the club and shows rows and rows of people, including mothers and babies, all of whom are dressed in Livingston colours. The calendar shows that breastfeeding is natural and I commend it to members and the minister as a  Christmas present. I took part in the promotion and was pleased to do so. We should be relaxed about the issue—that is the whole point; we should not be uptight. That is where Carolyn Leckie misses the point—by getting so uptight. Breastfeeding is normal and natural. What can we do to make a difference? How can we change perceptions? I have said before that I would prefer it if the legislation had been on the basis of antidiscrimination. The Queensland example is a good example of that, but we are not in that situation. I commend the committee for looking into the issue of criminal legislation and addressing it very seriously. We have to address workplace situations. I would say to the Deputy Presiding Officer that continued breastfeeding in this place would be enhanced if, rather than the visitors' crèche, we had a workplace nursery. That might allow staff and MSPs to continue breastfeeding for longer than they would continue otherwise. [ Applause. ] I refer the minister to section 4 on the promotion and support of breastfeeding. The UNICEF report was in July. One of the most serious issues that we will have to address—and I hope that the minister will do so—is the minister's powers under section 4. The 70 per cent of women who do not breastfeed after six weeks take that decision in the first few hours. Women are not being allowed to stay in hospital, with the support of midwives, in the early days after the birth of their child. They are not getting the medical provision that they need to continue breastfeeding. I appeal to the minister to examine the rates at which women are discharged from hospitals, because continued support by breastfeeding-supporting midwives would make a crucial difference. Elaine Smith has done a marvellous job. She has persuaded people and that is the important thing. I hope that, in the days and years to come, we will have health ministers reporting that Scotland is leading the way rather than falling behind. Radical and considered measures are required and Elaine Smith should be congratulated on her proposals.

I, too, remind members that we are at stage 3. The Parliament is a law-making place, so the decisions that we take when making laws must stand up in court. Carolyn Leckie has missed the point, as have the Conservatives in opposing the bill in toto. In many times and in many places, politics and legislation must be about compromise. It is striking that in the bill and in her response to the amendments in committee, the member in charge of the bill took a responsible approach based on compromise, to ensure that we take the country with us. We cannot have arguments such as those made by Carolyn Leckie, which divide people and distract them from the main point about what is needed. I would have preferred us to take a different route: a position based on rights and antidiscrimination, such as was taken by Queensland in Australia. Had we done that, there would have been no need for Carolyn Leckie's amendments. We cannot take such an approach, because the Parliament does not have the powers to pursue it. Members are sighing, but this is a serious point. The issue is the powers of the Parliament. Because we are not taking the rights-based approach in the bill, we are required to make use of the criminal law, as Mike Rumbles pointed out. In matters of criminal law, it is necessary to be exact, because a criminal case could be pursued. That is the intellectual argument that Carolyn Leckie will have to address when she sums up. At stage 3, members must be responsible in the arguments that they make and must address the points at issue. There is a strong argument for rejecting the amendments and for accepting that, as a compromise position, it is right that the Parliament should take a view on the age of children who are covered by the bill. In committee Kate Maclean made the important point that at the age of two a child is able to understand that it can be fed later. This is a responsible piece of legislation.  Very few women breastfeed beyond six weeks. Even fewer women breastfeed beyond two years. The bill is for the 80 per cent or more of women—working-class women—in West Lothian who do not breastfeed at all after six weeks. Let us take a responsible position, follow Elaine Smith's lead and reject the amendments.

I am interested in the First Minister's response to Dr Murray, which offers some reassurance to those who are seriously concerned about the cuts in highers and the attack on so many higher subjects. Is he aware that one of the concerns that people have is  the consequences that those cuts would have for universities in particular? On modern languages, does he acknowledge not only that we need a flexible, modern curriculum, but that we must ensure that we equip our young people to contribute to the world of work and trade in the years ahead and that modern languages in particular must be protected?

Poverty is not a reserved matter. There are no legal or constitutional boundaries on the pain and the anger of poor pensioners. We cannot have the frustrating situation in which the job of the Scottish Parliament is to ameliorate the consequences of poverty without having the powers to tackle the root causes of that poverty. We will return to that issue time and again. The Scottish National Party's proposal is a positive contribution to the debate. This is a real debate. This Parliament should be debating real issues and there is nothing more real than one of the biggest debates in the country, which is on the pensions crisis. We should treat the debate seriously. We must address two issues. One relates to the problems of pensioners at present and the other relates to the pending pensions crisis. We have a debt generation of people in their 30s and 40s and, unless we sort out that crisis, people down the line will increasingly have to deal with the problems associated with the root causes of poverty. It is right that we take note of the Turner report and that all parties, whether they be in the Scottish Parliament or the UK Parliament, state their case. There is a genuine debate to be had about targeting and universal benefits. I appreciate where those proposing more targeting are coming from in terms of their values. However, as well as the moral case against means testing, which Alex Neil set out, there is also an administrative issue. It is not efficient government to have to spend 10 times more on means testing while 25 per cent of pensioners are left out. Under our citizens pension proposals, no poor pensioner would be left out; under Labour's proposals, 25 per cent—and rising—of pensioners will be left out.

The Liberal Democrats had better be careful that, in the debate about citizens pensions, they do not start arguing against their own position. If we take the basic state pension, tax credit problems and means-testing administration costs, we can come up with a proposal that is fit for purpose and provides a citizens pension. That is what New Zealand has done and it is what the SNP wants to do. The point about how we can encourage people to save is important. The pensions crisis will hit Scotland harder than elsewhere because of the size of our public sector. We must all face up to that. One of the ideas that lie at the heart of the citizens pension proposal is equality and fairness for all. That idea not only helps those in poverty but does something else important. As those in the Labour Party who remember the arguments for universal benefits will know, it ties society together and gives people a stake in the future. Remember, one of the first things that Gordon Brown did after the 1997 election was to raid the pension funds and create a disincentive to save. Grandchildren watched their grandparents and realised that there was no point in investing if the money was going to be clawed back. We must address the growing dislocation in society that is characterised by those in the private pensions sector looking with envy at those in the public pensions sector. If we are to make a meaningful contribution to this debate, we must address that issue. We have a complex and unfair pensions system. As John Swinburne said, it treats women unequally. The Scottish Parliament has one of the highest percentages of women members in the world. If we want to tackle inequalities, we must tackle the position of women in society and the citizens pension will do that. The SNP proposals would deliver a fairer deal for pensioners, women, people on low incomes and people on modest incomes. Within the wider system of local income tax and integrated tax and benefits that we propose, we provide a vision for a positive future for pensioners and the rest of society. We must have a serious debate about the issue because that is what the people out there are debating.

rose—

I thank the minister for his tribute. Some of us are doing our bit to reverse falling school rolls. If we have the scale of population reduction that has been projected, the problem of the 20 per cent of S4 pupils who are underachieving will be exacerbated.

I agree that it has been remiss of us not to mention early-years intervention, which is desperately needed. Does not the introduction of a single curriculum from age three to 18 reinforce the need for the recognition of the important role of nursery nurses in early-years education?

Much bureaucracy comes from continuous assessment. Is it not the case that accuracy of assessment may help to relieve the volume of assessment, leaving more time for teachers to teach?

Is the member concerned that languages such as Italian might be dropped from the curriculum? Does that provide flexibility and choice?

Will Robert Brown explain the contradiction between an economic policy that aims to reverse those falling school rolls and their use as an opportunity? Those two approaches do not compute, and if we are to have faith and confidence in the policy of trying to increase Scotland's population, it is essential that we do not put all our eggs in the basket of relying on falling school rolls for improvement.

I welcome the opportunity to discuss the future of education in Scotland. We were promised a revolution in education, but what was published was scaled down to simply and modestly "the most comprehensive modernisation ... for a generation". We now have a more proportionate explanation of what is being proposed, which consists of reviews and reforms. By the end of the debate, we may finally have the admission that we are largely being presented with supply-side, producer-led  changes, which will result in administrative change for the institutional arm of education in relation to assessments, but which contains little that is concrete, as yet, in relation to improved educational experience for and attainment by pupils. If highers in hype were being awarded, the minister would have secured one at grade A. If there were standard grades in exaggeration, he would have bagged one before the qualification was withdrawn. I say to the Tories that the free market does not inspire enthusiasm for learning; teachers do. The Executive champions institutional interest and the Tories champion free-market self-interest, but the SNP champions the community of interest. Scotland needs real, pupil-centred educational change that marries the core skills of literacy, numeracy and communication to flexibility and choice in the curriculum and an emphasis on the tools that are needed to comprehend and appreciate not just the modern world of work, but the modern world in which we live. We need to value and promote active citizenship in a world in which people are increasingly alienated. The Executive's long-awaited proposals are finally here—although perhaps not, as most of the proposed changes will not be ready for introduction until after 2007, by which time yet another cohort of pupils will have left school. I am making a serious point about the timescale, scope and impact of the changes. The fresh-faced, bright-eyed five-year-olds who started their education in 1997 with the words "education, education, education" ringing in their ears are now the S1 pupils who are marking time, as the minister has said. In 2007, when most of the proposed changes are introduced, 20 per cent of those children will be in S4, underachieving and being failed by the system. A generation of pupils under Labour ministers—the class of 1997—will have been untouched by changes. "Education, education, education" meant "later, later, later". Each one of those five-year-olds of the 1997 intake could have expected more. It is economically imperative for Scotland that we raise the game, not just for some, but for all.

The national debate for education came hard on the heels of the report by the Education, Culture and Sport Committee in the first session of the Parliament, which included many suggestions and challenges that were made through public consultation and involvement. A standing national education convention would  provide the pace and drive to make changes happen sooner and offer a consensus for progress more effectively than would the welcome but rather delayed measures that have been announced today. I will touch on another aspect of national policy making. There is a glaring contradiction in two key areas of Government policy. The Executive's economic policy identifies the need to reverse the country's population decline, but its education policy depends on that decline to reduce class sizes and to cope with the retirement of 40 per cent of teachers during the next 10 years. Many of the Executive's proposals rely on a limitless supply of teachers—the partnership agreement promises to increase teacher numbers to 53,000. I welcome many of the proposals. The clearing out of the excessive assessment and bureaucracy that hinder teachers' ability to teach is overdue. I welcome the proposal to identify 20 schools of ambition, but would it have been made without the welcome philanthropic support that we understand has been offered? Twenty schools out of 2,826 will be identified. Does that mean that the Executive is unambitious for the remainder of our schools? Is the proposal simply a good way of presenting the rationing of resources to pay for the servicing of public-private partnership revenue costs, which next year will be three times greater than the actual spend on buildings?

We have been presented with what we are told is "the most comprehensive modernisation programme in Scottish schools for a generation". It is right and responsible of the Opposition to examine every detail of that programme. Robert Brown knows well that one of the most revolutionary measures that could be taken would be to slash class sizes to ensure that teachers had the time to teach and pupils had the space to learn. The Executive adopted that practical proposal at a late stage. The proposal to establish a leadership academy is welcome. However, it is perhaps an indictment of the Executive that head teachers, who might be responsible for an organisation of 800 people, should not already have received targeted support. Head teachers should already have 80 per cent control of their budgets, but the  bureaucracy in the system is such that they do not have that control. The idea of having a fresh curriculum is great, but we are still waiting for the results. Let us hope that pupils, parents and employers get a say. Opportunities for vocational experience are now on the agenda of all political parties—perhaps we should reflect on the fact that the Howie report of 11 years ago considered such issues. Breadth and flexibility in the curriculum should be championed, but the hatchet men from the Scottish Qualifications Authority appear to be showing their virility in potentially axing highers in modern languages, in an era of global trading, and in biotechnology—it is ironic that we should be debating that near to Midlothian, where we have a biotechnology park. There may be a link between colleges and national qualifications, but the Executive does not make it explicitly. It is fine to have more time for highers, but why sit 10 highers when university admissions are based on proposals for four or five highers? The Executive's proposals do not explicitly make the link with lifelong learning. The proposals talk about an excellent gold standard from HMIE. That might be helpful, but the schools that already achieve the best results do so within an ethos and culture of continuous improvement. The proposals will hardly make a difference to them and they will certainly make no difference to the schools that are not reaching that standard. I understand the logic behind having a qualifications review, but the mess over the introduction of higher still has yet to be properly addressed. Changes to the age-and-stage regulations are fine and will be meaningful for the few pupils who will be affected, but those are hardly the modernising changes of the generation.

I am conscious of the time and want to move on. Moving primary teachers into secondary schools will help to cover the problems with teacher shortages and class sizes. I am pleased that the commitment dragged out of the Executive by the SNP some months ago—that the GTC would be key in the changes—has been adopted. What we need is a community of interest. There is no monopoly, in the chamber or in the country, on the ambition for success for our young people through education. We desperately need to build a consensus on how to move forward. We should not have a top-down approach from the Executive. For centuries in Scotland, there has been a community of interest in education for all.

I am in my concluding moments. The contribution of the Hunter Foundation and the thoughtful speech that Tom Hunter delivered during the summer is testament to that community of interest. The Executive's belated national debate was a stab at capturing the national interest, but we need a sustained expression of that shared interest. If people want a cultural change among all the interest parties—parents, pupils, employers, universities, colleges and businesses—we will have to elevate that tangible community of interest and give it practical and continuing means of expression. That was the point that I made to Elaine Murray. The SNP proposal for a national education convention would provide for that. It would provide for accountability and a national common interest that would allow a shared strategy and vision to be delivered. That is what is sadly lacking from the series of practical, managerial changes that the Executive has presented today. I did not taste excitement and enthusiasm in the reforms. They have not generated palpable anticipation and or an expectation that could be catching. If they had, the minister could truly make the claims that he has made today. There is an old saying: judge me not by what I say, but by what I do. The 1997 school generation will judge the minister by his actions and the minister is in danger of being hung by his own hyperbole. I move amendment S2M-1925.2, to leave out from "supports" to end and insert: "acknowledges the publication of the proposed changes to education contained in the Scottish Executive's Ambitious, Excellent Schools but is concerned that many of the proposals are structural, administrative and managerial in nature, depend from a resource perspective on the short-sighted presumption of continued falling school rolls and that, although they may have an impact on the educational experience of a few pupils, they will not provide comprehensive change for all and are centred on a national curriculum review which will deliver only in 2007 after the current generation of pupils has passed though school under Labour ministers of education, and urges the Executive to provide a shared national vision and strategy for education which the nation can contribute to by establishing a National Education Convention to address the persistent under-achievement of 20% of pupils and to provide a pupil-centric education system which can create the conditions for success for this generation of school pupils."

The minister makes an important point about employers and what they expect. Why is it only standard grade that is being considered in the qualifications review? Does he have every confidence in higher still or, based on employers' feedback, should the content of higher still be re-examined?

To ask the Scottish Executive what proportion of the draw-down of public-private partnership funding for schools indicated in its budget equates to capital spend. (S2O-3735)

I refer the minister to pages 6 and 39 of the draft budget document, which indicate a low capital investment proportion of the costs of the private finance scheme. In 2005-06, the figure is £35 million out of £100 million. Does he agree that that reflects a high degree of service bundling in the contracts, which is likely to accelerate over time, and that that will seriously inhibit future budgets and the provision of direct services to pupils, as most of the money will be spent on servicing the revenue costs of PPP and not on capital spend on buildings?

Is the minister aware of the great geographic disparity in the development of curriculum faculties? In some areas, that development is governed by the location of departments rather than their subject matter—for example, departments on the ground floor are put together, which is corridor management rather than professional mentoring. Would the minister be prepared to propose the guidance for which Dennis Canavan asked in order to reappraise what is happening throughout Scotland? Although the change to faculty departments is not a direct result of the McCrone agreement, it most certainly is an indirect result of that and we should take national cognisance of it.

I appreciate the minister's comments, but will he reflect on the statistics that the Executive revealed today, which show an 11 per cent decline in the past year alone in the number of part-time students who enrolled in further education colleges? In many subjects, such as maths, engineering and technology, languages and education, that decline has been in the number of students following sub-degree courses. Will the minister comment on that worrying statistic?

I will clarify matters. I do not think that there is any problem with the merging of the funding councils, which is a welcome bureaucratic change. However, there are concerns about the sector's future and the definition of the tertiary sector. There are serious concerns about the detail in the draft bill on tertiary education and the prospects for that sector—Christine May has just made that point.

I listened carefully to Murdo Fraser's speech. His proposals under Conservative policy would be for pupils to be taught in colleges, as opposed to being taught in schools by college lecturers. Does Brian Monteith see this as a two-way process? Does he agree that the GTC has an important role to play if we are talking about lecturers coming into schools?

As somebody who knows these things, I have to tell Jeremy Purvis that the size of a population is determined by the number of women, not the number of men.

I start by quoting an absent friend, Jim Wallace, the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning. I am sure that he is somewhere else today.

It is kind of obvious. Jim Wallace and I attended an important meeting at a conference in Edinburgh last week about the future of and ambitions for the city. He commented that, although we would like to be ambitious for Edinburgh and for Scotland, ambition without an agenda is a pipe dream. That is my concern in relation to this debate and the Scottish National Party has framed its amendment on that basis. Our problem is that, although we welcome the debate, we think that it fails to face up to the real skills challenges in Scotland and that it is hampered by the lack of an agenda or national skills strategy. In 1999, the Executive consulted on a skills strategy for a competitive Scotland. Indeed, Henry McLeish led a debate on skills.

It is interesting that the minister sets so much store by the content of that document. Why is it that, in the 13 months of the second session of the Parliament, this is the first debate on skills—or, indeed, on higher or further education—that has been led by the Executive in its parliamentary time? As we know, the Executive takes the vast majority of parliamentary time. In the debate in 1999, Henry McLeish said that, at that point, all the Executive was doing was consulting on an action plan. Little has been done since then. We have a dossier—not a strategy—which is drowning us in descriptors and data, welcome as they may be. Absent from the debate so far, and certainly from the minister's speech, has been mention of a significant contribution by the Parliament. The Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee's report on its lifelong learning inquiry in the previous session was an important contribution to the debate. It had meaningful and achievable recommendations and I regret that the minister did not mention it and, indeed, that the motion does not refer to it. Some of the recommendations have been acted on, but only belatedly. For example, the lifelong learning forum recommended by the committee was established only in December 2003 and, to date, questions about its membership, the frequency of its meetings and the progress that it has made have been met with little information. Economic growth is supposed to be the number 1 priority, but we know that the Executive is  prepared to work only as a dependant within the devolution settlement and so has levers of power only to tinker with the supply side. Against that background, the absence of a skills strategy will be felt even more acutely. We should recognise that the debate is taking place in the context of adult learners week, but that should be the subject of a members' business debate. Indeed, I notice that Bill Butler, who is getting a reputation for lodging good motions for topics for members' business debates, has lodged one on the subject. I welcome the fact that the minister will be visiting a fire station this afternoon. I hope that he takes the opportunity to discuss with firemen their real concerns about the current dispute and about safety conditions in the public service. We must recognise that Scotland's future economic success lies with having a high-skill, high-value work force. However, we must marry that with the fact that, unless we alter our demographics, we will continue to have an aging population. We need to consider whether we plan for decline or halt the decline. That is a real challenge and my colleague Jim Mather will cover the issue later. Important things are happening. If it can live up to its spin, the fresh talent initiative—whereby skilled people from abroad are invited to come and work in Scotland—is one way forward. It can be matched by the use of the excellent skills and contributions of asylum seekers, the majority of whom stay on to become refugees. The SNP supports a reduction in class sizes in order to improve basic skills. The late intervention of Professor Heckman in our on-going debate on early intervention is very welcome. I note the fact that it seems to take an American male economist to argue what many female professionals and politicians from all parties have long been saying in Scotland before anyone listens: invest early and reap the rewards for individuals, parents and society in spades later on. I am pleased that the Education Committee, under the direction of our convener, Robert Brown, will be examining early intervention later this year. Population pressures mean that rewarding nursery nurses properly through a national settlement is even more imperative. We must value those who nurture cognitive and non-cognitive development skills at home, because, as Professor Heckman has recognised, that input becomes so important at a later date. We need to support the Scottish credit and qualifications framework and, rather than blundering into confrontation, we need to encourage collaboration between schools, further education and higher education. The SCQF has attracted international envy. It can meaningfully  and materially make a difference, but it needs a cultural evaluation of skills, higher education and further education.

I am just coming on to the relationship between HE, FE and schools, which is essential. I have mentioned smaller class sizes and the importance of early intervention in relation to skills and I have talked about the Scottish credit and qualifications framework. That framework can operate only in a climate of collaboration. I am afraid that the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, who is from Jamie Stone's party, has created a climate of confrontation between universities and FE colleges, which is undesirable. That is exactly the sort of thing that—

We would want to have co-operation between FE and HE. We would expand access to further education for those who need it. We are concerned that universities are full. The expansion of universities has, in many ways, been contributed to by an expansion of the middle classes. Further education represents the foundations for ensuring added value in the skilled work force and child care policies are required to ensure that people can access it. Let me deal with one of the issues that the Government can do something about. A university principal recently said to me that a Government should provide legislative frameworks, not legislative cages. The Executive could well learn that lesson in the skills and education debate. The proposal to have Scottish tertiary education providers—STEPS—is an example of where Government policy is inappropriate. Steps is a disbanded pop group; it should not be the framework for taking us forward on an agenda through which we must build contacts between universities and business. We are putting institutions into a cage, which will prevent them from having the independence that they require to attract global investment and to facilitate the research that they need to do in order to develop business.

Nothing that the minister has said publicly would lead me to believe that they will. However, what I have read in the draft Tertiary Education (Funding etc) (Scotland) Bill and what I have been told directly by university principals within the past 10 days indicate that the bill will unnecessarily provide for ministerial intervention, comparable to the powers under the School Education (Ministerial Powers and Independent Schools) (Scotland) Bill. That would restrict the direction of courses and the control over what courses can and should be run. I say that in the context of the forthcoming bill, not of statements that the minister has made. I will now deal with vocational qualifications. In August 2003, the SNP suggested that 14-year-olds should have access to further education teaching. I note that the Conservatives refer to that policy in their amendment and that they mentioned it in their conference of October last year. The proposal is also in the partnership agreement. We must recognise the vital role of the General Teaching Council for Scotland. However, it is regrettable that the Executive has been slow to consult and be guided by the GTCS. I refer to the abolition of school codes, for example. If we want FE lectures in schools, to help 14 and 15-year-olds, we have to take the GTCS with us. I turn now to skills, skills gaps and skills shortages. The number of vacancies in Scotland has increased by 7 per cent and the number of gaps that are hard to fill has increased by 5 per cent in one year. We must recognise what those skills gaps are. Futureskills Scotland has stated that the commonly lacking skills are planning and organising, problem solving, customer handling, teamworking and oral communication. I recognise that we need construction workers and people with languages—particularly given the recent accession of new member states to the European Union—but, if we are to promote a meaningful, high-value, high-wage and high-skilled economy for the future, we cannot forecast here and now what skills will be needed. Professor Heckman's work and the recommendations from Futureskills Scotland of what is required lead us to believe that knowledge of how to learn and how to develop skills will, in the future, be as important as the actual skills themselves. Workplace learning is vital as part of the culture of continuous improvement and skills change and development. The message from a West Lothian Chamber of Commerce meeting that I attended last week was that the employers wanted young people and staff who knew how to learn and who wanted to learn, which would enable employers to train them with the necessary skills. The ideas of early intervention and the programme outlined in "Determined to Succeed" might help with that, but  what is vital is a framework of knowledge of how to learn. The statistics show that the majority of training is provided by external training companies, rather than by colleges. We need to address that issue. Many things can and should be done. We should be using the skills of the asylum seekers who want to stay and work in Scotland. We should recognise the fact that skills gaps are often in the soft skills and not necessarily in the hard skills. We should also reflect on the need for a national spatial strategy on skills. The issues facing Glasgow are quite different from those facing the Lothians. In the Lothians, there are skills shortages in the form of a lack of people. In Glasgow, there is not necessarily a lack of people; rather, the skills gap needs addressed there. That must be reflected in policies for investment, which should be covered by the national strategy that we want to be developed. West Lothian College has the fastest-growing student population in Scotland—a nation with a falling population—and is turning away thousands of students, frustrating the employers who need the skills now. That is what we mean when we say that we need a national skills strategy. It is about addressing the immediate issues, forecasting what we need in the longer term and ensuring that all the Government agencies, schools and HE and FE institutions work together to deliver that strategy.

I am about to finish.

I welcome the opportunity to explore those issues, some of which are contentious—we must face up to the age issue, in particular. I look forward to the Executive returning to the chamber to debate its national skills strategy in the future. I move amendment S2M-1340.1, to leave out from "supports" to end and insert: "regrets the absence of a national skills and lifelong learning strategy from the Scottish Executive as part of the Smart, Successful Scotland policy; recognises the contribution of the Scottish Union Learning Fund, the Scottish Credit and Qualifications Framework, the Determined to Succeed programme and the Modern Apprenticeship programme, but notes that these individual elements by themselves will not deliver the appropriate skills and continued learning requirements for Scotland in the 21st century."

Would the minister care to reflect on the comments made today by the Confederation of British Industry about the publication of a survey that showed that businesses in Scotland invest less in training than those in any other part of the United Kingdom?

The modern apprenticeship scheme is to be welcomed, but does the minister acknowledge that those employers who take on the vast majority of modern apprentices are often in areas such as financial services, where there is less need for skills and less of a skills shortage? Standard Life, for example, is laying off 1,000 staff, which has is own implications.

I thank the minister for his remarks about the recruitment of social workers, but there is still concern about retention and the  continued support and recognition of existing social workers. Will he comment on that?

Comparisons have been made with court duty. Does Scott Barrie agree that employers should respect time off for participation in children's panels and training, in the same way that they respect time off for participation in jury service?

Will the member give way?

Annabel Goldie has given a good example of how legislation in one area—the  Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill—has an impact on core care and protection activities. Does she recognise that such measures need to be seen as a whole and that the financial memorandums to all such bills should take into account the national recruitment policy for social workers and others?

The Scottish National Party welcomes this chance to discuss in depth the experience of the children's hearings system and the opportunities to develop it. However, we warn Parliament that it cannot preside over a lame discussion that paves the way for dismantling the children's hearings system— any notion of hiving off youth offending to youth courts would do just that. The children's hearings system, which considers the child in the round and takes into account all aspects of the child's life as part of a joined-up approach, must not be destroyed by partial or wholesale removal of its work on youth justice. I challenge the minister to rule that out. He gave an answer, but I am not sure whether he ruled it out. The children's hearings system was established in 1971, but it has not simply been preserved in aspic. The Children (Scotland) Act 1995—to which the minister referred—made the children's hearings system consistent with the European convention on human rights. The act made the welfare of the individual child central to the process, developed care systems to consider the individual needs of the child and created the very important Scottish Children's Reporters Administration. No one is saying that the Executive should not review the children's hearings system—we note that the review was included in the partnership agreement. However, what we are saying is let that be done in a climate of realism and with perspective. Let us be honest in the debate; if the Executive is considering hiving off some or all of youth offending to youth courts, it should at least be up front about that and place it centre stage in the review consultation papers. This must be the third or fourth speech—it is a bit like "Groundhog Day"—that I have made on the topic in the past year. From members' business debates, such as the one secured by Scott Barrie, to debates on social work, child protection and youth justice, we come back time and again to the central role of the children's hearings system. As well as the current consultation, many reports on the subject have been published: the Council on Tribunals report of June 2002; the Audit Scotland report of December 2002; the Executive's report on child protection; NCH Scotland's recent "Where's Kilbrandon Now?" report; and the interim report on the effectiveness of fast-track hearings. I reflect the point made by Margaret Mitchell as to why we are holding this debate here and now, bearing it in mind that we have spent considerable time on the issue in the past. The Parliament must not be used simply as an extension of a consultation process: this Parliament is about policy, legislation and decision making. The operation of the children's hearings system needs to be reviewed, but the SNP's view is that the principle of the system—treating the child as a whole—is sound. Issues ranging from care and protection through to offending behaviour need to be dealt with together.  In order to serve Scotland's children we must consider what helps, and what hinders, the system in facing the demands and challenges of the 21 st century. The SNP's position is to urge the Government to focus on prevention when considering the problems that face our children and the problems that young people cause, rather than concentrate efforts on firefighting and crisis management with policy and legislation that sometimes appear to be more about being seen to tackle the very real problems in society and not about delivering on the issue. Children's experiences are changing. There has been a big shift in referrals from the early years in the 1970s. Since 1971, there has been a 7 per cent reduction in referrals on offence grounds and a 600 per cent increase in referrals on non-offence, care and protection grounds. Almost double the number of children are now referred on non-offence as opposed to offence grounds.

Johann Lamont makes a very important point. Recently, I spoke to West Lothian Women's Aid, for which an issue in relation to working with the police is how resources can be used most effectively to ensure that we concentrate on identifying children who are vulnerable and in need and, more important, that we give them the right treatment and support. We must ensure that the figures are not distorted. We need to look at the profile, because there is a powder keg that demands immediate and effective responses. We know from the study into children's reporters in Glasgow that for persistent offenders—those who have had 20-plus referrals—the average age for initial referral is eight years old for care and protection purposes. Effective support at the age of eight means that problems are tackled by the age of 14; ineffective support at the age of eight means that society pays by the time the child is 14. I will draw attention to the issue of drug abuse. One in 50 births in Scotland is to a family in which one of the parents abuses drugs. We know that those children are more likely to misuse drugs themselves and so become involved with the offending activity that often surrounds drug misuse at a later date. We know that, unless those  children are properly supported now, we are storing up problems for the future. When children's hearings were first established, far more children were living under the care of statutory authorities or voluntary agencies. That number has fallen dramatically but, as the interim report on fast-track pilots shows, the profile of persistent young offenders shows that a disproportionate number of them are looked-after children. Whether in relation education standards, career opportunities or offending behaviour, the nation should hang its head in shame at the lack of progress in that area. We know from the experience of the children's hearings system and from Audit Scotland's report that the slow responses and lack of accountability of the statutory services—which has been touched on already—are a hindrance. I turn to the issue of social workers. We acknowledge that more social workers are employed in Scotland than ever before; however, there are more vacancies than ever before. Since 1999, the number of children's social workers has risen by 15 per cent, but the number of vacancies has risen by 129 per cent. Demand for social workers is outstripping supply, and the Executive is complicit in the creation of that environment. Time and time again, we must come back to this: although we have fast-track training for social workers, we must look for more creative and inventive ways to recruit and train them as well as some basic, commonsense measures. In that spirit, the SNP proposes a five-point plan to help to deal with the shortage of child protection workers. First, many people who work in the social care arena would like to go into social work and be trained, and we must ensure that their work environment enables them to do so. That may mean recruiting more administrators to cover the training period. We should remember that the biggest criticism of staffing levels in the Caleb Ness report concerned the shortage of administration workers in social work leading to poor communication. Secondly, the Government should broker strategic arrangements in partnership with the voluntary sector to see whether, with secondments and career developments, we could stem the tide of those who are leaving council social work departments, allowing them respite from the pressurised and often harrowing environment of child protection but not losing them from that vital area of support. Thirdly, recent Government policy and legislation have created the vacancies, often through good intentions such as the provision of free personal care, adults with incapacity legislation, criminal justice measures and the recent additional support for learning legislation. A  climate has been created in which career prestige is gained through working in areas such as care of the elderly and criminal justice, which is drawing even more workers from the core preventive activity of child protection. The financial memorandums for, and the policy behind, such legislation should spell out the national recruitment implications. Fourthly, the Government should lead a recruitment drive for people to fill caring, child support and education roles in the public services generally. I heard what the minister said about education, but I ask him to remember please that teachers are not social workers and should not be expected to carry out a social work function. The golden hello bidding wars in the social work field are vying with the bidding war for nurses, and golden hellos for teachers in certain subjects loom on the horizon. A joined-up approach to public service recruitment could help personal career development and progression without bursting the public purse on often wasteful competitive pricing. Fifthly, there should be a McCrone-style review of social work conditions and remuneration. There needs to be a hard look at an integrated social work profession in which the recent drive for specialisation, coupled with enhanced career progression in certain fields, has compounded the problem of shortages in child care and protection.

I do not think that the bidding war is helpful or a good use of resources. We need to ensure that we enhance the status not only of social workers, but of all those who work with children. A comprehensive view should be taken of that. Indeed, the Education Committee is conducting an inquiry into child protection and has been thanked by those in the profession for trying to put forward a more positive view of what is required and of how society might regard that. The SNP's proposals are made constructively by an Opposition that wants all parties in the Parliament to work together in the interests of Scotland's children. However, until social work issues can be resolved, the children's hearings system will continue to fail some children. Supervision contact is often made once a month and sometimes twice a month. How can that  amount to regular contact? We also know that one of the concerns about the children's hearings system is the limited range of disposals. Time and time again, the criticisms that are levelled at the shortfalls in the children's hearings system arise from the limited range of disposals and an inability to force social work services and other agencies to deliver on recommendations. That point was made by Mary Scanlon. The NCH Scotland report found a lack of monitoring of decisions; failure by the system to implement the recommendations of the panel; and a limited range of disposals. Extending the range of disposals will be people and resource intensive, and that preventive investment must be acknowledged and supported. Restorative justice needs resourced support. More power and authority must be given to children's panels and there must be clear avenues for co-operation with the courts, when necessary, especially—as the minister said—in relation to the referral of parents and parenting orders. An important question that is posed in the review is whether there is a role for family hearings. The SNP has long championed the role of family courts in cases of domestic abuse and in legal custody cases, but there may be times when such cases overlap with the children's panel's assessment of the child and their behaviour. There is a case for family hearings when behavioural issues in the family are central to the case and when other siblings are becoming increasingly affected. I will follow with interest the feedback from the review on that issue. However, we cannot lose the child-centred approach of the children's hearings system; therefore, a balance must be struck. In conclusion, the case for children's hearings and the child-centred approach to care and protection and youth offending is sound. The system needs to be strengthened, not weakened. The children of Scotland deserve no less.

The minister says that he wants to hold on to some of the children's hearings system's principles and that he does not want the system to be dismantled, but will he take this opportunity to say that he will not oversee the hiving off of youth justice to youth courts as part of the review?

Is the minister aware that by 2006 the Dutch will be able to travel the 51 miles between Rotterdam and Amsterdam in only 28 minutes? Will he reconcile the need for a fast link between the cities of Glasgow and Edinburgh with the need for commuting opportunities for communities such as those in West Lothian? Does he agree with Karen Whitefield's valid point that more consideration should be given to making the Shotts line into the fast line in order to allow us to open up commuting opportunities for other communities? It is vital that we have fast and regular communications between Glasgow and Edinburgh and the communities in between.

Does the First Minister agree that it makes no sense for Scotland to move away from a distinction between further and higher education just as the Bologna process is getting into its stride and when other European countries are looking to the Scottish system as the ideal? Does he acknowledge that his Deputy First Minister has managed—not for the first time—to create a problem where there was none before? Does the First Minister understand that it is the detail of the draft bill to merge higher and further education that might undermine our position in the European higher education area and damage our ability to attract students from elsewhere? Does he understand that it is the extra details in the bill, on top of the simple merger of the funding councils, that are in danger of causing chaos and confusion where there should be collaboration and co-operation between the university and further education sectors?

The minister may be aware that the City of Edinburgh Council and, indeed, a head teacher are facing criminal charges in relation to the near-drowning of a six-year-old boy. There is a danger that young people may not participate in sport if we do not ensure that their safety is paramount. However, there is also a danger that teachers will become more resistant to taking part in educational visits and outdoor education. Will the minister ensure that the guidance that he produces takes account of what has happened in England, where an educational visits advisory council has recently been established? We must have robust guidance and we must have support that gives protection both to children and to teachers when engaging in outdoor education and visits.

Will the member give way?

I, too, put on record my thanks for the hard work of all my colleagues on the committee and the clerks. I also recognise the work of the Executive bill team and the minister.  During the process, I think that the minister persuaded the committee and the Parliament in some areas and that we persuaded him in a number of areas. The bill has had a thorough going over—I am not sure whether the minister feels that he has also had a thorough going over. I think that I recognised in some of Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's comments a backhanded compliment, perhaps followed up by a sucker punch from his experience. However, we should recognise what has happened. I have a heavy heart in rising to speak because I support Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's amendment. The bill is a difficult bill—we all recognised that it would be—but there has been a continuous debate about how fairness and justice for all can be balanced against rationing resources and targeting for a few. That has been a contention throughout the debate on the bill. There has been a debate about balancing the rights of parents and children against the responsibilities and resources of local authorities. The concern is whether we have managed to reach the right balance between the rights of parents and the rights of authorities. I acknowledge that concessions have been made as the bill has progressed. Section 2A and section 24A and the support and advocacy in the bill are testament to that. There is some recognition of the need to protect children who currently have a record of needs, but there is a danger that they will not have rights that are comparable to the rights of those who have the new CSP. That cuts to the heart of the matter. There has been amelioration of some factors, which I welcome and am pleased about. Much attention has also been given to the early years debate and, in particular, to the importance of recognising special needs and additional support for learning at an early stage. I ask the minister to reflect that, as part of this national bill, we will yet again put more duties and responsibilities on nursery nurses in order to deliver some of the early provision. [ Interruption. ]

I recognise that the Executive has referred to three and four-year-olds, but I am disappointed that the amendment relating to two-year-olds was not accepted. An opportunity has been missed. There could have been a universal system. I think that we want a universal system and that the ministers would like such a system, but we are going too slowly for that. We will revisit the legislation—certainly in dealing with a code of practice—but I suspect that, later on, we will need to ensure that we secure rights for all children to ensure that all children's support needs are met in future.

I, too, support amendment 52, which is an essential amendment. The evidence that the committee received and the representations that were made were that so much will be reliant on the code of practice that it would be wrong to leave it as a negative instrument; it must go forward by the affirmative resolution procedure. Indeed, at one point, the minister acknowledged the possibility that, in effect, the Parliament's consideration of the bill will have drawn up the content of the code of practice, so the Parliament would be well placed to consider the code if it came before the Parliament as an affirmative instrument. It is essential for that to happen, particularly when we bear in mind the fact that the bill is so dependent on the code of practice.

I welcome amendment 70's introduction of the idea of monitoring the implementation of the bill. Amendment 70A suggests that we have an annual report thereafter to revisit the issue. This would not be the first time that Parliament had asked for reports back on the implementation of an important piece of legislation. If we consider that the bill is based on good faith and trust, we have a duty and a responsibility to examine the process and the practical implementation of the bill. Rosemary Byrne spoke about the problem of disparity in the delivery of special needs support at present. We do not want to see that revisited with the bill. The bill contains provisions on additional support needs and duties, but we remain to be convinced that the practical implementation of the bill will be equal throughout the country. It would be useful if the Parliament were able to see an annual report from HMIE because that would give some confidence that the implementation of the bill throughout the country was practical, fair and equitable. I move amendment 70A.

In the interests of time, I will not wind up.

Amendment 88 would allow ministers to empower tribunals to impose sanctions on education authorities or other appropriate agencies if they fail to comply with a tribunal decision. I have concerns. Robert Brown said that somehow I was questioning the performance of HMIE, but that is not in the least true. I question its ability to examine individual cases, because it does not look at individual cases. If, in an individual case, an agency or education authority has not carried out a decision of a tribunal, the tribunal must have the power to impose some kind of sanction. Recommendation 73 of the Education Committee's stage 1 report said that the role of HMIE should be explained. Frankly, I think that that role has not been explained. That is one of the reasons why we want to strengthen the powers of tribunals, so that they can impose sanctions if a health authority or an education authority fails to comply with their decisions. We cannot wait three or four years for a school or local authority inspection for that to happen.

One of the more interesting parts of stage 3 consideration is to see some movement from the Executive during the course of the debate. As members who have paid close attention will already know—those who have not will know now—we have seen that movement, which is welcome given the essential role that the tribunals will have. Had eligibility for CSPs been expanded, access to the tribunals would have been less important, but as that did not happen, the tribunals are a core issue. Yes, we want to provide for dispute resolution and mediation, but it will still be  necessary in some instances for disputes to go to tribunals. The Executive's approach would have been more honest if, instead of using the wider term "additional support needs tribunals", it had called them co-ordinated support plan tribunals. Adam Ingram's points on that issue were well made. We have seen movement on whether the use of the tribunals should be expanded. In our stage 1 report, we said that it should. The minister has now said that he will consider using the powers. Amendment 49 would give the Executive two years to consider those powers, but then the Executive would be required to lay an order extending the powers of the tribunals to include those that are outlined in the section that was inserted by Robert Brown's amendment at stage 2. Amendment 49 would be a good step forward. Just as the minister wants the Education Committee to take stock, I want the Executive to take stock and my amendment would give it two years to do that. Another welcome concession that we have managed to achieve is two years' protection for those children who currently have a record of needs. The reason that amendment 49 specifies that ministers must come back to the Parliament with an order within two years is that there is now protection on the face of the bill for children who have a record of needs to ensure that they receive a CSP assessment within that time. Let me speak briefly to amendment 84, which is absolutely core. Regardless of any changes that might be made, if the education or health authority fails to deliver the additional support needs that are contained within an agreed CSP, the minister is saying that HMIE will sort that out. When will HMIE do that? Will that be when the child has left primary school, during the inspections that take place every three or four years? That does not make sense. Amendment 84 would ensure that, within the narrow confines that the bill provides, there would be some redress if the support needs that were agreed in a co-ordinated support plan were not lived up to. That issue, in particular, merits attention. There has been some movement. I understand that in his summing-up Robert Brown might make some remarks about sifting, but I would like there to be a requirement that we move somewhat. Under amendment 49, the minister would have to come back within two years to extend the powers.

I, too, will support amendment 40. The amendment is a tribute to those who gave evidence to the committee at stage 1 and to the  committee. The arguments for having reference to supporters and advocacy included in the bill were well made by many of them, so I am pleased that such provision will be included in the bill. It is very good that amendment 40 seeks to give legal standing to personal advocacy. I want to reflect on some of the other amendments in the group. With amendment 40A, Rosemary Byrne makes an important point about the need for financial support for independent advocacy; if we do not have such support, we will have an exclusive system that is based on people's bank balances rather than on their needs. With amendment 78, Donald Gorrie has highlighted a fundamental part of the bill. If access to a co-ordinated support plan is defined very narrowly, the ability to have one's case about eligibility argued at the tribunal becomes crucial. If we agree to the principle of independent advocacy and support, I agree with Donald Gorrie that that principle should also apply to the tribunal. It is important that the bill should say that Scottish ministers "shall" have powers to make relevant regulations. Amendment 78 reflects the amendment on the issue that Robert Brown lodged at stage 2. He, too, was in favour of ministers being able to use their powers to ensure that access to tribunals could be expanded. The amendments in the group are important. I welcome the inclusion in the bill of a reference to advocacy. It will be not be a step forward only for the bill, but for Parliament. I hope that Parliament will support advocacy in many other bills in the future.

To ask the Scottish Executive what changes will require to be made in higher education to ensure that it is competitive in the European higher education area. (S2O-1883)

Obviously, the European higher education area will be a reality by 2010. Does the minister agree that last night's vote at Westminster makes it more likely that the difficulties that the Enterprise and Culture Committee's "Report on Scottish Solutions Inquiry" warn about will come to pass? If we are to compete, particularly with universities in England, for students from the new accession states, some of whom might want to stay and contribute to Scotland's future economy, we will need more than indifference as far as investment is concerned to maintain the quality of research that would have attracted them in the first place.

Can you clarify whether amendment 3 is pre-empted by amendment 20?

I, too, have serious concerns about the stage 2 amendment that was lodged at the suggestion of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. Amendments 1, 2 and 3 seek to protect the rights of looked-after children in particular. As Rhona Brankin said, the local authority will have rights as a provider and as the parent. I lodged amendments 1, 2 and 3 because I was concerned that the balance had shifted from the rights of parents back towards those of local authorities. We have grappled with that issue throughout consideration of the bill, as has the Executive—hence amendment 33. If the Executive were so relaxed about the fact that there might be agreement not to have CSPs, why is there an extensive amendment to compensate for the fact that there might be problems? I realise that if amendment 20 is passed, it will pre-empt amendments 1, 2 and 3, but I think that the logical path is to support amendment 20. Although Rhona Brankin and I have disagreed on a number of issues while considering the bill, I think that we can come together on this one. If there is logic to it, COSLA's case can be made at a later stage when the legislation has bedded in. The issue is to do with trust, and the jury is out among parents as to whether they can trust local authorities to deliver. We should wait and see before accepting that case. I urge members to take the commonsense approach and support amendment 20. If that fails, they should support amendments 1, 2 and 3.

I want to address the issue of extending rights to children under 16. I appreciate the amendments that the Executive has lodged, which take on board concerns that the Education Committee, in particular, has raised. However, the Executive recognises that the issue of how we treat the rights of children aged 12 and over is outstanding. The minister has suggested that it may be addressed in a proposed children's services bill. This is not necessarily just a children's issue or a matter for the Education Committee—perhaps the justice committees should consider the spectrum of legal rights in relation to capacity and age. I recognise that the bill makes provision for consultation with children and young people throughout and that the Executive amendments help to address the matter in the bill. However, this is an outstanding issue to which I hope the Parliament will return in future.

I will speak first to amendments  73 and 4, which are connected. I acknowledge the fact that the Executive has taken on board the point that the SNP made at stage 2 about the factors themselves not being the passport to the co-ordinated support plan. The concerns are particularly about children in bed-and-breakfast accommodation that will not last for 12 months and whose parents have episodic mental health problems, for example. Perhaps the most tragic example would be the child of a murder victim. The incident and the factor might have occurred only once, but the need for support might continue for a long time. Therefore, I welcome amendment 4. Amendment 4 goes part of the way towards addressing my concerns. However, I lodged amendment 73 because it does not address the particular issue relating to the 12-month period. The minister said that my amendment 73 is well intentioned, but I suggest to him that it is also well sourced, as the wording comes from the Disability Discrimination Act 1995. The amendment reflects the wording of paragraph 2(2) of schedule 1 to that act in trying to define a situation in which needs might not be conclusive or continuing over 12 months, but are likely to recur, so that there is a need for a co-ordinated support plan over a period of time. The needs may be episodic just as much as the factor that caused them in the first place may be episodic. I gave the example of a child of a murder victim. The consequences of the murder might be long standing, and the educational support needs might vary and recur over a period of time; support will not necessarily be required only once. My intentions in lodging the amendment were good, although I recognise the Executive's efforts in amendment 4. As the minister said, amendment 62 concerns the fundamentals of the bill. The aspect of the bill that causes the greatest concern is the two-tier, or three-tier, system for co-ordinated support plans and additional support for learning in general that is being developed. The Parliament has persuaded the Executive to include in the bill section 2A, which imposes a general duty in respect of additional support needs, but the Executive has not addressed the fundamental point about why children whose needs can be met solely by the education authority—in particular, children who have dyslexia or autistic spectrum disorder—should be excluded from having the rights that other children in relation to whom the health authority is involved will be given. Is it not ironic that the Executive has just rejected an amendment because it did not want health authorities to be integral and wanted them to identify two-year-olds but, all of a sudden, health authorities are part and parcel and a fundamental part of the bill? There is muddled and disjointed thinking by the Executive.  If the issue comes down to resources, why does the Executive not admit that the bill is only about administration? It is about reducing the number of children who currently have records of needs from 4,000 to the 2,000 who will get a co-ordinated support plan. The minister has made great efforts to say that those who will not have a co-ordinated support plan will still have their additional support needs met, but anybody with any experience of local authorities and support provision will know that some criteria must be used for limited resources. I believe that the approach is very much to be regretted and that amendment 62 is fundamental. Individualised educational programmes and personal learning plans are ideas whose time is yet to come. They might be part of a universal system in the future, but they are not in the bill here and now. We have a right and a duty to stand up for children who have additional support needs but who will not get a CSP, and we should allow them the same legal rights. The issue is one of fairness and equity. Amendment 62 is fundamental to the bill and I support it.

I support amendments 61, 64, 65 and 72 in Lord James Douglas-Hamilton's name. The amendments address a key area of the bill and cut to the heart of the issue with which we have wrestled over many months: although Parliament wants to put children at the heart of our policy in so many areas, our problem is that, although we might have joined-up thinking, we do not have joined-up legislation. A group of children are being excluded from the bill purely because the Executive wants to define what is in education authorities' remit but not what is in the health service's remit. It is not satisfactory that the Executive seeks to bounce back to the health service the responsibility to bring to education authorities' attention children of  two and over—particularly those aged two—who have additional needs. It is important that we strengthen the provisions. We heard reassurances from the Executive at stage 2 that existing legislation would cover remits in respect of two, three and four-year-olds. The problem is that there is no guarantee that every local authority has a partnership arrangement for three and four-year-olds who are in pre-school education. Are we really saying that, even if all local authorities had such arrangements, additional support would be provided only for the two and a half hours during which children were in nursery education and that, for the rest of the time, the children would be excluded from such support despite the fact that everybody knows that learning through play is vital in early years? The amendments cut to the heart of the approach to the bill. On that basis, I support the amendments.

I should declare that I am a former employee of Standard Life and that I, too, hold policies. I share the concern that the minister has expressed for the 1,000 people who will lose their jobs as a result of today's announcement and for their families. Will he encourage the company to resist the need for compulsory redundancies? The financial services strategy group is defining a strategic vision and is considering what action it can take in the future. What action has it taken in respect of the demutualisation issue? What  approaches has the minister made to Ruth Kelly and Gordon Brown on the financial vandalism of the Financial Services Authority's actions in some of its recent rulings? What action has he taken to protect the interests not just of Standard Life, but of other mutuals?

The minister cites the current legislation, but he has heard calls for an urgent review of the guidance. Given that he has mentioned the requirement that a school should have an 80 per cent occupancy rate, I should mention the fact that there is dispute about what the capacity of specific schools is. That is particularly the case in Midlothian, where school rolls were limited by teacher numbers, which were prescribed by the local authority. I believe that the 80 per cent rule is somewhat arbitrary and I hope that ministers will be flexible in considering how it should be implemented.

I congratulate Christine Grahame on bringing the issue to the chamber. The motion addresses the closures that the Borders schools we heard about are facing. It also opens up the wider issue of education and rural school closures. I am pleased to see Karen Gillon in the chamber because some of my speech will reflect on what happened in the previous session and the commitments that the Education, Culture and Sport Committee raised about guidelines for rural school closures—I can see her nodding. When I was first contacted by Midlothian schools that are facing closure, I wanted to find out about the context and previous policy on the issue. We know that, in Midlothian, Howgate Primary School, Temple Primary School, Borthwick Primary School, Cousland Primary School and Cranston Primary School face closure. School closures are happening not just in the Borders and Midlothian, but throughout Scotland—and they are happening this year. Rosemary Byrne made the point that closures are closely tied to the buildings and estates review and the second-phase PPPs, and we must address that issue. Some of the school closures that were discussed before were in authorities that had falling school rolls. That issue needs to be addressed, but it is separate from the closure of some schools, especially in Midlothian and parts of the Borders, in which occupancy is above 80 per cent. Our approach to education policy and social inclusion is very important. I quote the report of the minister's colleague, Jamie Stone, on rural school closures, which was the result of a petition that came to the Parliament in May 2001. The issue has not arisen recently—it has a history. With reference to Moray Council, the report states: "Moray considers that the Scottish Executive's Social Inclusion agenda is closely focussed in the Central Belt." I appeal to the minister—if the Parliament is to pursue social inclusion, it must embrace rural issues and schools. I want to address the minister's responsibility for school closures. I hope that we will not hear him say that the issue is the responsibility of local  authorities only. When I was contacted by the Midlothian schools campaign group, I sought to find out about the last stage that the petition reached. The Education, Culture and Sport Committee asked COSLA to produce guidelines. As the minister will know, on 12 March 2003 the Scottish Executive Education Department wrote to the committee on the subject of school closures and rationalisation. It said: "COSLA decided to abandon its work on a Code of Practice and wrote to the Executive on 9 October 2001". The Executive went on to say: "The outcome was an agreement that it would be sensible to await the publication of the school estate strategy"— which has led to the second-phase PPPs that we have heard are leading to the closure and rationalisation of many schools— "and then to meet again to discuss further the issue of school rationalisation after authorities had had time to consider the document". What has happened since then? What is the educational value of closing schools? In March 1998, Brian Wilson said that there had to be proportionate advantage and that no school should close on financial grounds alone. What about composite classes? There has been a big increase in the number of composite classes because the Executive has cut class sizes from 32 to 30 pupils. No research has been done on that. One argument for school closures that is being used in Midlothian, in particular, is that single-stream schools are not as good as double-stream schools. Where is the research base for that assertion? It was not there for the commitment that was made on composite class sizes. We must ensure that decisions are based on the needs of communities and on good educational foundations and arguments. Those are lacking in this case. I say passionately that we must address the issue now, as school closures are happening in this financial year. We cannot allow the problem to go for three years without being addressed and without guidelines being issued that stand up for communities, as happened in the previous session. I congratulate Christine Grahame on securing the debate and ask all members to gather behind her on the issue of rural school closures, so that we can address it here and now in the Parliament.

Does Cathy Peattie agree with the section on child care on page 9 of the report by the strategic group, which says: "The Scottish Executive should enhance the quality and value of the childcare workforce. There should be a review of the pay and conditions of childcare workers in the public and private sectors." Should that work be done on a national basis and should there be a national settlement for nursery nurses?

Will the minister share with members the content of his letter today to The Scotsman , which stated that it was "unfounded" speculation that the Government intended to provide two hours of compulsory PE at primary school level?

To ask the Scottish Executive what importance it places on the provision of appropriate school, health and transport facilities to support major housing developments, such as the heartlands project at Polkemmet in West Lothian, which has the fastest-growing population in Scotland. (S2O-1667)

The minister will be aware that 2,000 houses are proposed along with important environmental remedial work at Polkemmet. The provision of a road junction to the M8 is vital to the proposal. Can she give an assurance that her Executive colleagues with responsibility for planning and transport will work collectively to deal with any competent application that is made? Furthermore, can the minister provide a reassurance that the proposal will not be unduly influenced by other major development proposals in the central belt such as the development that is proposed at Ravenscraig, in the First Minister's constituency?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

It is celebrated only in Edinburgh.

Are the member and the minister aware of the proposal to start celebrating festivals for tourism with St Andrew's day on 30 November and to take that through to Burns day on 25 January? That would place the Hogmanay celebrations in the middle of two months which ordinarily have poor tourism activity. That is a great opportunity.

Has the St Andrew's week committee approached the Catholic Church to find out what would be involved in changing the date?

The report was right to talk about pay modernisation, but today's announcement of an increase of 3.4 per cent for teaching staff does not augur well for modernisation in the coming year. What timescale would be appropriate for modernisation?

Will the member give way?

Does the member acknowledge that one concern about that dispute is that local pay bargaining may be introduced, which could undermine the pay of lower-paid staff in England? That would necessarily have a knock-on effect in Scotland.

I, too, pay tribute to the Enterprise and Culture Committee. The debate is important and timely. The committee's report is comprehensive and it is important that it goes wider than just analysing the top-up fees issue. I reiterate the position of the Scottish National Party: regardless of the implications of top-up fees, we must address comprehensively the future of higher education funding. In the spirit of St Patrick's day, just as the minister acknowledged the University of Aberdeen's endowment, we should acknowledge the honour given to Irishman Bernard King of the University of Abertay Dundee and his contribution to higher education in Scotland. The committee has served the debate well. It provided a political lead early in the second session of the Parliament and filled the vacuum that the Executive had left. Its report was issued to every Scottish MP before the Westminster debate on the Higher Education Bill. We were led to believe that the phase 3 review report would be key. It turns out that it is a comprehensive collection of data and includes useful information and makes recommendations, although the fact that the participants produced an alternative website is worrying. The problem is that we have not yet had a response to it from the Executive. The Executive bends over backwards to make statements and have debates about other people's reviews, but on the issue of higher education funding we are yet to hear about its own policy and review. I acknowledge the fact that the issues are complex, the challenges are big and the implications are manifold, but hiding from the problem does not help to address it.  The committee acknowledges in its report that top-up fees will have an adverse impact. There has been speculation that a huge Barnett windfall will come to Scotland as a result of what is happening in England. The phase 3 report states that although £1 billion will be generated in top-up fees income for universities in England, it is likely that we will have only a £30 million Barnett consequential here. It would be useful if in summing up the minister could indicate that at least that amount will be invested and that the Executive will not steal it away to put in another area. I am rather bemused by the Executive's announcement today of already-announced research money for universities. I understand that SHEFC was due to make the announcement on Friday, but that was delayed in order for the minister to announce the proposals today. I welcome the moneys—which were announced previously. The budget day announcement of a 3.4 per cent increase in funding for higher education teaching might be buried in today's news release, but it is of concern, given that we are in a period of industrial dispute and even the university principals acknowledge the pay problems that university staff face. I doubt whether the 3.4 per cent increase will give universities the room for manoeuvre that they need over the coming year to address the problem. I am concerned that the minister is not addressing the key point. Today should not be about lulling the public into a false sense of security that something new is happening, because so far today we have heard nothing new from the minister. We acknowledge that resources are going into higher education, but we want to address the pace of investment. How can we ensure that we remain competitive if we do not know from what basis we are starting? The rate of increase in investment in England is double that here. The Scottish Executive spend from the Scottish block is increasing by 23.29 per cent in the current period 2002-03 to 2005-06, yet the SHEFC spend for that same period is increasing by only 14.8 per cent, which is a below-average increase compared with the increases for other departments. In a sense, the Parliament is as guilty as the Executive is in this regard because, in the previous session, we allowed the issue of tuition fees to overshadow the rest of the debate about higher education funding. It is as if we assumed that, because we had dealt with tuition fees, we could tick the higher education funding box. However, that was not the case.

We have always recognised that the Executive dealt with tuition fees. The problem is that it did so by moving them from the front end to the back end. I hope that Jamie Stone takes my point seriously. The fact that we focused on tuition fees perhaps meant that, collectively, we ignored the wider issue of higher education funding. If we can get a consensus on that point, we can perhaps move forward. We have to allow the minister to break out of the bunker mentality, because there is a stark choice for the Executive: plan for success in this decade or prepare for crisis management in the next. The committee report acknowledges that there have been many successes. The points that are made about participation and the role of further and higher education are key and some important recommendations are made. We do not need foundation degrees, which they have down south, because we have a robust and successful further education system. We have to address the issue of research. If Conservative MSPs want to be taken seriously, they should ask the English Tory MPs to stop attempting to remove provisions from the Higher Education Bill that are relevant to Scottish ministers. That cannot be squared with Peter Duncan MP sitting on his hands. That is hypocrisy. On research, how much should the minister direct universities and how much autonomy should universities have? We can make progress on the policy of creating a smart, successful Scotland. Yesterday, I spoke to Norwegians who talked about the policy of giving tax breaks to companies that have fewer than 50 employees and which invest in research and last week, Irish visitors told me that they viewed education as being vital to their economic success. We can reach a consensus on this issue, but we must acknowledge the position that we are starting from. If we want to be competitive, we must tackle this issue seriously and look to the future. Instead of managing higher education as a problem, we should grasp it as an opportunity.

Perhaps the minister will tell us at some point what that means in pounds, shillings and pence. Will he acknowledge that in the most recent spending review in 2002, the rate of investment in higher education in England was substantially higher than the rate here in Scotland? Regardless of the Westminster Parliament's decision on top-up fees in the future, does he recognise that we have a strong case to argue for more competitive investment in higher education here and now, as part of his economic policy for a smart, successful Scotland?

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive what implications the rate of retirement of teachers will have for its ability to ensure that there are sufficient teacher numbers to meet its targets. (S2O-1399)

The minister will be aware that, for some time now, the SNP has highlighted the need to double or even triple the number of new recruits into teacher training colleges. Bearing in mind the facts that there was an 11 per cent increase last year in the number of teachers retiring, that that trend is likely to continue, and that we will need 1,500 teachers on average each year just to replace those who are retiring, what measures will the minister take to try to bring more people into the teaching profession?

Does the First Minister agree that Scottish education policy must not be made on the hoof in reaction to domestic headline-grabbing initiatives by the Prime Minister? The drugs issue in Scotland is too important to be dealt with in that way. Does the First Minister understand that neither parents nor teachers have asked for random drug testing in schools? If the head teachers reject the invitation that the First Minister has given them to implement such powers, will he apologise for wasting their time?

We have had a number of debates on young people and related  subjects. We have had debates on children and young people, the children's hearings system, social work services, children's therapists, child protection, alternatives to custody, youth offending, the children's commissioner, and we now have this debate. It is clear that the Parliament, through members' business debates, Executive-led debates and committee debates, has touched on the subject of young people a number of times. Many of the debates have been general in nature, as is the motion that is before us today. Therefore, it is relevant to accept an illustrative amendment to try to articulate some of the arguments, because we face an immediate and urgent situation in the shape of the Airborne Initiative. That situation reflects a regular theme of many of our previous debates; that theme, as Keith Raffan said, is breaking the cycle of deprivation. Children who appear in the children's hearings system for care and protection at the age of eight often end up returning as persistent offenders at the age of 11.

That point is well made. The Executive should welcome a parliamentary review of services for young people. Such a review should be viewed within the context of reconsidering the position of Airborne. However, for that to be meaningful, Airborne would have to have a short-term continuation of funding. Robert Brown made a point about Airborne not being the minister's responsibility. We recognise that the Executive practises collective responsibility. Our debates on young people have been conducted in isolation from one another, but the same theme keeps returning: the need to break the cycle of deprivation. We must have an example of an effort to do that and the Airborne Initiative offers a golden opportunity to see an example of joined-up working from the Executive portfolios of education and young people and justice. The minister stated that Airborne is not relevant to this debate because the initiative deals with older youngsters of 19 and over. YouthLink Scotland, which is the national youth agency for Scotland, recently commissioned a poll on the opinions of young people from the ages of 11 to  25; that illustrates the wide age range within which we can consider policy solutions for young people. It is appropriate to address the issue of the Airborne Initiative here and now, and we can do so by means of the SNP's amendment. Child protection has been mentioned in the debate. We recognise that problems with care and protection in the early years can lead to problems later on. There is concern about the effectiveness and timescale of the implementation of the recommendations in "It's everyone's job to make sure I'm alright". I am pleased to say that the Education Committee, under its convener Robert Brown, is undertaking a child protection inquiry. I share concerns that the timescale for review of the children's hearings system may miss some of the opportunities to make a direct intervention now. The City of Edinburgh Council is concerned that the percentage of cases in which no social worker has been allocated has increased from 9.5 per cent to 22 per cent. That is because of a 14.5 per cent increase in permanent vacancies in the children and families practice team, which represents a significant increase over the past three years. Rather than the issue being investigated over a period of time, after which it may be difficult to have direct intervention, the children's hearings system needs support now. Part of the motion touches on looked-after children. Members may be aware that this week the BBC is running a season of programmes about looked-after children. In my household, I was forced to watch "The Story of Tracy Beaker—The Movie of Me"; the programme may not have reflected all children's homes, but it was important in reflecting some of the issues and concerns about looked-after children. It is imperative that the issue of looked-after children is addressed. The interim report on fast-track hearings shows that a much higher proportion of children who were referred on offence grounds for persistent offending, in comparison with other young people who were referred on offence grounds, were living in a residential establishment—28 per cent against 3 per cent—and far fewer were living at home with both parents. Statistics show that six out of 10 young people who leave care have no qualifications; 20 per cent have had a spell of homelessness and 60 per cent of young people receiving aftercare were not in education, employment or training. It is vital that we address those points. What does being young in Scotland mean? We have a diminishing pool of fresh talent. We talk about fresh talent, but there are fewer young people for us to work with. We desperately need a national youth strategy and I would like to hear a timescale for that.  The Parliament has an opportunity to do the right thing today. We must give the Executive confidence to do the right thing by young people. It is essential that we recognise that, in relation to youth justice and youth offending, we need one voice, but many solutions. There must be a range of solutions to choose from. Donald Gorrie made the important point that although this debate is general and the Airborne Initiative is by no means a solution to everybody's issues and circumstances, the Executive's decision will send out a message. If the Parliament and the Executive are serious about illustrating the fact that there are alternatives, we must take the opportunity for the Parliament, together with the Executive, to undertake a sensible and constructive consideration of the issue. That would be a job well done by the Parliament today.

Will the member give way?

The minister may be aware of the concerns that have been expressed on a number of occasions about the restrictions that the Data Protection Act 1998 could place on professionals seeking to ensure the very protection that he is talking about. Will he consider the impact of data protection legislation on the professionals that he has mentioned?

Will the minister give way?

Thank you very much, gentlemen. I appreciate what the Executive is saying about looked-after children. However, we seem to be setting lower standards for looked-after children than for other children. We need to look beyond that. The other serious concern about looked-after children is the lack of co-ordination between different departments and services. Looked-after children are being failed. We have promises from the minister, but we need firm action instead of visions and expectations.

I appreciate that the minister cannot comment on the planning applications. He mentions that the bridging-the-gap team is already in operation and is considering options. In the past, the Executive has said that the first prison of the two to have its planning application approved would be the privately built, privately run one. Is that still the case or are other criteria being used to judge which of the locations—Addiewell or Low Moss—should host the privately run prison and so be open to tender?

I am pleased to have secured this debate this evening. The topic raises considerable local concerns in my Lothians constituency but it also touches on national issues in the fields of justice and planning policy. I thank members from political parties throughout the chamber for signing the motion, which is clear in focusing on the public's right to know whether or not proposed prison developments in their communities will or will not be run as private concerns. It is an issue of openness and accountability in public policy, and it is an issue of democracy. Politicians want the public to participate in public policy but then, as happened in this case, ride rough-shod over the basic tools that the public want as part of the process. The public want all the information that they need at the right time, and to be treated with a bit of respect. It is not very often that I quote a Labour politician, but I would like to quote from a recent publication by Robin Cook. He says: "It is a strange and indefinable thing, community spirit. Every politician agrees that we need more of it but none of us can artificially conjure it up." He continues: "Yet despite all that" deprivation, Addiewell "has a stronger, fiercer sense of community, pride and solidarity than you'll find in Windsor or Maidenhead." Addiewell and West Calder are strong, vibrant communities. They deserve our respect on this issue. The west of West Lothian is often the forgotten place. It is where people want to have dumping; it is where there are plans for opencasting; and now it is where there are plans  for a prison. The proposal will involve the purchase of council-owned land, so I am quite aware that it will be referred to the Scottish ministers for a final decision. That may limit the scope of what the minister can say today, particularly in relation to objections that are purely to do with planning. Serious planning concerns arise, especially because the proposed West Lothian site is above a former shale mining work. When a refuse tip was proposed in the 1980s, concerns arose that the mine shaft would have to be sealed off and that the digging out and consolidation of old workings would be necessary and very expensive. In 1988, West Lothian District Council's planning report stated that the area should be used only for low-intensity purposes. All such planning aspects will be dealt with through the normal mechanisms. Members might recall the many statements, debates and questions on the Executive's prison estates review, the concerns that were raised about prisons being run by the private sector, and the final acceptance by the Executive that it should give the public sector the chance to bid for one of the two prisons that are to be built. I recognise the pressures of overcrowding and I appreciate that it is absolutely essential for the barbaric practice of slopping out to be dealt with. It should be noted that at the public meeting on prisons policy that was held in October and attended by more than 300 members of the local community, people were interested in discussing wider penal policy issues. They were concerned that, as a country, we jail more people per head of population than almost any other European country. It is interesting to note that although those people have strongly held views about local amenity issues, the environment, transport, the emergency services and house prices, the vast majority of them wanted to express the view that they are not just interested in making not-in-my-backyard arguments. People are concerned about whether the prison is to be a private prison for two reasons. First, there is a moral reason. Private prisons bring a whole new meaning to the phrase "the proceeds of crime". It is not right for profits to be made as a result of the state's decision to incarcerate someone. Even if members do not agree with that proposition, do they not respect the rights of others to hold and express that view? Secondly, there are operational concerns about private prisons. Perhaps other members will comment on the experience of Kilmarnock prison: high levels of violence and fire raising, high staff turnover, and poor conditions for staff. There are also issues to do with the effects on local amenities and local emergency services. Members should remember that we are talking about the  edge of the Lothian and Borders police and fire service area, and therefore the edge of the policing and fire service provision for that area. Some people at the public meeting said that they do not care whether the prison is run by martians, the private sector or the Scottish Prison Service, which is an interesting combination. However, a significant number of people care about who will run the prison and they are entitled to air their concerns. The problem is that our so-called democratic process does not give them information or respect. The process clearly started with approaches to and from and negotiations between the Scottish Prison Service and West Lothian Council before the 2003 council elections, but the Labour council gave no indication that it would support the prison. On 23 May, weeks after the election, a paper suddenly appeared that proposed a joint site investigation at Addiewell by the SPS and the council. The council has an interest in the site not only because it owns the land but because it wanted to investigate the use of the site for waste management purposes. At the time, the council agreed to go ahead with the site investigation but said that there should be a full public consultation and that relevant issues that arose from that consultation should be taken into account in any subsequent applications for statutory or other consents. However, that has not happened. The SPS is consulting—the consultation period ends tomorrow—but, according to the council, the applications themselves should be subject to the results of the consultation process. As the consultation that ends tomorrow is the only period during which non-design concerns may be raised, how can the council's requirements be met? The public do not even know whether the proposed prison is to be a private prison, and the results of the public consultation will not be made known. Even before the consultation process ends, the Labour members of the council have agreed, by a majority, to pass the final decision to an unelected, unaccountable official. The decision will not be taken in the democratic forum of the council. Where exactly in the process is the public's voice about private prisons to be heard? This is a travesty of democracy. The process has been flawed in many ways and the people of West Lothian are being kept in the dark. Their democratic right to be heard has been denied, and that is why I lodged my motion for debate. The issue of prisons is not just of national concern; whether the prison is to be private is of local concern. To all intents and purposes, the people of West Lothian are acting as the conscience of Scotland on the matter. That is why I ask the Executive to deny the current notice of proposed development and to instruct the SPS to  resubmit full details of who will build and operate the prison—of course, the Executive will have to tell the SPS which type of prison it will be. That information should form part of any new notice of proposed development. To do that would be to act in a manner that is open and accountable and in a way that treats the public with respect. If we want the public to be part of public policy, we should give them information at the right time and treat them with respect. That is why I lodged the motion.

Paragraph 215 of the Education Committee's report on the bill requests that the minister itemises those moneys that are meant to support the general duty and produces a revised financial memorandum. What is his response to that?

The way in which the Government and the Parliament legislate to provide support needs for children is one of the most important and sensitive issues with which we deal. For some time it has been recognised that—as was highlighted in the Education, Culture and Sport Committee report to which the minister referred—the current system is far from ideal and improvements need to be made. We all have constituency cases of parents' having approached us because they are concerned about how they engage in a system that frequently becomes adversarial when there is dispute about access to assessment, the assessment itself and the provision of services. Indeed, we must recognise that the energy that is needed to deal with the system, and the distress that that causes, frequently bear heavily on the families concerned. The bill has been some time in gestation; indeed, it was delayed so that the Executive could take into account the wider views of parents. The Education Committee has also taken a long time to take evidence from many witnesses before producing a thoughtful report on this important and sensitive subject. At the heart of today's debate, however, is the fact that there are two interpretations of the approach that the bill takes. I note that when the minister appeared before the committee, he  acknowledged that he would be comfortable with either interpretation. One interpretation is that the bill will bring fundamental change and introduce a whole new system. The other interpretation is that the bill will change only the administration of additional support needs. The perspective that people take lies at the core of the debate and affects what the public might expect from the bill. The bill concentrates on the operation of the new CSPs that are to come into force. The Executive says that only 2 per cent of children will have a CSP compared with the 4 per cent of children who currently have records of needs, which will be abolished by the bill. Those figures are disputed, but even if we take the Executive's position, there are serious concerns about the bill's financial memorandum. The financial memorandum focuses simply on the costs associated with the operation of the tribunal system, which is associated with CSPs. On that analysis, the bill should be viewed simply as an administrative change. However, a different perspective was presented to the committee by a number of witnesses, who said that the bill will introduce a fundamental change to the system because the new definition of additional support needs will introduce a wider inclusive approach. The concentration on co-ordination of support provision, which will replace the dependence on a medical model of assessment, will bring a new and welcome change. Another fundamental change is the new general duty that the bill will place on education authorities to provide support so that the needs of all those who have support needs are met. The minister confirmed to the Education Committee that he expects those services to be improved. The problem is the level of resources that will be provided if the bill is to introduce that fundamental change, which will mean that so much will depend on the general duty of local authorities. In its latest correspondence, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities said that it has continuing concerns that the bill could generate expectations among, and pressures on, parents at levels that will exceed resourcing provision. The problem is that if the new system is meant to embed current best practice—as we know it is—the unmet need that currently exists must be recognised. In particular, there is unmet need for child therapy services, on which we had a members' business debate only recently. There are serious concerns that if the all-important general duty is to be fulfilled, the bill will need to provide the resources to support that. The financial memorandum does not mention that. In his correspondence, the minister has indicated that a list of other mainstream education budgets can be expected to support provision to  meet additional support needs. Those should be mentioned in a revised financial memorandum, which the committee has recommended as a possibility. On a point of process and procedure, although I welcome the minister's announcement that there will be £14 million in the future and £12 million immediately to support the introduction of the bill as enacted, surely that means that we need a revised financial memorandum before we proceed further to stage 2. A new three-tier system will be introduced, which will consist of co-ordinated support plans, individual education plans and personal learning plans. There will be great reliance on the latter two kinds of plan, but they are not even in the bill. Indeed, PLPs are currently only being piloted. The SNP is greatly sympathetic to the need to pursue in policy, in legislation and—most importantly—in operation a single universal system that does not have the problems that are associated with a three-tier system. The minister acknowledges that a universal system would be the ideal, but thinks that in the short term a different approach is required. The SNP is disappointed that the Executive has not taken the opportunity to introduce a single universal system. The bill will leave us with a three-tier system. Some people will argue that that is right, because the bill should concentrate on the administration and, importantly, the co-ordination that is needed to deal with children who have the most complex needs and who need services from different agencies. That is where co-ordination frequently breaks down and there are problems. However, unless the recommendations and qualifications that the Education Committee makes in its report are taken on board, we will be left with a system in which the CSP may be the passport to services and in which possession of a CSP carries with it legal rights of access to the tribunal. In that case, the CSP will become the vehicle for accessing much-needed services, which many people fear will be rationed. If that happens, the bill will have failed. The committee has frequently heard concerns that trust has broken down under the current system. The bill is right to support dispute resolution and mediation, but I hope that the minister will take on board the concerns that have been expressed about advocacy; he says that he wants to support such services, but perhaps that should be in the bill. To build parents' trust in the new system, we need to do two things. First, we need to shift the balance of power back to parents from the hands and—importantly, under the bill—from the discretion of education and other authorities. Secondly, we need to build in safety nets to ensure that children other than those who have  CSPs will be able to access tribunals, so that assessments of children who do not qualify for CSPs can be appealed. If the Executive is right—the good will is that it is—and the new general duty is sufficient to ensure that all support needs will be met, it should have no worries about extending the tribunal function and other legal recourses to other parents. That measure would do a great deal to reassure worried parents. I want to address the amendment in the name of Lord James Douglas-Hamilton, because it reflects the Education Committee's view. The committee wants to ensure that rights are respected and that support needs are met. It is important that that be acknowledged—I heard what the minister said on that issue. Integrated working is essential. We must ensure that authorities do not use the general opt-outs in the bill in order not to take on their responsibilities. When dealing with a bill such as this, the rights of the child should be enshrined in law, so if the bill is deficient in that regard, as it may be, that problem must be addressed. As the committee discovered when taking evidence, the code of practice is absolutely essential. I recommend to the minister that he have the confidence to bring a code of practice to the chamber under the affirmative procedure. As other members may mention, tribunals are critical. The issue of transitions is also important. There are two aspects to consider in relation to transitions: what happens to those who are leaving school and, importantly, what happens to those who are currently in the system. I wonder how many records of needs have been opened since October. The minister may be able to do some research into that question before the winding-up speeches. If he can reassure us that, in operation, there has been no diminution in services and in the number of records of needs that are being opened, that would be helpful.

We take on board the minister's reassurance and his instruction that there should be no diminution in current services. We accept that Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education will monitor the new system. However, it would be helpful for us to find out what the situation is and how many records of needs have been opened since October.  I welcome the minister's comments about under-threes and I expect him to address some of the issues relating to three and four-year-olds in nurseries, especially in respect of there being no state provision. Some useful comments have been made on that issue. As the minister will see from the committee's report, a sensible approach should be taken to aids and adaptations.

No. I need to watch my time. The minister knows that I have expressed good will towards the bill and that the SNP can deal with its passage sensibly and co-operatively. However, the more evidence the Education Committee took and the more I heard from witnesses from all sides, the more concerned I became that the children who would not qualify for a CSP and who were on the margins and, more important, children who have hidden disabilities, will not be helped by the bill and will find their path to support more difficult. The bill should be changed and should be judged on what appears at stages 2 and 3. The bill must meet the needs of all children who have additional support needs. That is why the section in the bill and the part of the committee report that mention those legal needs are important. The SNP is disappointed at the lost opportunity to introduce a single universal system, but we will work constructively at stage 2 to promote amendments that support many of the committee report's recommendations, because all children with support needs—not just some—deserve that.

I thank the deputy minister for the recognition that he and the minister gave last week to the fact that standards should not fall. Can  he tell me how many people will enter teacher training each year over the next few years? How many will go through the process to provide the 3,000 new, additional teachers? [ Interruption. ]

Rhona Brankin makes an important point. Perhaps she should distinguish between vocational education in the sense of training for a vocation and the more creative use of vocational choice in the curriculum that allows schools to reach those pupils who have difficulties with the traditional subjects. I hope that she spots that important distinction.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I would never describe you as menacing. The minister's motion seems to be very much a work in progress—a check-up of the Executive's various programmes and new proposals. The minister says that he would like a debate on education philosophy—I would be more than delighted to have such a debate, and I invite him to lodge a motion on the subject. The issue is continuous programmes. Perhaps the minister does not want to debate education standards because of a previous Executive's record. Of course, he was the Deputy Minister for Children and Education in a previous Executive. We should, however, recognise some of the good moves that the Executive has made. Class size reduction is the right way forward, as is ending national league tables. Ending national tests that prevent diagnostic assessment is the right way forward. The SNP has argued that for many years, and I welcome the Executive's move towards it.

No, I want to move on. One of the Executive's key pledges is to reduce class sizes in secondary 1 and 2 for maths and English. The minister knows that the SNP has taken a keen interest in that, because in order to achieve that 3,000 new teachers were pledged. I understand that there is an element in the draft budget for that, which I welcome. There is also an element in the budget to pay for the national Spark information and communications technology project, although we do not know what the balance of expenses will be on that. As far as work force planning is concerned, with 40 per cent of teachers leaving the profession or retiring in the next 10 years, Scotland has a real challenge in education. I would like to hear more about that from the minister in February when, I understand from the answer to a parliamentary question, the work force planning report is due. I welcome the move towards a reduction in class sizes in primary 1—although we would have liked that to cover P1, P2 and P3. The Executive should be wary of not meeting that pledge in composite classes. The teacher pledge is important, but I worry that, if we are paying for teachers through  end-year flexibility, that is not a secure means of funding them. If I were a teacher being funded in that way, I would question where next year's or subsequent years' wages were coming from. I do not think that EYF is a stable way of paying for such a proposal. Perhaps that is being done because the commitment came as a last-minute proposal before last year's elections. We should consider the teacher deficit connected with those who are leaving the profession. It is estimated that 900 new teachers are needed every year, just to replace those who are retiring. The 2003-04 session is already under way and there is a commitment to provide 3,000 new teachers. Obviously, the intake of new teachers cannot start their training until later this year, and they will not graduate until 2005. That leads me to believe that there are only two years in which to increase recruitment to supply those 3,000 new teachers who are to help meet the Executive's key education pledge. I am concerned that that will prove to be a real challenge. I have not so far heard about any initiatives to accelerate or significantly expand the number of teachers undertaking post-graduate training. The intake for 2003-04 was 950. We have two years to meet the new challenge of supplying 3,000 teachers, which means training 1,500 teachers each year, in addition to the 900 required to replace teachers leaving the profession. That makes a total of about 2,400 teachers who need to be trained each year for two years, which means that a trebling of the current capacity of initial teacher training is required in order to meet the Executive's pledge of 3,000 new teachers in maths and English. Only 401 maths and English teachers were trained last year in Scotland, which is only 17 per cent of the number of students who are studying initial teacher training. Either the Executive owns up to the fact that its pledge cannot be met or it admits—as it has done—that it now wants transitions between P7 and S1 and S2. I recognise the need for that, but transferring existing teachers from primary school to secondary school is not a provision of new teachers, which is what was pledged, agreed to and promoted in the partnership agreement. My concern is shared by others. The Scottish Secondary Teachers' Association said: "This proposal has nothing to do with education; it has to do with teacher shortages. This is a backdoor way of resourcing secondaries". I would be interested to hear the minister's response to that. Still on resources, the minister will know that we have serious concerns about another matter. Yesterday's Edinburgh Evening News carried a story entitled "PPP firm 'holding schools to ransom'". For those who are not aware of the  story, it is about youngsters with special needs being moved out of Willowpark special school in Gorgie. They will have to face a double upheaval when they move into specially built premises at the new Firhill campus, which is due for completion in 2005. The public-private partnership company, the Edinburgh Schools Partnership, has told the City of Edinburgh Council that it would charge £8.6 million extra if it was not allowed to start building work on a replacement school this summer. The pressures are not on the private companies, but on the pupils. That example is one of commercial profit coming before educational needs. The problem driving that is the Executive's obsession with PPP. If it did not have that obsession, I would understand it if the Executive was willing to consider other sources of funding. However, it has already said that the school fund, which is very important for councils, will not be available for prudential borrowing. It is extremely important to make music tuition available to pupils, and in the very good debate that we had on enterprise in education, we recognised the importance of the expressive arts in cultivating innovation and ideas. However to give a primary 6 pupil one year of music and then take it away is most unfair. There have been some welcome proposals for vocational training—the SNP made proposals for post-16 vocational training—but I would question the extent to which initiatives are used. We have initiative after initiative; we have health initiatives and active school co-ordinators, but practical examples of what works on the ground—including a recent initiative from Easterhouse, which the Executive should consider—are being rejected. I leave the Executive with a final thought. One of the welcome suggestions that the Executive made was to move more budgets to head teachers' control. We welcome the move to 90 per cent funding; however, one teacher said to me, "I would be happy if I got the 80 per cent that I am meant to get." I note the Executive's progress and what it is working on and I welcome it. If we believe that education is the key to the world, as Dennis Canavan said, let us open the door to the liberation and achievement of all our young people. Let us return to education and have the philosophical debate, rather than a debate just on work in progress. I move amendment S2M-806.1, to leave out from "supports" to end and insert: "notes the Scottish Executive's additional financial support and reform programme for school education; welcomes its belated adoption of longstanding SNP policies on the principle of class size reduction, tackling the bureaucratic problems associated with national tests and the damaging impact of the national publication of school  league tables; looks forward to the Parliament's involvement in the review and reform of the curriculum, in the opportunities available around the transition period of pupils into primary, secondary and post-14 education and in additional support for learning, and calls on the Executive to ensure that resources, in particular sufficient properly trained and qualified teachers, are in place to meet these demands."

I am glad that the debate has opened on an international perspective. I encourage the minister to visit as many countries as possible in order to gain knowledge. Is he aware that the result of the introduction of top-up fees in New Zealand was a reduction in the number of medical and science students? The costs of those courses are more expensive because they are longer and involve the purchase of capital equipment.

The minister will know that there was cross-chamber support for the McCrone agreement and the benefits that it will bring, but is he aware that an indirect result of McCrone has been the introduction of faculty arrangements in schools, which is causing a degree of demoralisation in authorities where such arrangements are not being introduced? Will he reflect on that, because that is counterproductive to what we all want to achieve?

Does the First Minister acknowledge that he might be part of the problem as he has raised the expectations of the public and pupils by connecting the tackling of sectarianism with the use of joint campuses? Does he recognise that campuses that are the size of the one in Dalkeith will always have problems with pupils? Does he agree with Rhona Brankin and me that support should be given to the teachers and pupils in that school, who are adopting a commonsense approach to the issue?

The urgent need for action to be taken and reports to be implemented now is illustrated by the fact that the University of Edinburgh is already having to draft publications to attract students who will graduate in 2008. The university has no idea what the Scottish Executive plans. Is that not a problem here and now for the university?

Will the member take an intervention?

I do indeed want to comment. My concern is that this is the first debate that we have had on higher education since this Government came into office. It would have been helpful to and instructive for the public in Scotland to know not just that the review was taking place but what it has done and what it has influenced. We have review after review after review, but it is results that matter.

Will the minister give way?

I am pleased to open this Opposition debate on higher education, which is the first debate that we have had on the subject since the new Executive was elected in May last year. We have much to be proud of in our higher education sector. We must see the future of higher education not only in the context of the developments in competition for research and staff with England, but in the European and global context. Given that the knowledge economy is critical, where do we foster that knowledge if not in our universities? If we want a smart, successful Scotland, where will the ideas and intellect be fostered and promoted? Our universities are critical to the country's economic future, but they are also critical to its economic present. The university and higher education sector in Glasgow contributes £0.5 billion to the local economy; here in Edinburgh, the figure is £0.75 billion; and the figure for Scotland as a whole is more than £2.5 billion. The Executive needs to see the sector as an investment, not as a cost burden. I say at the outset that our preference would have been to debate the Enterprise and Culture Committee's report on the issue, but as Westminster will vote on the Higher Education Bill next week, it is important that, within that timescale, we take the opportunity to send a clear message to the elected politicians from Scotland at Westminster about why the introduction of top-up fees in England would disadvantage Scotland. Regardless of the top-up fee proposals in England that we are debating today, the Government in Scotland should be planning strategically to ensure that our higher education sector is well placed to meet and maximise the international opportunities in the future. However, it is unforgivable not to do so when we have the threat of top-up fees and their impact in Scotland. The Executive has seen the English higher education  budget in the current six-year period grow at twice the rate of that in Scotland, even before the introduction of top-up fees. The Scottish National Party will always stand up for the Scottish interest, wherever and whenever that interest is threatened. The SNP MPs at Westminster will vote on the Higher Education Bill next week because until we have financial independence and the powers to compete fairly with England and the rest of the world—and while our financial arrangements are so tightly constrained by the Westminster system—it is our duty and responsibility to do so. I make it clear that Scotland will not receive a Barnett consequential from top-up fees—which will be classed as private money—although we can anticipate some Barnett consequentials from the non-top-up fee student support package. However, in the long term, we will be at a disadvantage. If any member is under the illusion that the bill will be backed by huge amounts of public money, I point out that, despite daily concessions from Tony Blair to sweeten the variable-fee pill, there is still no clear definitive statement of how much new money will go into the system. On 15 January, Tim Yeo, the Conservative education spokesperson, asked Mr Clarke: "There is a substantial burden of new costs associated with the Government's Higher Education Bill—costs that have increased as a result of some of the concessions that the Secretary of State has been forced to make. Will these costs be met within the higher education budget or by additions to that budget?" The answer from Mr Clarke was: "The former."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 15 January 2004; Vol 416, c 941.] One concern is that a raid on the existing higher education budget will have a knock-on effect in Scotland. Clause 1 of the bill will establish a research council under the Department of Trade and Industry to implement the Government's privatising agenda down south. While I am on the subject of research, we cannot and must not accept the Westminster Government's plan to polarise research and to develop an elitist ivy league system. The Scottish Labour MPs' problem is that they are exercising their vote, but doing so against the Scottish interest. The Tories' problem is that their sole Scottish member will not even stand up for Scotland, but prefers to sit on his hands—sometimes.

Excuse me—Peter Duncan has voted at least 37 times on English affairs, including three times on top-up fees, one of which was as  recent as June last year. That is hypocrisy in action. There is a clear consensus that we must take action to address the funding issues in Scottish universities and that the bill will disadvantage Scotland. Our choice is whether to try to influence the vote before it takes place—from our unique perspective and armed with the Enterprise and Culture Committee's report—or to react after the event. Do Scotland and Scotland's Parliament lead or do they follow? As the Deputy First Minister well knows, I accused him of sleepwalking through the issue and of exhibiting complacency and arrogance towards the sector by not acknowledging that there was a problem.

Although I have concerns about the minister's well-being—particularly given that he has told 700 of my constituents that he is delighted that their jobs are moving elsewhere—I perhaps will not be as cruel as Mr Monteith is.

I welcome the fact that the Executive has set up a private and secret review group. I return to my point that, whether or not there was a debate on top-up fees in England, the Executive should have been considering the issues anyway. What has the Executive been doing for the past four years? I know—it has ensured that while the overall Scottish budget has increased by 23 per cent, the higher education budget has increased by only 15 per cent. Political pressure and pressure from Universities Scotland forced last week's admission from Jack McConnell that something must be done and that Scotland's funding advantage is more in the order of 3.6 per cent and not the 20 per cent that the Executive has been hiding behind. Because the SNP has forced a debate on the issue, we have seen movement today in the Executive amendment, which makes some kind of acknowledgement that there would be a disadvantage for Scotland. We thought that  progress was being made until we started hearing from the true voice of Labour at Westminster that top-up fees in Scotland are inevitable. Top-up fees are wrong in principle and we should rule them out. Student debt is already a serious problem for young people. The Prime Minister's logic seems to be that the new measures are okay because students already have debt. We either have financial independence under the SNP to grow the economy and our higher education system or we will be softened up for top-up fees from Labour. Who do we believe on those issues?

No, I want to carry on. Unless we see a concerted effort from the Labour-Liberal Executive to come up with financial provision, we have no option but to believe that the Executive is being softened up for the post-2007 introduction of top-up fees. The SNP can stop that by using the powers that financial independence can bring. Who speaks for Labour on the issue? Which minister was Sam Galbraith referring to in his conclusions the other night on "Newsnight"? We have given options for tackling the short-term challenge: we should use the £47 million from the council tax consequentials, which would not cut other budgets and would keep up with the pace of investment elsewhere. I want our universities to maintain their competitive position and to continue to produce world-class research. From the Executive, I hear the silence of lambs. It might be too much to expect the roar of lions, but all the SNP is asking the Executive to do—and giving members the opportunity to do—is to speak up and speak out for Scotland's national interest. I move, That the Parliament believes that the Higher Education Bill published by the Department for Education and Skills on 8 January 2004 will have an adverse effect on Scottish higher education and therefore calls on all Scottish MPs to vote against the bill at Second Reading.

To ask the Scottish Executive what legislation it will introduce to ensure that school teachers will require to have a teaching degree after the repeal of the remaining sections of the schools code. (S2O-1046)

The minister will be aware that there is a great deal of concern about the repeal of the code. The previous Minister for Education and Young People promised consultation on the matter. Will the minister ensure that there is consultation, particularly in relation to teaching qualifications? Can he give us a guarantee that the repeal will not be used as a means of lowering the entry standards for teachers in order to meet the target of 3,000 new teachers?

Does the First Minister agree that there will be no long-term Barnett consequentials from top-up fees in England? Does he acknowledge that, in assessing what resources are available to universities to spend on research and teaching, the important figure to use is spend per student, the figure used by Tony Blair only yesterday? Does he acknowledge that the spend per student in Scotland three years ago was only 3.6 per cent ahead of the spend in England? That was even before top-up fees and before the current period in which higher education spending in England is double the rate in Scotland. Does he admit that the Executive is doing less, better, in that area and that it is in danger of causing problems for the  competitive advantage of our universities in the future?

It might be useful to reflect on the fact that the McCrone review of the teaching profession also considered access to the profession—for example, it considered probationary teachers and their initial training. Therefore, perhaps we should appreciate that the McCrone review had a wider context and not just a narrow focus on pay and conditions.

Will the minister confirm that, for the purposes of his party's election promise of 3,000 new teachers primarily for English and maths in S1 and S2, the transfer of primary teachers into secondary is not an addition of new teachers but a transfer? Will he also confirm that there may be some difficulty in primary teachers teaching in both primary and secondary, particularly given the reduction in class-contact time expected after McCrone? Given the other pressures, we have to ensure that primary school pupils are given the benefit of primary school teachers.

Will the Cabinet reflect on the recent earthquake in Iran? I am sure that the chamber would wish to send its condolences on the devastation and loss of life there. Is the First Minister aware that the Iranian Government has asked the United Nations to set up a flash appeal? I understand that it will be launched in Tehran today. What support has the Executive already offered, or what support does it intend to offer, to the people of Iran at this time?

I welcome the tone of the Minister for Justice's speech and I welcome her announcements, particularly in relation to children's panels. I will focus on children's panels and children's hearings and, in particular, on the interim report on the pilot programmes that are being conducted on the fast tracking of children's panels. The report was published yesterday on the Executive's website. I hope that the Minister for Justice will reflect on the debate that the Parliament had at the end of October on Scott Barrie's motion on the membership of children's panels. It was a very good debate, in which some very interesting points were made. In recent debates, there has been a danger that the Executive might confuse concern about serious antisocial behaviour with enthusiasm for its proposals to tackle the problem: those are not one and the same thing. I wonder whether the Executive is conducting a good-cop, bad-cop operation; Margaret Curran is the latter, while the Minister for Justice's comments about supporting existing initiatives—particularly in the children's hearings system—put her in the former category. Being tough with one's use of language does not always mean being effective in action. I much prefer the content of the proposals and reflections in the Minister for Justice's speech today to the creation of new laws—when existing laws are not being used effectively—in the Antisocial Behaviour etc (Scotland) Bill. The pilot programmes that have fast tracked persistent young offenders through the children's hearings system have been very interesting. The pilots have taken place in Dundee City Council; Scottish Borders Council and East Lothian Council; and in East Ayrshire Council, North Ayrshire Council and South Ayrshire Council. The interim report shows who is going through the system, the effectiveness of the operation of the system and the input of the different agencies that are involved. However, the report states that "the main data about outcomes will be gathered in the second half of the research." The report shows that 71 per cent of those who go through the system as persistent offenders come back into the system. That is a high  percentage of re-referral, but the report states that it will take some time for fast tracking to produce end results. The report states: "Panel members in particular were pleased that fast track should improve the quality of the information on which decisions are based and strengthen their capacity to ensure that young people access the resources that hearings decide are needed." Breach of the peace accounts for 21 per cent of the offences that are covered by the interim report, assault for 20 per cent, vandalism and malicious mischief for 15 per cent and road traffic offences for 8 per cent. Those are all existing criminal offences and I wonder whether redefining them as antisocial behaviour would make a difference. As a number of members have said, surely it is the disposal that matters. Another significant aspect of the interim report is its statement that "A significant minority of pilot area persistent offenders were also referred on non-offence grounds". That is where my concern about the concentration on youth courts as opposed to the children's hearings system comes from. The report also states: "Compared with other young people referred on offence grounds, the persistent offenders included a much higher proportion living in a residential establishment at the point of referral (28% against 3%) and far fewer were living at home with both parents". The Minister for Justice's points about the emphasis on what happens in relation to looked-after children are vital when we see the information that is emerging about persistent offenders. The report raises another important issue, which touches on a comment that was made by Christine May. It states: "central guidance may be helpful on the sharing of police information, within the context of communication among all other relevant agencies and data protection considerations". There are concerns about the experiences relating to Soham. We know that the experience in Scotland is different, but that important point about the exchange of information must be reflected on. One of the strongest messages that has come forward concerns social work recruitment and retention—retirement is also an important issue. When we consider the age profile of social workers and the work force planning that is taking place, our concern must be to ensure that there are social workers in the here and now and in five or ten years' time, when the majority of social workers will start to retire.  We should reflect on the report "For Scotland's children". As a result of the severe pressure on local authorities, a number of social workers are leaving to join the voluntary sector; they are then lost to the system that we want to support. It is essential that we examine the work pressures on existing social workers and recognise that the Executive and the Parliament, in generating legislation, are creating bigger demand and more work for social workers. Yes, the Executive is recruiting more social workers but, at the same time, it is creating demand that outstrips that supply. That must be addressed. I welcome the fact that the Executive is exhorting local authorities to comply with the children's hearings system to ensure that the reports are there in time. However, unless we address the vital issues of recruitment, retention and work force planning, we will create a rod for our own backs that will cause difficulties in the future. The Executive must ensure that social work training, provision and recruitment happen outwith the central belt. It is quite clear that social workers want to work in the areas in which they live, and that issue must be addressed in the Highlands and the north-east of Scotland. This debate is quite different from any of the other youth justice debates that we have had; I welcome that. If there is one message that we can take away from the debate, it is that the care and protection of children is a vital aspect of crime prevention.

First, I pass on to Sarah Boyack and the rest of the chamber Kenny MacAskill's apologies. He had prearranged a rail meeting for half past 4 before he knew that the debate would be brought forward. I congratulate Bristow Muldoon on securing the debate and I should say that I signed his motion.  As it is very rare for him and me to be on the same side on anything, the minister should take note of the cross-party and geographical spread of feeling on this issue. If we want economic growth in Scotland, we have to acknowledge the role that Edinburgh and the Lothians play in that respect. Unless we have a good enough transport system, we will not achieve such growth. As a result, it is important for the Parliament to take a strategic view about what is needed. Like other members, I do not have a problem with the principle of congestion charging. However, we have a problem with the principle, practice and process of the scheme that has been suggested. The minister should take cognisance of that. One of the important aspects of Bristow Muldoon's motion is its concentration on fair treatment. After all, the Parliament passed the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 to make it clear that it is up to local councils to decide on these matters. However, although the council can put forward proposals, the minister must ultimately reflect on certain strategic views—and, indeed, the views of the chamber—before reaching any final decisions on approval. The point about fair treatment is absolutely essential, because it covers the practice and process of the proposed scheme. As a regular commuter from Linlithgow, I know that, because of the delays, people do not drive into Edinburgh for their own pleasure. Indeed, most people drive into the city because they know that they will need their cars later. Most of the time, I take the train into the city. However, there are severe health and safety issues about the cattle trucks on the Dunblane and Glasgow lines. Employers in Edinburgh are seriously concerned about recruiting people from Fife, given that those people might have to stand for the whole train journey into the city.

I am sorry, but I am very aware of the time and the need to let other members speak. Those employers cannot recruit people from Fife because of the transport problems. However, although we need to do something about the issue, the proposed scheme is not the right way of dealing with it. Robin Harper took great pains to push the positive aspects of the London scheme. I have to say that the jury is still out on that. The big difference is that London has a tube network, an internal rail system and—more important—the democratic mandate that our system does not have.

I want to press on. One of my concerns is that the way in which the proposals have been developed has created a them-and-us attitude between Edinburgh and the surrounding areas. That is a problem. People in West Lothian do not feel part of the process. Nor, I suspect, do people in other regions. We need to get together and take a strategic view, because the problem is that there is no strategic view. I say to Margaret Smith that I think that the biggest problems are the second cordon and the problems in west Edinburgh. We stand united on that and I appeal to her not to pick and choose the parts of the proposals that she likes, but to stand together with us all to say that the real transport problems are in west Edinburgh and that they have to be resolved. We should stand together on that issue. The inequalities between people who pay council tax in Edinburgh and people who pay council tax in other areas are, quite frankly, ridiculous—the City of Edinburgh Council has set its case back. What Bristow Muldoon said about fair treatment must certainly be considered. The issue is about democracy and having a voice. The City of Edinburgh Council had the opportunity to be up front about the issue and to take it to the voters in May. If it had confidence in the proposals, it should have done that. Sarah Boyack mentioned buses. For people, especially women, who live in Armadale and try to commute out of Edinburgh after 6 o'clock, safety is a serious concern. We must have upfront proposals. Initially, the proposals were about congestion charging, but unfortunately they now seem to be about raising revenue. Let us put the focus back on to congestion and let us ensure that we have the revenue to back up the scheme. If the Parliament had proper powers, it might be a wee bit easier to do that.

Is the minister aware that I wrote to the Executive about the issue in June? Head lice infection is causing concern and practical problems for many parents. I told the Executive about the situation in West Lothian, where there is concern that the practical implication of alert letters not being sent out is that outbreaks are not being dealt with. I agree that we must ensure that we do not over-use chemicals. However, mothers—indeed, parents—are very responsible and if they are given the right information, they can deal with the issue promptly. Will the minister review the guidelines quickly? Head lice infection is causing real problems in the here and now.

Is the First Minister aware that, although there might be a prospect of another single bidder coming in to replace the collapsed Ballast consortium in East  Lothian, books and computers are being withheld from schools? Is he aware that schools are having to appeal to the Scottish Qualifications Authority for special consideration, because of problems with continuous assessment? Is he aware that the prudential borrowing that is meant to be on offer from the Executive will not be in place until next April and that, even when it is in place, the schools fund that is available to councils—which is around £190 million—will not be available for prudential borrowing, although it will be available for PPP? Will he stop his ideological obsession with PPP, which is robbing our schools and services of the resources that they very much need? That is not value for money, and it is about time he woke up to that.

Is the £27 million that has been announced intended to allow local authorities to choose to set up mandatory zones, mandatory speed limits or advisory speed limits? What is the money actually for?

I do not know whether the minister is aware that new school transport guidelines were issued only a few months ago. When the Education Committee examined the guidelines, it was concerned to find that there did not seem to be much joined-up thinking between the Education Department and the Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning Department, or much innovative thinking, such as that which Michael Matheson gave an example of. Will the minister give a commitment to reconsider the school transport guidelines to ensure that we embrace some of that innovative thinking?

As well as my responsibilities as a member of the Scottish Parliament, on Fridays I usually have the responsibility of being the walking bus—if I may use that phrase. I walk with half a dozen children from my street to the local primary school and I am conscious of my responsibility as I note the speed of the cars that go by.  West Lothian Council has introduced 20mph speed limits in a number of areas, particularly in villages. Indeed I think that it might have done so before Glasgow City Council, but I will not be picky about the dates. When the minister announced the very welcome money to support the introduction of 20mph speed limits, I was not sure to what extent councils that had already introduced such speed limits off their own backs and without Executive funding would be compensated. I would like the minister to address that point, which raises a central issue about the extent to which the Parliament should dictate what local authorities do. If local authorities are capable of coming up with good ideas and practices themselves, should they not be given the resources that would allow them to make decisions, rather than be allocated ring-fenced money, however welcome that might be? That is a general point that is not just about transport but about the issues that the Parliament has to address. On 8 October when the minister announced the £27 million for local authorities, he said that the money was for the introduction of 20mph speed limits. My understanding is that there are three different types of measure that local authorities can bring in. The first type are mandatory 20mph speed zones, which have particular criteria including traffic-calming measures and for which the police's support must be obtained. The second type are mandatory 20mph speed limits, which are different and include different speed measures. In the second category, the speed below which 85 per cent of vehicles travel should be less than or equal to 24mph. There do not necessarily have to be traffic-calming measures. The third type includes a legally enforceable speed limit of 30mph, for which the support of local residents is crucial. The Executive's announcement was about speed limits, not about speed zones, which are the most stringent measure. I would like clarification of what the Executive expects local authorities to introduce, because there is quite a lot of difference between speed limits and speed zones. If the speed limits are just advisory—the third type of measure—that can be problematic. I refer to the experience of West Lothian Council, because it is probably more advanced in implementing its zones than are other authorities. We might have to address what action is required, because people do not have to pay attention and at 20 minutes to 9 in the morning, the police are not necessarily out monitoring or enforcing the measures. Therefore I am not convinced that the speed limits will have the impact that we want them to have—we have to be conscious of that. They can make a visual impact, as people driving past the school are made aware that they have to slow down. I seek  clarification from the minister on the three different categories. It is interesting to note that whereas in 1972, 111 child pedestrians in Scotland were killed and 2,500 were seriously injured, in 2002 only 14 were killed—that is an improvement, but it is still 14 too many—but still more than 2,000 were injured. We must address those statistics, because even one life is worth the measures. We are obviously conscious of the role of lollipop men, and we should acknowledge the 50 th anniversary of the introduction of lollipop men and women. When I walk to school in my walking bus on a Friday morning, I meet the two Ronnies. They are not the comedians that we know from the television, but they certainly are cheerful and they give children confidence in walking to school on their own, which is important. We should put our thanks to them on the record.

To ask the Scottish Executive what stage the implementation of the McCrone agreement on teachers' pay and conditions has reached and whether it envisages any difficulties arising. (S2O-943)

Perhaps we can have regular and more full explanations at a later date. The minister will be aware that the McCrone agreement includes options for a retirement wind-down for teachers. Does he agree that implementation of the pension provisions in the Westminster green paper that could forcibly increase teachers' pension ages from 60 to 65 could undermine the hard work of all those who ensured that the McCrone agreement was established and implemented? Does the minister agree that that is a matter of serious concern and that we must protect the McCrone agreement from being interfered with by the pension provisions in the green paper?

Does the minister agree that it would be unforgivable if negotiations with private sector schools had delayed charity law reform? Will he confirm that he will consider affording charitable status not only to existing private sector schools, but to local authority-run school projects that are for the public benefit of local children and are funded by not-for-profit trusts?

There are two main arguments in this debate on financial independence. The first of those arguments is about self-respect and responsibility, which—I suspect—a large number of members recognise are things that a normal Parliament should have. The second argument is about opportunity. Would financial independence provide greater opportunity than the status quo? I think that it would, although I acknowledge that not all members would agree. I was disappointed by Tavish Scott's speech. He has been known to be erudite and intelligent, but he stooped to some schoolboy comments today. Perhaps the speech was his penance for daring to speak up for the Scottish fishermen earlier in the year. Although there is a genuine argument in this chamber for federalism, it is yet to find its voice because the Liberal Democrats do not have the confidence to put it forward. That creates a vacuum in the debate.

I will not take an intervention. The Liberal Democrats had the opportunity to lodge an amendment to state their case but they failed to do so. In Scotland, we have low wages, low growth, widening inequality and high emigration. Most worrying of all, our number of births is the lowest ever recorded. Unfortunately, Des McNulty has rudely left the chamber following his speech—

I am sorry. He has moved seats. I say to Des McNulty that this is an extremely serious issue; it should not be treated as a standing joke. I will argue the case for the Parliament's aspirations to grow, because we need that growth to happen for the benefit of Scotland's families. We need it for Scotland's children who are going to university, for Scotland's children who are at school and for Scotland's children who face poverty.

If we have a growing, exciting and dynamic economy, people will want to stay instead of leave. Some of George Lyon's constituents are young women who graduate with £15,000 of student debt. They cannot afford child care and they cannot afford to live in the country that they were brought up in. Is that an incentive for growth? Is that an incentive for our economy? I will address three main areas: higher education, public services, and child care and poverty. The Herald today gives an interesting example of a situation in which Scottish students will lose out under the proposed tuition fees because they will have the worst of both worlds. Should the proposals in the English white paper go ahead, Scottish students would have to pay £9,000 up front, whereas if we were independent, we would be treated like any other EU country so the students would be treated the same and would be in the same position as English students. Unfortunately, Scottish students will have to pay £9,000 up front to study in England because we are not independent and we do not have our own powers. There is disparity in funding. Regardless of whether England introduces tuition fees, we should ensure that we put our shoulder to the wheel to invest in higher education. We are competing not only with England, but with Europe and the wider world. It is extremely disappointing that Liberal Democrat ministers are sleepwalking into the situation, saying, "Let us wait and see  what is in the higher education bill in England." Regardless of the contents of that bill, we should invest in Scotland so that we have a competitive edge. Fiscal autonomy and financial independence would allow us to have more flexibility for investment in our higher education system; to look at the estates review; and to ensure that there is capital investment in our universities—we could do that cheaply under independence, because we would have the powers at our command. Some people want a graduate tax to be used to help to finance education in Scotland. We need fiscal autonomy to do that. That is a clear example of why fiscal autonomy is needed, because it would give us flexibility and choice. We should consider what Quebec is doing as far as using taxation to invest in research and development is concerned. Tavish Scott stated that we have "full autonomy in our spending." I argue that with public-private partnerships we do not. Why are we the private finance initiative capital of Europe? Because Gordon Brown ensured that when investment was being made in public services, it was necessary to go through an excess private profit model, which is PPP. Tell the students in East Lothian, who are having to ask for special dispensation in relation to their exam results in their applications to the SQA, about the benefits of PPPs. That is happening because of the controversial situation that is created by a PPP when the private sector partner goes belly up; it is not the private sector, but the public sector that has the risk. It is the students who have to face going into their exams penalised because of the problems with PPP contracts. David McLetchie questioned whether this issue is about public services. It is—it is about the Edinburgh royal infirmary and PPPs in schools. Another example of an area in which fiscal autonomy could be used creatively is child care. Fiscal autonomy could be used to tackle poverty in this country and to ensure that families can work. I do not think that the current system of child tax credits is acting properly in the interests of our families. We have a crisis in child care in our rural areas; there are mothers who cannot get into work because of a lack of child care. We should be thinking creatively about how we use our fiscal levers of power. I will finish by quoting Nora Radcliffe, who is still in the chamber. She stated: "We have power without accountability. It's demeaning in a way—it's as if you're being given a penny to spend without having to earn it first".  I agree with Nora Radcliffe. The danger is that, as people know, he who pays the piper calls the tune. It is about time that the Scottish people, through the Scottish Parliament, start calling the tune. I support the motion.

Is the member aware of comments by consultants in Edinburgh that the fact that the new Edinburgh royal infirmary is further away from the sick kids hospital than the old ERI is a major disadvantage? They have recommended that Glasgow should learn lessons from what has happened in Edinburgh.

The member mentioned the tax and benefit systems, power over which is obviously reserved to Westminster. I understand that some Liberal Democrat members believe that we should bring those powers back to Scotland. Does the member agree that if, in so doing, we were to integrate the tax and benefit systems, we would tackle the high marginal tax rate that some of the poorest people in our society face?

The minister mentioned the need to keep the women's agenda alive. Over the summer, I saw a report that said that the minister was keen to ensure that the women's agenda was pursued by the Executive. In the remainder of her speech, perhaps she can share with us what that is likely to be.

Although I come from Linlithgow and have some red in my hair, if the member thinks that I am going to dress up as Mary Queen  of Scots to get votes for women, I am afraid that he is mistaken.

I point out that in the first session of Parliament, the SNP delivered 40 per cent of its representation by women. We did not use positive action, although many of us argued for that. Part of that success was due to our making the argument, which is as important as delivering the mechanism. Action is necessary in some parties; in others it is the argument. Either way, we have to achieve a result.

Is the minister aware that the newly published school transport guidelines say very little about nursery transport? The case of West Lothian is pertinent: whereas children in the villages of Torphichen and Westfield get free transport, because there is a primary school in their village but no nursery provision, the children of Philipstoun do not get free transport, because there is no primary school in the village. There are many such anomalies. Given that most three and four-year-olds can now access nursery education, we should examine why there is provision of safety in transport for five-year-olds but not for three and four-year-olds.

If the assurances that the minister seeks from various authorities are not provided by the time that the minister holds next spring's conference, would he be prepared to examine the powers that the social work services inspectorate has? Secondly, on the issue of having someone on health boards who is responsible for child protection services, my understanding is that they should already have been appointed.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Do you recognise that a point of order should refer to the standing orders of the Parliament, and that under the standing orders the minister can make an intervention at any time during a debate? Perhaps that would have been the most appropriate time to make such a contribution.

This most serious of debates is cast at a time and in a climate in which we reflect on the publication of the Caleb Ness inquiry report and the progress of the child protection review that was set up following the death of Kennedy McFarlane. A number of statistics will be quoted in the debate, but we must remember that behind those statistics are individual children with a name who often live in sad, uncertain and cruel worlds. Government cannot solve every problem of every child, but it can ensure that our support and intervention systems proactively try to prevent vulnerable children's hurt, despair and fear. My  concern is that, for various reasons—many of which are noted in the published reviews—Scotland's disjointed way of working has not served children well. The system concentrates on crisis intervention rather than on preventing the crisis in the first place. The Scottish National Party's amendment focuses on the need to increase the pace and range of recruitment. I welcome and acknowledge the Executive's initiatives for social work recruitment. However, as recently as yesterday, the City of Edinburgh Council announced that, in the wake of the Caleb Ness report, it will spend £220,000 on clerical staff to support social workers. Our amendment acknowledges that the issue is wider than simply recruiting social workers and notes that the issues of child care and protection workers and the wider support system must be addressed. For example, the Caleb Ness inquiry report did not point to a shortage of social workers as the key problem in that case; it pointed to the lack of sharing of information, among many other factors. It is of serious concern that the report "It's everyone's job to make sure I'm alright" found that effective service delivery is often a result of extraordinary efforts by individuals, sometimes despite—not because of—system structures. Professionals in the field are working hard to bring Scotland's children safety, security and a chance to develop, but it is surely politicians' responsibility to ensure that those professionals have the support that they need to continue their work and to develop new and innovative ways of working. If those professionals can deliver services as a result of their extraordinary efforts and despite the inertia of the system in which they work, imagine how much better they could work to deliver proper support and assistance within a system that helped rather than hindered. With such a system, the service would be more efficient and effective and there would be far less chance of tragedies that resulted from insufficiencies in service provision. Holistic and constant examination of the delivery of children's services throughout the country is required. I welcome the recommendation that reviews should be on-going after the end of the present three-year period. I also welcome the child protection initiatives that were announced in February and I look forward to the publication of the children's charter. I acknowledge the increase in the budget line for social work training in the minister's portfolio, but I notice that that will be capped after two years. We need a constant increase, not least because the age profile of social workers means that a large number of them will retire in the coming decade. I suggest that there is a strong argument for increasing the training budget.  I believe that every politician in Scotland has a responsibility to advance the services that are provided to children. One of the marks of decency in a society is how its children are protected and encouraged. I want us to go further than the motion suggests in respect of the requirement to review practices. I believe that every public body should be examining how it interacts with children for the purposes of safety and well-being. Interestingly, the Caleb Ness inquiry threw up the problem of drug abuse. There has been a huge increase in the number of children who are referred to children's panels because their parents have drug-abuse problems. The figures from the Edinburgh children's panel show that the increase in referrals is not because of a greater incidence of criminal activity by young people. The big increase in referrals comes from children who need protection and the biggest reason for that is neglect from parents. That must be addressed. The scale of the increase in the number of children concerned is quite staggering. A 13 per cent increase over one year is a call to us all, and certainly to those who provide the relevant services. It is vital that we have a sufficiency of well-trained social workers to meet projected needs. The Government's "For Scotland's children" report outlined the problem around the number of qualified social workers. It noted that a large number of social workers were leaving local authority work to take up employment in the voluntary sector, where working conditions are perhaps deemed to be better. The retention of social workers in local authority employment needs to be addressed. There is no shortage of people wanting to become social workers or to work in child protection, but they often have trouble finding places. If we increased the provision of child care and child protection workers, particularly those working with less vulnerable children, we would release the more experienced social workers to deal with the young people who are at most risk. However, I do not think that the responsibility for ensuring that there is a sufficiency of social workers falls entirely on the heads of local authorities, health boards and the police, as the motion appears to suggest. That is why the SNP's amendment calls on the Parliament to ensure that the Executive "acknowledges its own role". The Government cannot be responsible for the demand for child protection that is caused by negligent parents. However, it has not only key control over the supply of social workers' training and budgets, but a key influence over the demand for social workers. Feedback from the front line over recent weeks shows that, although there is an increasing number of social workers—I  acknowledge the minister's figures on that—the Executive's initiatives on social work, of which we are told there have been 50 since the Executive came to power, have themselves created more demand. That is probably why, despite the increase in recruitment, there has been an increase in the number of vacancies of more than 30 per cent in recent years. The Executive can provide a supply of social workers, but it can also create excessive demands. Those demands and the initiatives taken to meet them may be right, but the problem is continuing. The SNP amendment calls on the Executive "to review the role and powers of the Social Work Services Inspectorate". That comes back to the core issue of responsibility. A blame culture, where people have their backs against the wall and where the system is used to protect individuals and to ensure that people are covered in case there is a problem, is not the climate in which to run services for vulnerable children. It is not blame that is needed; it is responsibility. They are not the same thing. What we want, what the public want and what children need is a system of responsibility—for someone to take responsibility. That was behind the publication "It's everyone's job to make sure I'm alright". I am happy to make a judgment on that following the review of the social work services inspectorate, which, I understand from the minister's comments, is probably being conducted as we speak. We need to know that we have sufficient legislative powers to ensure that every relevant authority is taking responsibility for protecting children in a meaningful, practical, cross-agency way. On public responsibility, I am sure that we have all been contacted by Children 1 st on its proposal to set up some kind of helpline for the public. I would prefer to see more details, but I would be interested if the minister, in summing up, could respond to that suggestion for a helpline to give easy access to the public to report concerns.

I acknowledge that point and agree that we need to examine the matter more closely. The issue comes back to responsibility. The public have to take responsibility not just for initial referrals but for the situation thereafter. We might also consider the French example—the green, or numéro vert, phone line. I would be interested to hear the minister's response on that point. We know that there is a Scotland-wide problem with the provision of social workers. The statistics that the Executive published last week show that there has been a 33 per cent increase in the number of vacancies in children's social care. More posts lie vacant than was the case previously, although there may be more social workers in the system. Almost one in eight children's social care posts in Edinburgh is unfilled and there are 265 vacancies in Glasgow. In Highland Council, in the area for which the Minister for Education and Young People is a list MSP, there has been a 106 per cent increase in the number of vacancies over two years. In Shetland, the number of vacancies has doubled; in Orkney, it has increased by 200 per cent. Over the same period, there has been an increase in the number of children on child protection registers. Despite the fact that 13 per cent more children are registered as being at risk, there are far more vacancies in social care services. Although the Government is moving in the right direction, the tide might be moving faster than the Executive's response. There are shortages in relation to the services that are needed to protect those children. Statistics on children at risk are getting worse. We are aware of the problem of the number of at-risk children who do not have case workers, which was highlighted by The Herald . That situation is inexcusable and must be addressed as a matter of urgency. A nation can be judged on how it treats its most vulnerable citizens. I would like to think—and the public expect—that there is the political will in all parts of the chamber to ensure that the child protection review and agenda are driven forward with energy and determination. Our responsibility in the SNP is to fulfil our role of providing well-intentioned, constructive criticism and of scrutinising the Government and holding it to account. However, that also means that we can offer strength and support to the minister if he pursues the vital child protection agenda vigorously. Scotland's children are too important to be pushed aside and to be neglected by individuals or by the system. Let us all renew our determination to serve Scotland's children. I move amendment S2M-593.3, to leave out from "continue" to end and insert:  "; acknowledges its own role in increasing the scale, pace and range of staff recruitment in social work and child care and protection to ensure there are sufficient, well-paid staff to meet current and projected needs, and agrees to review the role and powers of the Social Work Services Inspectorate in this area."

The fact that the social work services inspectorate has to operate across agencies, departments, local authorities and health authorities might, if anything, give rise to more challenges and difficulties than is the case with Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education. That is why our amendment mentions the need to review and strengthen the SWSI's powers. Will legislation be needed to do that?

Does the minister appreciate the frustration that many members feel? We are at an important staging post in the debate, but we have not had time to read the document. Even if we had had enough time to read it, the minister says that he cannot answer many questions that he is being asked about its content and he is neatly—actually, quite clumsily—sidestepping them. When will the minister publish a strategy? He has confirmed that this is not a strategy but is, rather, proposals that he has not endorsed. What will happen in the meantime? I managed to read page 9 of the summary document in which the reference group talks about the healthy respect project that is being piloted in all schools in Lothian. If the minister wanted to choose to pilot the project in all schools in all regions, could that be done now, or will we have to wait until some  time in the future? When will we know what the minister wants to do, rather than just what the summary content of the document is?

rose—

Is Frances Curran happy with the fact that these subs are leaking into the—

She just said that, despite the fact—

To ask the Scottish Executive what involvement it has had, and plans to have, in the East Lothian schools public-private partnership. (S2O-641)

Does the Scottish Executive share concerns about the fact that Ballast plc has now been placed in administration? Can the Executive tell us who owns the schools in East Lothian as of today? Should the Executive have to provide financial support at any time for the project to complete, would that not undermine the argument that PPP is off balance sheet and that the private sector takes the risk?

I congratulate Scott Barrie warmly on bringing this issue to the chamber as it is one to which we must return again and again. It is not just about congratulating warmly those who take part in the children's panels. They would welcome our support, but they would also want a commitment from us to stand by them and to ensure that they are supported. They would want us to ensure that the system develops and that it is given the financial support that it requires. I read recently a report produced by Iain Gault called "Study on Youth Offending in Glasgow", which was written in April 2001 and published on 6 October 2003. Its content is relevant to what we are discussing. We must remember that the children's panel system is not just a nice thing to have and something on which we can shine a torch and about which we can say that it is a Scottish solution to youth care and justice issues. It is essential and integral to our care system and youth justice system. I will concentrate my remarks on the connection between care and justice. The report studied persistent offenders—children who had had 10 to 19 referrals and children who had had more than 20 referrals. Among those who had had 10 to 19 referrals, the average age of first referral was at 8.7 years, but the average first-offence referral was at 11.9 years. More than 40 per cent of those who had had more than 20 referrals and 47 per cent of those who had had 10 to 19 referrals had been referred originally on care and protection grounds. It is essential to consider that point in our continuing debate on antisocial behaviour. Our responses to youth issues must be integrated and must emphasise care and the importance of referrals and support at an early stage.  I contacted the Edinburgh children's panel. Although its referral rates between 2000 and 2003 have gone up by about 600, referrals for offences have actually gone down. There is a perception that our children's panels have, all of a sudden, been swamped by offence referrals. However, Edinburgh's biggest increase in referrals is in cases of alleged lack of parental care, the number of which has gone up from 1,700 to 3,200. We should reflect on that. If children's panels are considered essential in our youth care and justice system, they must be placed centre stage and given the support that they need. Scott Barrie spoke about the value of children's panels in offering experience and transferability of skills. If more private sector employers knew the value of such things, they might, instead of sending people on training sessions on this, that or the other, consider the valuable benefits that adult volunteering can offer to everybody, not only the participants. Many people over the age of 60 can contribute a great deal. Many members of children's panels have been members for 10 to 15 years. They feel a social obligation. For them, to stop being a member is very difficult. Children's panels are only as good as the partnerships that surround them. We cannot address the children's panels system without acknowledging the problems in social work recruitment and with the support that social workers can offer the panels. If the panels do not have support from social work departments for their disposals, those disposals will be ineffective. If things are referred to local authorities, we have to be sure that local authorities are able to support the recommendations of members of children's panels. If we are serious, we must address the social work crisis that exists in many local authorities. We have an obligation to support this essential and integral system of care and protection in Scotland.

I am very interested in what the minister says about the youth summit. However, if he has time, it would be helpful if he could explain what exactly he and Peter Peacock, as ministers representing the Parliament and the Executive, will be doing at the conference.

I welcome the debate and particularly the spirit of it. Sometimes people ask why we debate issues such as the Commonwealth and conferences, but the Parliament has an important role in marking the 15 th conference of the Commonwealth education ministers. Perhaps it would have been better to hold the debate as a members' debate, because I am sure that the subject will have universal support. Perhaps we should focus on day-to-day domestic issues such as the economy and jobs. That said, Parliament should recognise the importance of the conference. I am delighted that Edinburgh will host the conference and I am sure that the education ministers and the delegates of the parallel symposium and the education youth summit of the Commonwealth will have a warm welcome from the people of Edinburgh. One of the most interesting aspects of the conference is its theme—closing the gap—which is appropriate for us, given what we are facing in education and given the legislation that the Executive will introduce in the next few months. The conference will cover access, inclusion and the achievement of individuals' potential. We are in tune with that and recent debates have addressed those issues. The conference presents an opportunity for Scotland to share with the rest of the world some of our best practice. We should take pride in the promotion of the Scottish credit and qualifications framework. I recognise that the publication "How good is our school?" is being used elsewhere in the world. We have to address the inequalities that remain in the world, which the Minister for Education and Young People mentioned. Barriers to education are not necessarily to do with education; the minister mentioned health issues, such as AIDS, and poverty. If we want to liberate many more children so that they can have the opportunities that we have had to benefit from education, perhaps we should contribute to world solutions to  conflict and poverty. If there is an opportunity for education, we should drive it forward regardless of whether those matters are reserved. I ask Peter Peacock to explain in his summing up what his role will be at the conference. I hope that Charles Clarke, the Secretary of State for Education and Skills will not represent us, but that the minister will represent the Parliament. Margaret Ewing and Keith Raffan were concerned that the Parliament seems to be standing on the sidelines of the conference, rather than being involved. Only this week—barely three weeks before the conference—did I receive a notice, as a member of the Education Committee, asking whether I would be interested in taking part in the conference. That notice was a bit belated. I am not saying that it was necessarily the minister's fault, but perhaps he could look into that, or perhaps his officials could advise him before he sums up. I was interested to learn recently about the initiative from Queen Margaret University College in Edinburgh whereby it is taking its expertise to India to improve the knowledge and skills of Indian nurses. Professor Alan Gilloran, dean of the faculty of health and social sciences, reflected that the initiative is to address issues around the decision making and empowerment of nurses, which requires high-quality education. Indian nurses have substantial practical experience and they are extremely good at community healthcare. The memorandum of understanding, which is the first of its kind in India, aims to help British nurses learn the skills of community healthcare in India while the Indian nurses will be given confidence through education that will empower them to be independent, critical thinkers. That kind of collaboration at university level is a tribute to the continuing relationship between Scotland and the Commonwealth countries and I am pleased that we can support it. Of course, we have a long history of such relationships. The founders of McGill University in Canada were from Scotland and Mary Slessor did missionary work throughout the world, from Africa to India. We have been on the wrong side of too many arguments about Britain's imperial past, as the minister acknowledged. We regret some aspects of our imperial past, but we have to acknowledge it. If we consider the Commonwealth now, we see a great deal of energy being put into Commonwealth links—links between equals rather than links that reflect the imperial past. We learn from the Commonwealth: many students have come to our universities and many lecturers have contributed to the intellectual wealth of this country. We should pay tribute to them and acknowledge their contribution. The theme of the conference is  "Closing the Gap: Access, Inclusion, Achievement". The Scottish Parliament is contemplating additional support for learning in a forthcoming bill, which I am sure will be discussed at the conference. Will the minister reflect on recent inclusion issues that have arisen? I am thinking particularly of the education of asylum seekers. He may want to reflect on the way in which education ministers elsewhere treat the children of asylum seekers in their education services. He may be able to learn from them to ensure that we educate the children of asylum seekers properly. We have some way to go on disability. We can learn from good practice round the globe. I hope that the work of this chamber over the coming year will be informed by the international meeting of minds and ideas that will take place at the end of October. I regret that the contribution of this Parliament has been almost at the last minute. However, we should now grasp the opportunity for the Parliament to contribute to the conference. Education is a gateway to the future. Countries round the world can help each other to push the gate wide so that as many children as possible can benefit from the education that they so deserve.

Does the minister agree that tuition fees and top-up fees—if they are introduced—in England will have a direct effect in Scotland? On the point about competitiveness, will he consider as a matter of urgency the proportion of the budget that is spent on higher education, bearing in mind the fact that it will have an increase in the next few years of only two-thirds of the increase in the Scottish block? If we are to be competitive, we must ensure that we have funding in higher education.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to review legislation on pupil placement requests. (S2O-569)

Is the minister aware that in certain areas with growing populations, such as West Lothian, there can be pressures on local schools, which children in the catchment area cannot access? Will he give due consideration to any request to revise pupil placement legislation to allow schools to bank places for more than one year to allow children to go to their local school?

I will start by quoting an American actor. I was not sure whether that would be appropriate in a week when American actors and politics have combined, but I remembered that Lord James Douglas-Hamilton quoted Arnold Schwarzenegger's "I'll be back"—perhaps he has a hotline that we do not know about. The quotation that I want to use is from Lauren Bacall, who said: "Imagination is the highest kite that one can fly." I found the quotation in a document from Midlothian Council about its enterprise challenge final 2002-03. We are talking about creativity, confidence, ideas, and daring to be different.  When we fly a kite, sometimes it falls, but we learn from that and we go on to succeed. We have heard remarks about the problem of people's fear of failure, but we are also not very good at celebrating success. I ask the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning to concentrate on those issues. In West Lothian, Bathgate Academy and Balbardie Primary School have won Skene awards, which Fergus Ewing mentioned, not once but several times. I noticed that the minister mentioned six councils that will get funding. I hope that the councils in the Lothians are among those that have yet to have their funding announced. We should hear how much of what is a not inconsiderable sum will be spent in that area. Tommy Sheridan wants to wait for a world socialist revolution. In the here and now, we have to ensure that people have jobs when companies such as Motorola and NEC leave. The jobs for the many are created by the enterprise of the few. We must not mock enterprise in the Parliament, because that would do the people of Scotland a disservice.

No, I am sorry. I move on to the school curriculum and what it means as far as creating confidence, self-assuredness, ideas, creativity and imagination are concerned. I welcome the move by the Minister for Education and Young People to abolish national testing, for which the SNP has called for some time. That will provide space and time in the curriculum for teachers to do what needs to be done now, including the literacy and numeracy that Murdo Fraser talked about. We should not consider the review of the three to 18 curriculum in a narrow sense and say that literacy and numeracy will be learned in only English and maths; literacy and numeracy can be learned throughout the curriculum.

No. I am conscious of the time; the Presiding Officer has warned me. One of the curriculum challenges that we face is to ensure that enterprise is not just about business studies, but about creativity, ideas and daring to be different. When we review the three to 18 curriculum and when we consider removing some of the bureaucracy and time constraints that teachers face, it is essential that we ensure that music and drama are valued as the engines for creativity. We have to recognise that we cannot expect children to arrive at school confident. We have to ensure that we value children and those who care  for children in the early nursery years, which are the foundation for the future. I turn to the social responsibility agenda. The problem in this debate is that we are covering too much. We have strayed all over the place and covered a variety of ideological arguments about capitalism and socialism. Enterprise in schools is the focus for the debate, but we must also consider citizenship in schools and social responsibility. Most of the businesses that are run in schools are co-operatives. The foundations of responsibility are there. The children might go on to be the profiteers that Brian Monteith wants to celebrate, or they might end up running co-ops. Let us give young people the opportunity to experience enterprise regularly throughout their lives. Before I became an MSP I worked on understanding industry. I was involved in proposals on bringing education, industry and business together. We are a small country and we can create a dynamic. We can do what Fergus Ewing suggested and try to create that spirit and dynamism on a yearly basis. We cannot end our fear of failure if we are told that we cannot run our own country and that we cannot do things for ourselves. Self-confidence comes from leadership and I would like the minister to show some to the people of Scotland.

Jamie Stone might not be aware of the fact, but a large number of companies in Edinburgh have exchange programmes with teachers. However, if the Greens had their way, the money for such programmes would be withdrawn and the teachers would not have that experience.

Will the member give way?

I appreciate the member's point. Does she agree that enterprise is also about creativity and ideas and that, in educating for enterprise in schools, creative subjects such as music and drama might produce self-confidence and assuredness, which the minister said are key to encouraging enterprise?

Will the minister give way?

They have been applied for.

There has been a bit of sad triumphalism from the Labour ministers in the debate. It is as if they have just discovered this issue, although Labour has been in power for six years. Many of the points that Paul Martin and Janis Hughes made are policy issues that could be addressed without legislation. No one underestimates the problems of antisocial behaviour, but we have been completely underwhelmed by the Executive's response to it. The Executive is dealing with the consequences of antisocial behaviour, not the causes. The minister wants to be seen to be doing something—she laboured that point herself—but her solutions are flawed. There is a serious point to be made. If the minister raises expectations—as she has done in visiting those 30 constituencies—there is a risk that she will fall very flat unless the proposals deliver. Policy solutions, not legislation, will resolve the issues.

The problem is the fact that the Executive wants to leap to legislative solutions. Antisocial behaviour orders, for example, face serious problems. Three years ago in this chamber, the same minister trumpeted ASBOs as the big thing that would deal with antisocial neighbours. Let us consider the situation three years on.

In North Lanarkshire—Karen Whitefield's constituency—14 ASBOs have been applied for and five have been granted. In West Lothian, one order has been applied for and one has been granted.

I am sorry if Labour members do not like to hear this. The orders were the Executive's big solution, but they have not worked in the past three years, since they have been available. The First Minister came to West Lothian to launch his latest salvo on antisocial behaviour. However, the problem in West Lothian—as the  Deputy Minister for Communities will know—is that police officers are having to go out on their own. If the Executive wants solutions to the problems, and if it wants the police to deal with gatherings of young people, it must address the issue of single-handed policing in the Lothian and Borders region.

Let us consider the strategy for Edinburgh and ensure that we have more police in Lothian and Borders police. That is a big safety issue that must be addressed. I now turn to the content of the bill and the definition of antisocial behaviour. The minister has not addressed the issue of children with disabilities. Is the minister going to stigmatise not only young people but young people with disabilities, to whom many of the antisocial behaviour issues relate? I hope not. If the minister had read the responses as I have, she would know that that is one of people's serious concerns. Are we talking about a Scottish solution to a Scottish problem? I would like to think that we are, but—

No. I think that Donald Gorrie was right when he talked about David Blunkett's bill. The problem that we face is that, instead of seeking Scottish solutions to Scottish problems, the Executive saw what was happening down south and decided to import the Anti-social Behaviour Bill wholesale. The thing that is different about Scotland is the children's hearings system, which has been mentioned by one or two members but, interestingly, not particularly by Labour members. That is part of a deliberate policy to downgrade and run down the children's hearings system, which is one of the most serious problems with the Executive's policy. The under-resourcing that was mentioned and the problem with the lack of social workers to deal with the disposals suggest to me that the Executive might like the children's hearings system to fail so that people are pushed into the youth court system. That is extremely worrying. I know that a review is under way, but the Kilbrandon report said that the children's hearings system had to be more dynamic and to evolve. In that case, why are we rushing to legislate before the report of the review has been published? We have to recognise that our children's hearings system is precious. Perhaps supporting  that system is the way forward.

I am sure that they want different disposals under the children's hearings system, but not if they have to get a court referral for a hearing after an ASBO has been granted. It is worrying that, in his recent lecture on this issue, the First Minister said that hearings were useful only for very young children. That is an extremely worrying policy emphasis. We have heard reference to acceptable behaviour contracts, which were piloted in Edinburgh and are now being rolled out across the city and in Falkirk. They might be a way forward. Safeguarding Communities and Reducing Offending in Scotland—SACRO—has found that 77 per cent of the young people with whom they have worked on restorative justice programmes did not reoffend within a 12-month period. For the benefit of the minister, I point out that the community planning system is meant to be at the heart of the proposals that are before us. However, as some areas are just setting up such a system, what guarantee can the minister give that it is an appropriate delivery framework? One of the Executive's big ideas is its proposal to ban the sale of spray paint to the under-16s. If that is to be done, why not deal with it along with high hedges, fireworks, litter and so on in a civic governance bill? A young person who took part in the consultation said of the proposal: "I think this is stupid cos you could be using it for stuff like skateboards. You could stop selling everything like pencils in case we shove them through each other's eyes." We need to get a bit of common sense into the debate. We have to use the existing licensing laws and police resources properly. Also, we have to resource the children's hearings system properly. The Executive has had six years to do that but has not. Legislation will not solve the problems.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

I apologise in advance to the Presiding Officer and to the minister because I may have to leave to attend a public consultation meeting in Linlithgow tonight. I, too, congratulate Carolyn Leckie on bringing this debate to the chamber. There is a pay dispute and the issue is obviously topical. We must recognise that COSLA has a lead role in that dispute. However, Parliament has a responsibility to address the matter on two counts: first, because of our commitment to children, child care and early-years education; and secondly—this is an  issue that Johann Lamont brought to the debate—because of gender inequality. If Parliament, which has so many women MSPs, does nothing to address issues around low pay and part-time working, we should look ourselves in the eye and ask why we are here. Many of the women who have been elected to Parliament have come here to address equality for women and women's low pay. When we have debates on the economy and what the country needs—such as those in which I have participated recently—in which the same conclusion is reached as that which the First Minister reached this morning when he talked on the radio about the need to bring more workers into Scotland, we must ask ourselves why that is necessary. We know that we have a falling population: that is of real concern. Unless we arrest or change that trend, we must ensure that the people who are here now—the young people who are our future—get the best start in life. We have to realise that the Executive's proposals for child care strategies and early-years intervention have to be delivered by somebody. The Executive is placing increasing demands on nursery nurses; we have a responsibility to reflect that. We must support young people in their first steps. Some educational materials show that the interventions and actions of nursery nurses in the early years can make a considerable contribution to identifying future support needs. We must acknowledge that and the Parliament must support their work. That is one of the ways forward. It is imperative that we also consider the gender issues. If we want to tackle poverty and the problems of a falling population, we must encourage women to take up employment or better-placed employment. Women have often to work part time because that is the only way for them to work around their child care needs and to find employment near their children's schools or nurseries. The Executive cannot expect its proposal for nursery places for three and four-year-olds—which I welcome—to work unless the proposal is supported by the necessary resources. The issue is not just about resolving the current pay dispute: it goes longer and deeper. However, If we value children and those who care for our children, that would be a big step in the progress that started many years ago with women demanding rights that are equal to those of men. In valuing the work that nursery nurses do, we will take steps to ensure that we build the type of country that we want, in which equality and social justice prevail. If valuing and celebrating children matters, we must support those who provide so much for them in their early years.

I agree with Marlyn Glen about the importance of teacher training and welcome the Executive's announcement this week. Does she agree that pressures on new teachers will increase purely and simply because of the number of older teachers who are retiring and that new teachers will face many pressures in the next few years?

I, too, welcome the debate, as it addresses a key issue in the field of education. I note, as the minister did, that the SNP conference in Inverness is currently debating indiscipline in schools. Standards in education have been a matter of concern for many years. Much of the debate in recent years has been about the importance of the three Rs in the achievement of core standards. If we do not approach behaviour and discipline problems in schools, we deny children the right to develop to their full potential. I suggest that we need new criteria in Scottish schools: the three Ps. If we are to make progress, pupils need a peaceful, positive and productive environment in which to be educated. Indiscipline is the factor most often cited as a problem for teachers in their work. Teachers are meant to be educators, yet many complain that they spend too much of their time policing the classroom and dealing with crowd control rather than nurturing young minds. The reported 76 per cent increase in incidents of violence against staff since 1999 is staggering. However, we should also note that general and persistent bad behaviour can be as stressful, if not more stressful, than isolated serious incidents of indiscipline. There are no quick fixes. The causes of the problems are complex, and the solutions multiple,  so the Executive's motion states the obvious. The question for this Parliament is whether Government interventions and strategies are helping or hindering the process. I welcome the work of the discipline task force and the moves to drive that work forward. However, even after six years of a Labour Government, and four in tandem with the Liberal Democrats, the answers are seen as policy developments with no action and no changes in the classroom. For many teachers, discipline changes have yet to hit the classroom. I use the word "hit" advisedly, as corporal punishment was banned the year after I left school. I went to Ayr Academy, the same school as Alex Neil went to. I might add that he went many, many years before I did. The school's motto is "Respice prospice," which means, "Look backwards, look forwards." Looking back, I remind Parliament what the Government has said. "Violence and threatening behaviour has no place in a school." That was said by Helen Liddell on 10 February 1999. "Violence and threatening behaviour against teachers has no place in our classrooms." That was said by Sam Galbraith on 16 February 2000. "Violence and threatening behaviour against teachers has no place in Scotland's schools." That was said by Jack McConnell on 24 January 2001. "There can be no excuse for violence and threatening behaviour against staff in Scotland's schools." That was said by Nicol Stephen on 23 January 2002. Then, this year we had: "Violence and threatening behaviour is unacceptable in a modern society and will not be tolerated in our schools." We need to break out of that groundhog-day repetition every time the school violence statistics come out at the end of January—we have got the message. However, for the best part of five years, head teachers have been hamstrung by misplaced targets—as referred to by Robert Brown—on the need to reduce exclusions by one third. That is a failed policy not simply because the target has not been reached but because of the serious concern that, in practice, the policy has compounded rather than relieved discipline problems. The General Teaching Council's publication of 13 September—which was only last week—has a comment piece by a teacher on indiscipline. It says: "there is no doubt that the Executive's social-inclusion policy has played a very large part in creating levels of indiscipline and stress previously undreamt of in our worst nightmares."  It goes on to say: "we find ourselves now working in a state of almost permanent crisis." The teacher then makes a very important point, which relates to my amendment: "Unless drastic changes are introduced soon, we very much fear that the authorities will find increasing difficulty in recruiting and retaining staff".

The member makes two important points. I welcome the money in the better behaviour, better learning fund, but the problem is that the funding is short term. We must recognise, as the Executive does, the need for long-term funding. I absolutely agree with what the member says about recognising the school ethos. Leadership in schools comes from head teachers. That is why it was important that the Executive did a U-turn and ensured that head teachers would be empowered to deal with discipline issues in their schools. Looking forwards, we must recognise that we have to build that peaceful, positive and productive environment. Many of the things that the Executive is doing are laudable. However, I want to address the Government's social inclusion agenda, which will be key to how we cope with future problems. Mainstreaming is now embedded in the Standards in Scotland's Schools etc Act 2000. Mainstreaming is endorsed, but I am not convinced that it is being embraced by the Government. Exhortations, guidelines and legislation for mainstreaming could fall badly if not resourced properly. We have increasing problems with pupils with social, emotional and behavioural needs in our schools. Many such pupils are increasingly being mainstreamed. I fear that, unless there are resources to support their behavioural problems, such pupils will have an increasing effect on mainstream pupils. If we do not take seriously those support needs, we will leave teachers with little in their armoury to ensure that all pupils in their care have a peaceful, positive and productive environment. If that happens, I fear that there will be a backlash from parents. I support mainstreaming absolutely, but we should not be misty-eyed about what a nice thing it is to have. Mainstreaming involves hard choices and it involves many teachers in managing difficult  situations.

The member will acknowledge that I was giving a direct quote from an article. There is increasing identification of pupils' social, emotional and behavioural problems; endemic poverty is putting growing pressure on young people in schools. I am conscious of time, so I will focus on my amendment. We know that 40 per cent of teachers are about to retire, that we desperately need more recruitment and that the welcome reduction in class sizes will lead to a need for more teachers. New teachers are less experienced at dealing with discipline issues, so we must ensure that they are supported. We have a problem with retirement. The Government must consider strategies to deal with what is about to happen—the retirement of 40 per cent of teachers in a decade. That will take place at the same time as new teachers will have to deal with mainstreaming. We must address that problem strategically. I also point out that we had better not massage the figures. I am concerned about reports that indicate possible changes in how we define severe incidences of indiscipline. I agree with the minister—it is better that such instances are reported, even if that means that the number of reported instances rises. However, it is more important that we deal with them. Does Government hinder or help? If we want to allow head teachers to have more powers in their schools, they will need to have space for exclusion zones, for example. One problem with the new public-private partnership contracts is that they often include a restriction on the amount of space that is available, not just for addressing discipline issues, but for providing support for learning. That needs to be tackled. At long last, head teachers are having more powers restored to them. The school ethos is also imperative. However, unless the Government examines the other issues that I have mentioned—mainstreaming, PPP, teacher retirement, and teacher recruitment and training—it will fail our young people.

We want a peaceful, positive and productive environment, but I ask the Executive to consider the wider sphere. We do not come up with the individual, practical, day-to-day solutions—our job is to be strategic. I move amendment S2M.379.2, to insert at end: "and notes the importance that teacher recruitment will have for this process."

Will the member give way?

The issue of how Scotland treats asylum seekers and, in particular, the children of asylum seekers is not new to the Parliament. Even before the Parliament took on its full powers, in a debate on 9 June 1999 about how Westminster legislation would affect the Scottish Parliament, I asked Donald Dewar what he would do about the fact that the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968, the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984 and the Children (Scotland) Act 1995 were being amended by the Immigration and Asylum Bill. Donald Dewar said at the time that it was for Westminster MPs to consider the bill. However, importantly, he said that the Scottish Parliament was free to amend provisions legislated for by Westminster that covered devolved areas. He warned about inertia creeping into the Scottish Parliament, which might prevent us from acting promptly to assert our role to reverse Westminster legislation covering devolved matters. We have seen the inertia that Donald Dewar warned about so long ago in this Parliament over this matter. I cannot understand ministers' inability to act even within the powers that they have. Donald Gorrie made a point about whether we should know about what they are doing and their private conversations. If we knew what they had been doing in the past few months, we would not necessarily have had to hold this debate today. One of the most telling facts is that Glasgow City Council has been able to arrange with the national asylum support service to have devolved functions for housing and South Lanarkshire Council has agreed with the Home Office a similar arrangement for education. The councils did not need the Executive, because the Executive does  not have the power or influence to make a difference. It is interesting that councils have more authority on this issue than the Parliament. This is a matter of political will and I am concerned by the lack of action. Why is the United Kingdom such a special case that we have to jail the children of asylum seekers? Other European countries do not have to. What is so special about us? An important point of Scots law arises. Anne Owers, HM chief inspector of prisons, has said in a report: "We also believe that the guiding principles that underlie international and domestic law on children should be brought into decisions to detain ... children and families." Anybody who knows anything about Scots law and children knows that children's welfare is paramount. Robert Brown's amendment says that he "believes that decisions affecting children whose parents are to be detained should be made in the best interests of the child". Do he and I agree that it is not in the best interests of the child for a child to be jailed? Do he and I agree that it is not in the best interests of the child to separate a child from its mother and family? If so, why on earth are we agreeing to the continued detention of children, as we will be if Robert Brown's amendment is agreed to?

Our concern is that we should speak with one voice to ensure that the Parliament sends a clear message that it refuses to accept the detentions. Robert Brown's amendment would allow children to go to school in the daytime but would necessitate their detention at night. We are able to express our opinion on whether we think it right or wrong to jail children. That is the choice before us. Why have things taken so long? Why do we have the inertia that I mentioned? Why is it only when we have an SNP debate that we make progress? Over the past four years, we have had opportunities but we have had no action. Why has the Executive not exercised the duties and responsibilities that it can exercise under section 63 of the Scotland Act 1998 to transfer functions? It could use section 30 to transfer legislative powers. I have written to Peter Peacock about education  issues. In many ways, the education issues mask the underlying problem, which is to do with the way in which we treat children. Is it right for children to be detained and jailed? If people think that our Minister for Justice—and the Minister for Justice for four years was a Liberal Democrat minister—has been making representations to the Home Office but nothing has happened, what makes them think that agreeing to Robert Brown's amendment will make a difference now that a Labour minister is the Minister for Justice? The United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child is a very serious issue indeed. It was the Tories who first rejected its complete adoption and wanted reservations on immigration and citizenship; it is the Westminster Labour Government that continues to reject the adoption of that part of the UN convention. Do the needs of the child drive the treatment of asylum seekers or is the need of the Home Office to jail parents more important? If members support the Executive's position, they are saying that the needs of the Home Office are paramount, and not the needs of the child. Scots law says that the needs of the child should always be paramount. We must make a judgment. What is on offer is day release from jail. That may be better than no release, but it is still just day release from jail. Compassion, justice, integrity and wisdom—are they shown in the detention of children at Dungavel? If members think not, they should support the SNP's motion.

The minister says that she wrote to the cross-party group last summer. The HMIE report was made in October last year, with an update in August this year. Why has this taken so long, given that South Lanarkshire Council has been willing to respond to any request to provide children with a decent, mainstream education? Why can she not tell us about her private meetings with Whitehall ministers?

Will the member give way?

Is the minister aware that the City of Edinburgh Council's problem was that it had only one developer for the overall project, which meant that bargaining power for individual projects was reduced? PPPs were meant to provide competition for best value. Rather than continue to use that flawed and expensive form of funding, will he accelerate the use of normal borrowing and the alternative of not-for-profit trusts?

I hope I do not shock the chamber when I say that an independent Scotland will not be a land of milk and honey. We are not arguing that, with independence, everything is suddenly going to be fundamentally changed beyond our wildest dreams. However, as Shona Robison said in her speech, it will give us a fighting chance to make a difference on a time scale that allows us to progress as a society. It will allow us levers on economic growth and income distribution, and to find ways of making sure that we tackle poverty properly. Had Scotland achieved the same economic growth as the rest of the United Kingdom since Labour came to power, and had the Parliament controlled the revenue raised from the same rate of taxes as would have been levied by the UK Government, we would have had £2 billion extra to invest.

I want to make progress. That extra money would have driven up the wages of our public sector workers and it could have been used to help those in poverty. The issue is about economic growth, but it is also about ensuring that we have a handle on income redistribution. Annabel Goldie talked about poverty traps. We do not have the opportunity to tackle the poverty trap. The tapering nature of the benefits system means that people who want to get into work have difficulties. We have to have the power to integrate tax and benefits so that we can resolve that. Tony Blair has done something about redistributing wealth. He has given it to the rich. One of the most fundamental indictments of the Westminster Government is the gap between the poorest and the richest in society. Tony Blair is redistributing wealth, but he is doing it the wrong way. We have heard some serious reflections on the impact that poverty has on people's lives. The problem is that the Executive is dealing with the symptoms and not the causes. I would support many of the Executive's initiatives but there is a  danger that until we break the cycle of a third generation of families living in poverty, all we are doing is chasing our tails and dealing with the consequences of poverty rather than the causes of it. It is quite interesting and very telling that, although there are targets in the budget for biodegradable waste, there is no target for child poverty. Does that mean that there is no budget line for tackling child poverty? I want to reflect particularly on our young people. We are about to embark on a bill—the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Bill—to deal with the special needs of young children in education. One of the most worrying consequences of poverty is the number of young people who enter primary 1 with social, emotional and behavioural problems, many of which are the consequence of having been brought up in the stressful and anxious circumstances that were discussed earlier, where there are generations of a dependency culture that people cannot break out of. Although it is worthy of the Parliament to deal with the consequences of that and to make provision to support social, emotional and behavioural problems, we should ensure that those young people do not have those problems in the first place. Effort in that area would make a difference. Milestone 9 in the "Social Justice...a Scotland where everyone matters: Annual Report 2002" talks about "Bringing the poorest-performing 20% of pupils, in terms of Standard Grade achievement, closer to the performance of all pupils." That is a worthy aim, but if we consider the Executive's statistics on page 43 of the report we can see that it is moving in the wrong direction. That is our problem. We are not even moving forward. On many other indices—we have also heard about child poverty—we are moving in the wrong direction. The consequences of that are not just the personal impact, particularly on young people, that I spoke about earlier, but the impact that it has on the public purse. We have a declining population; the pensioners that John Swinburne talked about will increasingly rely on health services that we do not have the people to generate the wealth to pay for. Unless we break the cycle of dependence we will have severe problems. If we break that cycle we might have a fighting chance.

If Christine May had listened to John Swinney and me, she would have heard us saying that we support "A Smart, Successful Scotland." However, our problem with the strategy is that if it just produces a supply of smart, successful Scots who leave, it will not have succeeded in its project of rejuvenating and reinvigorating the Scottish economy.

Last night, I was in Oatridge College in West Lothian, where I attended the Prince's Scottish Youth Business Trust business awards for West Lothian. It was a celebration of young entrepreneurial talent in the area, and the winners were Laura Hutton and Angela Hope of Allure Beauty Salon in Armadale. I am not suggesting that they should give the  minister business or beauty tips, although I am sure that they would be accepted if offered, but I am sure that the minister would want to congratulate those two winners and other young people in Scotland who are taking the courageous step of striking out on their own in business. This is a time in politics when many want to denigrate young people, but we must remember that the vast majority of young people want to, and do, contribute to our society and our economy in a positive manner. I want to return to the role of young people in higher education and, in particular, in the economy. Alarm bells should be ringing about the current state of our economy and our prospects for the future if our birth rate and the emigration of our young talent continue according to present trends. A falling birth rate is both a symptom and a cause of economic problems and I fear that, unless we can build a national consensus for a national project in pursuit of economic growth, the prospects are grim. Scotland is not a poor country, but it has particularly poor economic growth and prospects under the current settlement. The key to starting to deal with the problem is to acknowledge what it is in the first place, and we should not think for a minute that the problems now facing Scotland are just about the current global down-turn in certain sectors. The loss of NEC Semiconductors in particular has had a major impact on export figures and on the electronics sector, but we also have longer historical concerns. I would like to reflect a little on NEC's problems. When I visited NEC before it closed, it had major concerns about global demand, but the problem of the lack of competitiveness of a Scottish base was also on the agenda. The problems that NEC faced were created by the UK Government. There were interest rates and exchange rate policies that suited the south-east of England but not the exporting bases for Scotland's economy. Nor did the Parliament have any control over the climate change levy. The problems facing our economy are fundamentally that we do not have the powers of a normal country to effect change and we do not have a national consensus for economic development that provides a clear direction. Business wants a long-term national project for economic growth. That is what other European countries, such as Norway and Ireland, have had. Instead, we have devolution solutions that seem slow and sluggish and have an over-emphasis on supply-side conditions. The minister talked about supply-side solutions such as skills, planning and transport. Those are important, but addressing such issues will not provide a solution in itself and neither, as he admits, will reform of the bankruptcy laws.

Will George Lyon ever stop his scare stories and have ambitions for Scotland? Why is it that between 1975 and 2001 the stability that George Lyon is so proud of under the union gave Scotland a growth rate of 1.7 per cent, while the UK had a growth rate of 2.3 per cent and small, independent European countries had growth rates of 3.1 per cent? For every £1 billion raised in the economy as a result of economic growth the country gets £400 million back in revenue to deal with issues such as those that Tommy Sheridan raised about the level of wages in the public sector. Remember that we face a population time bomb in the public sector as many workers such as teachers and social workers are about to retire and people are not coming forward to replace them. On higher education, I support "A Smart, Successful, Scotland", but we have to deal with the supply of smart, successful Scots. What guarantees can we have that the supply of smart, successful Scots will not leave the country as they have done for generations? It is not good enough to talk about the pull of the heartstrings and say that that will bring them back to Scotland. Ambitious, hard-headed young Scots will need to have a fire in their belly and know that there is a future for their children and their businesses. Emotion will not be enough to make them want to stay. We must be competitive in science and research. Why is it that in England higher education and universities will receive an increase in funding of 19 per cent in the next three years while in Scotland the increase will be 6 per cent? The introduction of top-up fees in England will compound the Barnett squeeze, which is already kicking in. The consequences of recent research funding decisions could cause further problems. We can have Scottish solutions, but that means that this country needs to get a grip, needs to get real and needs independence.

Will the member give way?

It is obvious that the Executive has taken steps to change its exclusion policy, because its previous target of reducing exclusions by a third has been removed. Consequently, there might be more exclusions because head teachers have more powers to exclude. Does that not suggest a strategic role for the Government in looking at schools such as Red Brae, which deal with excluded pupils? We acknowledge that it is important to let local authorities decide on local facilities, but a strategic decision from the Executive will have a knock-on effect that could mean that places such as Red Brae receive a further supply of pupils.

As a representative of Edinburgh in the Scottish Parliament, I inform Mr Gallie that the city has been a centre for financial services for some time. Does he recognise that a financial services company in Edinburgh that employs many of my constituents is very much in favour of early entry to the euro zone?

I support the bill, regardless of the arguments at stages 1 and 2. As Euan Robson has said more than once, the bill is technical. However, it has allowed us to do what the Parliament should do, which is to scrutinise and call to account the Government and to look for opportunities to pursue creative policy ideas that otherwise would not be possible. We could have been saying that the time and effort of the civil service, the ministers, MSPs and parliamentary staff have been wasted in covering up a Westminster problem. However, the way in which members from different parties have taken the opportunity to try to pursue a genuine, positive policy agenda is a tribute to the Parliament. That is something that we should always look to do. The problem with the bill was the fact that, although we could be creative on the income side, we could not be creative on the nutrition side. It is essential that we do not lose sight of the agenda regarding the nutritional aspects of the provision of school meals. The more familiar that I become with this issue, the more that I am convinced that we should, and must, pursue the provision of breakfast clubs. I look forward to the Parliament revisiting the issue again and again. The use of affirmative instruments is a way forward in calling the Government automatically to account to the parliamentary committees. However, I recognise the issues surrounding the time scale and I acknowledge the fact that when we have to fix a loophole, we must fix it quickly and properly. I accept the minister's points on that. I return to the central issue of how the Parliament can work to change people's lives. If we can change anybody's lives, we should try to change the lives of people who are in need, especially those who have disabilities. I am extremely disappointed that we have not been able to do that during today's debate. If we are to tackle poverty as we should, we should make every effort and take every opportunity to do so. I ask the minister to reflect on his comments about not wanting to close the gap between those who are living in poverty and those who receive free school meals. We have a duty and responsibility to close that gap. In all sincerity, I ask the minister to reconsider his comments and, when he returns with the regulations on his figures, to produce something a bit more positive. Setting the  threshold at the Scottish median income would be a possibility. As part of our housekeeping, we should find out how and when the problem arose. In a useful intervention at stage 1, Brian Monteith pointed out the fact that the loophole had been known about for some time. We should not pass the bill without ensuring that there is some accountability about why it happened, without ensuring that it never happens again and without ensuring that we will not have to use parliamentary time yet again to cover up a mistake that was made at Westminster. If we had powers over tax and benefits, the process would have been much simpler and we could have decided things here in Scotland.

I support amendment 8. It is essential that we do not let the issue slip away after the vote at decision time at 5 o'clock. We must ensure that the minister comes back to account for his actions and to express a view on why he wants to choose a figure—

Will the member let me develop my point, please?

Amendment 8 would ensure that, when the minister decides through regulations the level of income at which people become eligible to receive free school meals for their children, he must come back to the Parliament to explain his rationale. In sections 1(2)(b) and 1(3), the bill mentions benefits and so on "that the Scottish Ministers may by regulations prescribe, in such circumstances as may be so prescribed".  That legal terminology means, in effect, that the minister will arbitrarily decide the level at which eligibility for free school meals will be determined through means testing. From the briefing, we understand that the Executive has chosen the figure of £13,230. Perhaps the minister will take this opportunity to explain why the proposals in the regulations will be based on that amount.

If the minister were to propose a figure of £13,230 in the regulations, the committee that was considering the matter—perhaps the Education Committee—could challenge him and perhaps persuade him through a vote to withdraw those regulations and come back with other regulations that were based on a more acceptable figure. For example, I tried to ensure that the figure for eligibility for free school meals was based on the Scottish median income. We have had no justification from the minister of why he wants the means-tested cut-off point for free school meal provision to be £13,230. We have a duty to scrutinise the Executive and, whether the minister likes it or not, to give the Parliament the opportunity to support an amendment that tries to close the gap between the respective figures for children living in poverty and those in receipt of free school meals. The amendment provides a positive, constructive and transparent means by which we can do that. If we do not act, we will rely on the minister to use the powers and regulations as prescribed in the bill. The minister will have to make that decision and introduce regulations fairly soon because, if he does not, under the bill, the children of someone who earns £40,000 and is in receipt of tax credit will be eligible for free school meals. I know that Tommy Sheridan wants universality and I suggest that he might want to reject the amendment or the regulations full stop. However, the only way in which we can reject the regulations or ask the minister to examine them again is by ensuring that the statutory instrument is given due consideration by the Parliament through the affirmative procedure.

I support amendment 9. One issue that we would like the minister to report on regularly is the nutritional aspect of free school meals. One of the gaping flaws in the argument for the universal provision of free school meals is the fact that the bill will not enable us to ensure that nutritional standards are met. The duty to report on the provision of free school meals would give a bit more flexibility to allow ministers to include, under proposed paragraph (b), "such other information as the Scottish Ministers consider appropriate." Whether or not one agrees with universality, everyone recognises that school meals can be a vehicle for change and a vehicle for health. We should not concentrate only on lunches. The Parliament will want to continue to debate and monitor the provision of breakfast clubs, at which it is easier to control nutritional value. That is something that we could request the minister to facilitate in respect of the duty to report. I hope that the minister recognises the opportunity that amendment 9 provides to keep a watching brief, enabling ministers to come forward with suggestions for improvement. There is a will in the Parliament to try to close the poverty gap and to address nutritional issues that relate to the provision not just of lunches, but of fruit, milk and breakfasts. I hope that the minister will respond positively in that light.

I appreciate the point about trying to tackle poverty. Will the member point to the part of the bill that will ensure high nutritional standards so that we get the tasty nutritious meals that she is talking about?

I cannot believe that the Executive has not found it in itself to take a small step that could make a big difference to pupils in Scotland, particularly those with disabilities. The case for the amendments that relate to disability  allowance is absolute.

Because I am indignant. Iain Smith, who is a Liberal Democrat, has just heard his party's minister say that he will not attempt to close the gap between the 30 per cent of children who live in poverty and the 20 per cent who are entitled to free school meals. The minister says that the Executive wants to deal with absolute poverty. Does that mean that relative poverty is okay? No. We lodged constructive amendments in a genuine attempt to seek a practical response. I am completely aghast that the Executive is not prepared to respond. The minister lacks consistency. He says that the bill is a technical one and that therefore it would not be the appropriate place in which to extend eligibility for free school meals. Why, then, did he decide to extend eligibility? He used the words "apart from". I welcome that extension, but it drives a coach and horses through his argument that he is not prepared to extend eligibility. He has already given in to an element of extension—I ask him to extend the eligibility further.

We must consider where the lack of Executive support for my stage 2 amendments leaves us. Brian Adam's amendments 9 and 10, if agreed to, would allow us to ask the minister to come back to Parliament to justify the income threshold level of £13,000 that he has set. Ironically, we will be able to do that because of the powers in the bill that allow ministers to use their discretion. I cannot, therefore, understand the minister's response to the request to make some effort. Although we could entrench the power by stating it in the bill, we will anyway have the opportunity through the use of the affirmative procedure to call the minister before us, should we choose to do so, to say what progress is being made on closing the gap. However, if he is already telling us that he does not want to close the gap and is not prepared to do so, now is our last chance to do it. The minister's statement is already on record.  I appeal to the Parliament to support my amendments. Perhaps they do not take us as far as we would want to go, but they are on offer now. I ask members to support particularly those amendments that would affect families with disabled children or disabled pupils. We should make the effort to show that we care and that we want to make a difference. I press amendment 1.

Will the minister give way?

I remind the minister that we are discussing fast-track legislation. Last week, we asked the Government to come forward with different options, as it has the resources to do so. I understand that the number of disabled pupils in question, for example, would be around 12,000. There is certainly a price that is worth paying by the Parliament to ensure that they are supported by us in respect of free school meals.

On a point of order, convener, of which I gave you notice to ensure that you would have time to consider your response. The bill that we are considering today is an important piece of proposed legislation, in that it will ensure that children who are currently entitled to the provision of free school meals remain so entitled, despite the drafting of the Westminster legislation on tax credits. Like many members, I wanted the provision of free school meals to be extended as far as possible. I therefore drafted an amendment that would have ensured that any school pupil whose family lives on less than the Scottish median income would be brought within the scope of the bill. My understanding is that, because of the tight drafting of the bill, it was not possible to lodge an income-related amendment. I then tried to achieve the same thing with an amendment that would have directed ministers under the bill's powers to extend the provision; again, that approach seemed to be blocked. However, I understand that it is possible under the bill to restrict which pupils the ministers have  powers to regulate for. Surely if it is competent to lodge amendments to restrict the powers that are given to ministers, it is also competent to lodge amendments to direct ministers on how to use those powers. In light of that, convener, I invite you to review the decision not to accept my amendment, which would ensure that the bill would direct ministers to help the least well-off in our society. It would also ensure that those pupils whose family income is less than the Scottish median income would become entitled to free school meals. Convener, this is an important point of order, not only for the bill, but for other legislation. I am interested in your response.

If politics is the art of the possible, we should embrace the opportunity that the bill—originally intended to close a loophole—presents for a better deal for Scotland's children. The Scottish National Party is disappointed that the Government did not take the opportunity that it was offered last week to turn the problem of having to use legislation to close that loophole into an opportunity to extend free school meals to more children. I acknowledge that it has attempted to extend provision further to the children of carers and students with savings of more than £8,000, but we will argue that it could and should go somewhat further. Because the Executive has chosen not to take up the invitation to scope what is possible, it is left to the Parliament at stage 2 to push and persuade so that we can amend the bill and extend provision. Although we gave the Government a chance to initiate such a move, it has not taken it. As I indicated in my point of order, the problem with the bill's scope is that we are restricted to lodging amendments that are related to benefits and tax credits. We are frustrated by the fact that we cannot directly affect families' incomes in the bill; however, we must deal with what we have before us at the moment. Unfortunately, we cannot lodge an amendment that seeks to allow children of a family whose income is below the Scottish median income to have free school meals. If such an amendment had been accepted, we would have been able to close the gap, where 30 per cent of children live in poverty but only 20 per cent  of children are entitled to free school meals. The Government intends to exercise power through regulations to set the income ceiling at which children would be eligible for free school meals. However, we need another route to address that matter and, when he speaks to a later amendment, Brian Adam will put forward proposals that would allow us to raise the income threshold of £13,230. As drafted, the bill leaves us no room to address the matter on the basis of income. Furthermore, it leaves us no room to address nutritional issues. That is a fundamental omission. It is important to point out that the absence of a legal means of enforcing nutritional standards will have a major impact on our assessment of Tommy Sheridan's amendments. The argument for universality is as much predicated on the need for legally enforceable nutritional standards as it is on the assumption that it is a lever to tackle poverty. However, amendments to the bill on nutritional grounds cannot be accepted, no matter whether they relate to legally enforceable standards or to the supply of locally produced food or even—as we discussed at stage 1—organic food. Given that the bill has cawed the feet from under one aspect of the free school meals for all argument, we are left purely and simply with the issue of tackling poverty and of how we spend almost £300 million. Do we spend it on feeding the children of millionaires; on childcare in order to tackle poverty; or on health promotion from birth onwards to ensure that children want to eat healthily in the first place whether school meals are free or not? As I have explained, the SNP wants to take a constructive approach to extending free school meals, but it can do so only by tackling the issue of benefits. As a result, amendment 1 would extend free school meals to pupils with a parent on a new deal scheme. As we know, one of the difficult periods that families must deal with is the transition from unemployment to work. Indeed, that is where the poverty trap can be sprung. Amendment 2 would extend free school meals to families that receive housing and council tax benefits. I acknowledge that many of those families could be covered by the child tax credit; however, that cannot be guaranteed. Because many families might not be covered, we need to provide a safety net. I hope that the Executive will sincerely take on board amendment 3, which relates to the disability living allowance and is an attempt to support pupils and parents with disabilities. Unfortunately, it is not clear whether all families that are dependent on disability benefits will qualify for free school meals under the new child tax credit  eligibility. As a result, amendment 3 seeks to guarantee that those families are covered. Because of the basket of benefits that they receive, they might not qualify for the child tax credit. Amendment 3 seeks to ensure that dependent children of parents who receive disability living allowance are eligible for free school meals. Living with a disability is expensive; furthermore, there are many hidden costs of disability. However, because of that additional income for support, other allowances that parents or pupils with disabilities receive might be lost. They might be just over the income threshold, even though they need that additional income to pay for special requirements that arise from their disability. Research indicates that under a third of families that live with disability receive free school meals and that few local authorities use their discretionary power to extend the scope of free school meal entitlement. Amendment 5 would ensure that pupils who receive disability living allowance qualify for free school meals. According to Capability Scotland, fewer than one in five households with a disabled child receive school meals. The SNP is presenting a pragmatic, practical and possible approach to the political process. In that spirit, I urge the chamber to do what is possible and support these amendments. I move amendment 1.

The member mentioned PPP and PFI. Because of PFI funding, West Lothian College, which is the only PFI college in Scotland, has problems offering the types of courses that the huge numbers of students who want to go there want to do. The PFI project is harming and limiting the educational opportunities at the college. Is that a concern?

The previous Executive reduced class sizes from 32 to 30. There were concerns that, in order to achieve that minimal reduction—obviously, we wanted a greater reduction—there was a great deal of disruption for many pupils and the development of composite classes in many local authority areas, particularly in high-population areas such as West Lothian. Does the member agree that welcome class-size reductions should be implemented at a pace that is suitable for young people and that the disruption should not be too evident?

I congratulate Peter Peacock on his appointment. Where we agree, I hope to work with him constructively, as there is much scope for consensus and dialogue. I hope that he will accept my intention to do that for the common good of the young people of Scotland. Where we disagree, I hope that he will listen, engage and be open to persuasion. I do not expect him always to change his mind, but a fair hearing from him for me and other members on his initiatives will help him to receive a fair wind in those areas where consensus is reasonable, possible and, more important, expected by the Scottish people. When I heard that the Executive was having a debate on young people, I was tempted, because of the rhetoric of recent months, to ask whether it would be a debate for young people or against them. For too long, politicians have used the word "youth" only if it is accompanied by the word "crime". Others may want to discuss that; I do not intend to, except to point out that if we want to consider who is best placed to deal with young people who are disconnected from society, we could do no better than to consider those young people who are connected with society. They are the ones who make up the bulk of our society. Much is said about rights and responsibilities in  today's world. Politicians have privileged rights to pass laws, but they also have a responsibility to pass laws, and to do so in an even-handed, logical and consistent manner. We have had debates in which members have praised firefighters; within days, the same members have kicked the firefighters in the teeth in a vote. Let us not spend today praising young people in a worthy debate, just to kick them in the teeth when it comes to crucial votes on policy, law and resources. On Tuesday, the youth, vitality and talent of young Scots transformed the chamber, when the National Youth Choir of Scotland Edinburgh children's choir transfixed us with its singing. I would like to congratulate the choir again on its performance on that day. It could be noted that the only standing ovation of the day was not for the symbols of Parliament, for the monarchy or for government. In our desire to find a new enemy to be seen to be defeating, let us not forget the abilities and potential of our young people. Every member will gladly celebrate the contribution of the young people of Scotland to society, whether it is here or abroad. We will applaud the positive thinking and actions of young Scots. Scotland is a nation steeped in history, but it is a nation that must look to and build for the future. We must remember the past and the lessons that it can teach us, but we must stand where we are and face the future. That requires the courage to examine ourselves critically, and the confidence to look forward from where we are, and to find our opportunities and the strength to pursue them. Our young Scots must be at the forefront when we look to and build for the future. The dynamism that marks youth is the force that we need to build and rebuild our country. It is the drive that we need to help to bring Scotland back into the top ranks of the family of nations. That will not be done easily or overnight, but it must be done. There will be no one here who does not want Scotland to grow, and no one who does not want Scotland's young people to get the very best that they can out of our country. The question is how we provide the platform for them to grow—the platform that will help us to rebuild Scotland. We cannot do that unless we acknowledge where we stand. It is still the case that one in three children in Scotland lives in poverty. The Westminster Government made a commitment to tackle poverty within 20 years. We are six years in, and there has been limited progress. The Parliament must acknowledge that, although we can tackle some of the supply-side issues and the education and skills issues, and while there can be early interventions and opportunities on health, and other initiatives that were mentioned by the minister, until we have powers over tax benefits and the economic  powers to ensure that we can truly tackle poverty, we have a very poor platform indeed. I want a smart, successful Scotland but for that we must have smart, successful Scots. We need those Scots to stay in Scotland and to contribute to Scotland. We can feed the international community with the talent of Scots, as we have done for many years, but our brain drain weakens our prospects for growth. The Scottish economy has a strong base but poor growth, and our population figures and prospects will cause serious damage in future. Members may have heard of the total fertility rate—I am not sure whether I am permitted to discuss such matters in Parliament. A comparison of the latest total fertility rates shows that Scotland's figure is 1.49, which is just below the European Union average; 20 years ago it was 4 per cent higher. We have had a dramatic change, which must be addressed.

I was not looking for invitations. There are young women in their 20s in Scotland who are saddled with student debt, and who have huge housing costs and face the prospect of paying £400 a month for child care. They are delaying having children until they are in their 30s and, when they have children, they have fewer children. We are pricing our young women out of motherhood. A birth rate as low as Scotland's is not sustainable economically in the long term. We need the next generation to earn the wealth and provide the services to us in our old age. Some members will need those services sooner than I will, but we will all need them. We need the economic powers of independence to build a vibrant Scotland that young people want to stay in and want to return to, and in which they want to bring up their children. In population terms, we could have the same results as Japan, where there were early signs of the population problems that are symptomatic of economic stagnation in a country that in recent decades had been one of the strongest economies. In order for young Scots to be here, they must have the opportunity to build their lives. There must be opportunities for them to flourish in their own country. Too many of our young people find themselves forced to leave this country in their 20s to look elsewhere. We have a declining population and our death rate is outstripping our birth rate. We have an aging population—the age profile is becoming top-heavy. We have had a fall-off in the birth rate and a large part of the problem may be that our young people do not have confidence in the future of the nation and do not want to commit themselves to having children. How else do we explain our population rates and our prospects for growth? Those are the issues that we must address.  I turn to the Government's proposals. I welcome the establishment of the children's commissioner and congratulate the Education, Culture and Sport Committee from the previous session on its work on that issue, which provided further evidence that the committee system is a powerful tool for democracy. I look forward to the bill and I invite the minister to indicate its timing so that we know when we can expect to get it on the statute book. We must support resources for, and listen to, the Scottish Youth Parliament. The events that I have attended challenge our thinking. That is what is needed and we should welcome it. Additional support for learning is an area in which we can work constructively with the Government. I have expressed concerns that parents have felt left out of the original process. When I questioned the First Minister, I was pleased to hear that publication of the bill has been delayed in order that some of the points that were made during the original consultation can be revisited. I hope sincerely that parents and young people will be involved in that process. We should recognise the recent Auditor General's report about resources and provision for special needs and consider how we can deal with it. There is a great deal of angst, anguish and sometimes anger among parents and professionals about the actual delivery, rather than the principle, of mainstreaming. We must engage meaningfully with those concerns. On charity law, I heard what the minister said about young people volunteering in environmental concerns and in the community. Many of the organisations that those young people deal with are charities. If we expect young people to volunteer, we should provide the framework of proper charity law and protection for such organisations. I hope that the minister will help to ensure that there is early legislation. It is not just the charities who need support, but the young people who benefit from them and who volunteer with them. We must find for Scotland the confidence to know that the future, if not entirely rosy, at least contains the seeds of hope. We can improve the future if we try. I acknowledge the Conservatives' amendment—I will be interested to hear their speeches. Parents have such an important role that they need support. We ask a lot of the parents of young children and we expect a lot of them when it comes to learning opportunities, but we must consider how we can provide support for parents without becoming the nanny state. There are many concerns about that, and we must achieve that balance. We must find for Scotland the vitality and verve that will create opportunities and openings to allow  our people to stay in this country, but we must do more than that. We must address our population problem in the short term, and we must look firth of our shores for new blood. We must encourage migration to Scotland and we must encourage young people to come and live here and build their future here. That means an end to the xenophobic policies of the current Government in Westminster, which sees those from other countries as a problem rather than an opportunity. I want Scotland to draw more people to its shores to enrich our culture and to revitalise our nation. Those people can provide the drive and determination to improve themselves, as they have done in previous generations, to ensure that Scotland can become competitive and successful. Whether they are new Scots coming from all parts of the world or expatriate Scots returning to their homeland, I would welcome the contribution that they could make to this country. We already have open borders in Europe, but we cannot be complacent, and we must consider what we can do. We can do many things for our country, but we must base what we do on a strong system of support. That brings me to education, where we must examine some of the curriculum issues that the minister touched on. We must consider core skills and allow teachers the space and time to provide the foundations for a good education. We must ensure that we have top-quality sports, cultural and leisure facilities. I assume that it is an oversight that culture is not mentioned in the minister's motion; perhaps he could touch on that in summing up. Let us do what we can to ensure that our young people have the platform to fulfil their potential. We want to ensure that young people have opportunities, but let us not leave them with a massive debt hanging over their head for the facilities that we build in their name. Let us not leave today's primary schoolchildren paying for their school when they are into their working lives. The private finance initiative or public-private partnerships in education are the worst tuition fees yet imposed. Let us not hamstring the young of today with the debts of tomorrow. Let us dump the profiteer's charter and get rid of excess profits from education, put other practices in place and build on the success of not-for-profit trusts. There are opportunities, but we must ensure that we know what we are saddling our young people with in the future. When we build for the future, we build the present into it. We should ensure that what we are doing here today, and throughout the country at all times, carries our best intentions for the future. We must look to the future with confidence. We need to build a confident Scotland with confident  people—young, old and in between—and confident parents to provide the support that we know is desperately needed. If our nation has the guts to stand up and say, "Yes, we can," perhaps our young people will learn that same confidence—the confidence to face the world and say, "Yes, I can." That confidence is what we have to instil in our young people.

I believe that we have a whole generation that has confidence, but what we have to provide for the next generation of young people is the confidence that their nation will be successful. I welcome absolutely the role of Scots in Europe. If we, as Scots, can look to other European nations and see their successes and what their young people can do, we must take inspiration from that. I hope that the European and External Relations Committee and other groups in this Parliament will embrace the future of Europe and the part that our young people can play in it. That is an agenda that we can pursue with some vigour in this session, and I hope that Irene Oldfather's experience will enable her to contribute to that. It is about time that we stopped looking for other people to do things for us. It is time that we stood on our own two feet, as a nation and as a people, and I am sure that members know what my party believes is needed for that. We need to build opportunities into Scotland. We must encourage more people to come here—that will require opportunities and life choices—and we must tackle our low birth rate. Opportunities, life choices and confidence are the three pillars upon which our future must rest. In that vein, I will celebrate the contribution made by Scotland's young people. I will applaud the "dynamism, intellect, enthusiasm, enterprise, creativity and individuality" that they exhibit, and I wish them all the best. However, we must get up and stand up to help them. We must create the conditions for a confident and forward-looking Scotland so that we can build for the future. I move amendment S2M-103.3, to leave out from first "will" to end and insert: "recognises, however, that it is essential for Scotland that we have the powers to ensure that young people do not  have to leave Scotland in their 20s to find a future; further recognises that tackling the low birth rate and developing an effective inward migration policy for Scotland are vital elements towards ensuring that there are enough young Scots to maintain our country's vitality, and, in the meantime, notes that it is right for there to be a Children's Commissioner and for the Scottish Executive to develop measures in the field of education and youth work, and to provide additional support for learning, volunteering, culture, sport and leisure facilities for young people in Scotland."

From the content of his remarks, the minister has obviously read the Scottish National Party amendment and recognises the need to provide opportunities for young people to stay in Scotland. What powers and initiatives will the Executive introduce to ensure that we have a future for our young people in Scotland?

Does the minister, in his new position, agree with his predecessor that we have to improve the adult to pupil ratio in order to provide the support that he has mentioned; or does he agree with the SNP that it is the teacher to pupil ratio that we have to improve?

My colleague Brian Adam made the point that there are problems with the tax credit itself. Therefore, parents might not have the Inland Revenue certificate that would ensure that their children got free school meals. How is that issue being dealt with?

The minister said in his introduction that the Government would use regulatory powers to put a limit on child tax credit salaries for eligibility for free school meals, and it has arbitrarily chosen £13,500 as the cut-off level. Does he think that that is adequate, or will he use the space and time available to him in the next  week to revise that figure upwards and close the gap between the 30 per cent of children who live in poverty and the 20 per cent who have access to free school meals?

Does the member agree not only that the Executive should have kept its eye on the ball but that Helen Liddell and the myriad civil servants in the Scotland Office should have considered the matter? Does he agree that, as a result, Helen Liddell's job might be on the line when there is a Cabinet reshuffle next week?

I apologise for missing the beginning of the member's speech. Does he think that universal free school meals is a redistributive measure and does he acknowledge that the  culture in many Scandinavian countries, which have a very pro-enterprise culture, is to redistribute to ensure that everyone benefits?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member fear that there is no reason for a debate? Under the powers of regulation, the Executive will have to set a limit on eligibility for free school meals. There is a desire to set a limit at an income level of £13,500 a year; our job is to agree whether that is the right level or whether it should be increased. We think that it should be increased. Does the member agree that this is an opportunity for the Parliament to debate what the level should be?

I hear what the member says. However, we heard from the minister that the Executive wants to use regulations to cap eligibility for free school meals for the children of people who are in receipt of tax credit and have an income of £13,500 a year. Does the member think that that figure is reasonable, or should it be increased?

The first meetings in the first session of the Scottish Parliament were marked by the need for emergency legislation to close a legal loophole in the Ruddle case. True to form, the purpose of the first bill in the Parliament's second session is to close a loophole of London's making. We understand that the Government knew about the problem earlier this year. The farce of the introduction of the child tax credit, which in the last few weeks has left thousands of families on low incomes worse off, has been followed by the free school meals fiasco. Seven thousand children face the threat of having their entitlement to free school meals removed, because the Westminster Government forgot to think about Scottish legislation when making its tax credit proposals. Today's debate on free  school meals fills me with a deep sense of irony. We must rush through emergency legislation to ameliorate the effects of a decision that was taken in London without considering its impact on our schoolchildren. Devolution has only partially resolved the problems of London deciding on issues that affect Scotland. Helen Liddell has been caught nodding on the job. Perhaps her French lessons, or the increasing number of receptions that she hosts, meant that she was too busy to tackle the problem. She had plenty of time to ensure that the rights of young Scots to free school meals were protected while the Tax Credits Act 2002 was being considered. She has been posted missing from duty.

I was about to deal with that. The Chancellor's approach is to tackle poverty by getting people back to work. The problem is that there are people who, in spite of being in work, are still poor. Their access to one set of benefits has been removed. The passporting system means that they have problems getting access to other services. Unemployment is down, but there is still a huge number of working poor. Although the devolved Government has responsibility for enterprise, jobs and social justice in Scotland, it has very limited powers to ensure a coherent approach to tackling low wages and poverty. The Tax Credits Act 2002 has resulted in tinkering with the system and in obfuscation designed to hide the fact that taxes are going up and benefits are going down and that we are failing the poorest in our society. That has impacted on a large number of Scots and has caused uncertainty. Thousands of people have tried to contact the Inland Revenue—it has been dealing with 200,000 calls a day. Let us consider the bill. Incompetence in the drafting of the Tax Credits Act 2002 means that a loophole must be plugged. The changes to the system affect not only free school meals—claimants will lose other passported benefits, such as maternity grants, funeral expenses, housing grants and national health service prescriptions. Such benefits are being removed from the poorest members of our society. We must address the impact on the free school meals initiative. I welcome the proposals to close the loophole. We should turn the problem into an  opportunity to open the door to wider access to free school meals. That is why the Scottish National Party has lodged its amendment. Although I hear what the Government has said about issuing directives to local authorities to continue entitlement, I have concerns about the problems of people who are caught in the system. Brian Adam raised such concerns. I have contacted the councils in the Lothians and, although some of them can deal with the situation, Midlothian Council does not know how many people are affected. If a council does not have that information, how can it continue to guarantee that there will be sufficient free school meal places? I would like the minister to deal with that in his summing up. We are spending valuable time on the issue and we should use that time to take the debate forward. Our amendment would give local authorities the freedom to use wider eligibility rules for free school meals. At present, the law tells local authorities whom they must charge. The Government's bill will mean that the Government will be able to make up its own rules on who gets school meals, as long as the definition is related to receipt of benefit or tax credit. Tommy Sheridan's amendment is premature. We hope to build a consensus and to establish a coalition for providing wider access to free school meals. We are considering stage 1 in the Parliament today. In committee, we might have asked the minister to say whether he would be prepared to use his powers to expand the provision of free school meals. Currently, the Executive could decide to do that by amending the bill at stage 2. It could decide that the children of anybody in receipt of child tax credit could receive free school meals. Basically, that would mean that there would be almost universal provision of free school meals. Ministers could still decide to do that. It is incumbent on us to press the Executive on that. The Executive already has the "Nutrition in Schools: Scottish Nutrient Standards for School Lunches" report on school meals provision. It could use the civil service to examine and cost the options. The Executive could show that it supports the will of the Parliament on widening access to free school meals by making further proposals on how it could do that. The Executive should do that before we get to stage 2 amendments. If people were then not satisfied with the Executive's proposals and wanted to push for universal free school meals, they could do so by amending the bill at stage 2. I believe in opening the door to wider access. I am concerned that the Scottish Socialist Party amendment might close that door at a time when we have an opportunity to build a consensus for wider access.  For example, eligibility for free school meals could be extended to the children of anyone in receipt of child benefit. At a cost of £300 million, I am not sure whether the Parliament would want to do that. We want to tackle poverty, but a better way of doing that might be to fund better child care provision, ensure that children get meals of proper nutritional value and tackle the low wages that I mentioned earlier. We know from the committee report and from the report of the expert panel what sort of money would be involved in such a decision. We could make that decision, but we do not need to make that decision today at 5 o'clock. We can ask the Executive to come back to the Parliament before stage 2 and set out its stall. There is almost certainly a place for universal benefits. I want to see a pro-enterprise Scotland and a Scotland that has economic growth, but I also believe in redistribution. I want to ensure that we tackle our country's appalling levels of poverty. I am not necessarily convinced that universal free school meals is the way to go, but I believe that the Executive should come back before stage 2 with a funding proposal for universal free school meals, or at least with some measure to widen access. We could then build something positive out of the loophole that the legislation seeks to cover. That is where the Scottish National Party is coming from. We want to open the door and build consensus. We have an opportunity to do that. For example, we could extend eligibility to other benefits, such as disability benefit, housing benefit and council tax benefit. It would not be unreasonable to look into all those options. As we are faced with a piece of fast-track, emergency legislation that has not had proper consultation, it is not unreasonable that we ask the Government to come back with recommendations, costings and an option. The Executive has already shown itself willing to widen eligibility for those on poor incomes, such as carers and students who have small savings. By agreeing to the SNP amendment, the Parliament would ask the Executive to go further. With the knowledge that has been gained from the expert panel and with the extensive support structure that is provided by the civil service, the Executive could propose improvements before we vote on amendments at stage 2. If the Executive parties do not support the SNP amendment, they will indicate that they are not interested in extending eligibility further and have no intention of doing so. It would then be for the Parliament to amend the bill at stage 2 to extend provision.

I am in my final minute. The SNP wants to open the door to wider access to free school meals for young Scots. By constructive consensus, we can build a coalition to do that. I urge members to call on the Government to come back with recommendations, before stage 2, that provide a better deal for our young Scots. I move amendment S2M-84.1, to insert at end: "and, in so doing, notes that the power conferred by the bill will allow ministers to extend the scope of eligibility for free school meal provision, and calls for ministers to lay before the Parliament proposals to extend further the eligibility for free school meals as part of an anti-poverty and nutritious health campaign and to do so in advance of Stage 2 proceedings on the bill."

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. We are about to move to Parliamentary Bureau motions, two of which refer to the Education (School Meals) (Scotland) Bill. That legislation tries to close the loophole that was created by the fiasco over school meals and child tax credit at Westminster. The bill involved a cost in time, money and effort for MSPs, for Executive ministers and their staff, and for local authorities, which are currently trying to ensure that emergency measures will be in place to ensure that 7,000 children get their free school meals. Will it be for the Presiding Officer or the Executive to pursue the Secretary of State for Scotland, who has obviously been negligent in her duties, for the cost of all that time and effort?

I, too, am delighted by the prospect of the Bathgate to Airdrie line. However, so that not only the people of Lanarkshire, but the people of West Lothian can benefit from that line, will the member join me in campaigning to ensure that there will be an additional stop in Armadale at least, but perhaps elsewhere, too?

Does the First Minister agree that it is important that we have a responsive and listening Government? The additional learning support legislation that he has announced causes some concern among parents who feel that they have not so far been listened to in the consultation process, and there are serious concerns about the implications of the record of needs proposals. Does the First Minister agree that special needs legislation needs special care? Will he give his personal commitment that the record of needs proposals will not compromise provision for special needs children?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to alter planning guidelines for local authorities on opencast mining and landfill. (S1O-6681)

I am somewhat disappointed that a decision will not be taken as to whether there should be change. Will the minister give an assurance that the review of national planning policy guideline 16—NPPG 16—will ensure that all the potentially damaging applications in an area and not just other opencast operations will be considered? That will mean that all applications will be assessed—not just the opencast ones—in villages such as Fauldhouse in West Lothian, where there are multiple landfill and opencast applications.

The Minister for Social Justice and I were both members of the Social Justice Committee before Johann Lamont became a member of the committee. At that time, the committee was asking for legislation. I want to concentrate on the process and not the pace of progress. Will the Deputy Minister for Justice reassure the chamber that social justice officials and justice officials are drafting the legislation? Furthermore, if there is a problem with the Inland Revenue definition of charity, does the minister think that it would be appropriate to seek some form of reverse Sewel motion to allow the Parliament to have a wider remit over the issue of definition in any legislation?

Will the member take an intervention?

We may be in the last days before military conflict. Today may be the last chance for this Parliament to express the views of its members, their constituents and Scotland on a war that would have global ramifications. The consequences of such a war will not be over in the brief spell of a "shock and awe" military bombardment, but will last for years. Clear positions have been set out during the debate—some clearer than others. They have ranged from Margaret Ewing's comments about her constituents in the gulf to Murdo Fraser's analysis that the troops should go in now that they are there. For clarity, I will go through the amendments and the amendments to the amendment in the order in which they will be voted on. The Conservative amendment, in the name of Phil Gallie, supports Tony Blair but seeks to bring the humanitarian consequences of war to the fore. Phil Gallie is right to raise the humanitarian aspects and, I trust, will receive the support of all members. However, as Donald Gorrie said, it is a pity that the Tory leader did not speak to the Tory amendment, but displayed muddled thinking on what is or is not an authorisation for war. Perhaps he should have listened to John Young. When John McAllion, in a powerful speech, spoke to his amendment, he said that the case for war had not been proven. We agree and we will support John McAllion's amendment to the Labour amendment. His single-line amendment is the same as the amendment that was supported by 199 MPs at Westminster. I think that John McAllion's amendment will garner support from many. If any members think that their opposition to the SNP is greater than their opposition to an illegal war, they may find safe haven in John McAllion's amendment, which takes the position that was supported at Westminster by Labour, Liberals, some Tories and the SNP.

In the last days of this Parliament, we have a chance to speak with the range of voices that we have heard today, but we also have a chance to vote. Would not it be better for the cause of peace if our vote was unanimous?  I turn to the Labour party amendment. If there was an undercurrent in the debate, it was about time. Should the weapons inspectors have more time? Why should the UK take us to war at this particular time? Should this Parliament express a view before or only after war starts? Should we be commentators after the event or participants during the debate? What is our job as democrats? How much time is there before war starts? The Labour party amendment expresses no opinion on those matters but simply states a series of facts. It states the obvious without saying anything at all and so defeats the purpose of today's debate—which is perhaps its aim. The amendment states that UN authority is crucial in the middle east. Of course it is. My party has consistently expressed that justice for the Palestinians is key to stability and peace in the region. Nobody seriously disputes that. However, tonight's vote will not add to the peace process if we do not speak out against war. The amendment also states that Saddam is a danger and should co-operate with resolution 1441. Of course he should, but again that is not in dispute. The key issue is whether resolution 1441 is a mandate for war and whether there has been a serious material breach of that resolution. That case has not been proven. Only today, we heard Tony Blair tell Iain Duncan Smith that a second UN resolution on Iraq is now probably less likely than at any time. That means that we are back with 1441. Cathy Jamieson, who is deputy leader of the Labour party, seemed to speak in a personal capacity as if she had forgotten that she was summing up for the Labour party. Before a previous vote, she told the Carrick Gazette : "The important thing from my point of view, and the reason why I was happy to support the government position was that it states that any move against Iraq would have to be with the full support of the UN." In his contribution, the First Minister said that the Labour party amendment says that there should be a UN resolution before action. I have looked at the text of that amendment and I cannot see where it says that there must or should be a UN resolution before action. Would the deputy leader of the Labour party clarify that? Where in the motion does it say that there should or must be a new UN resolution before action?

Presiding Officer?

Thank you. I think we have it. The key issue is whether the Labour party in Scotland supports a Government that goes to war without a UN resolution. That is the key question and the key point for debate. My next point is whether it is the objective of Her Majesty's Government to secure a further resolution before any military intervention. Clearly it is—we note that the Government is pursuing a second resolution. That does not give the Parliament any authority to say that there must or should be a UN mandate before there is a war. The Labour amendment adds nothing. What do we say to our constituents when they ask what we did in the Parliament in their name? Do we say "Nothing at all"? I am worried that the aim of the Labour amendment is to silence the Parliament on the debate of the day in the hours before war. The amendment is non-specific and it expresses no opinion even as to whether a second resolution should be supported, regardless of whether it is a mandate for war. It just notes the pursuit of a non-specific resolution. Is that what the Parliament will be reduced to voting on at decision time? If members believe that it is time to speak out, they should not be silenced by the Labour party's amendment. I turn to some of the contributions from Labour members. John Home Robertson said that if we argue for war, it should be on the basis of human rights abuses. If we go to war to rectify human rights abuses, there is a queue and a lottery. Why Iraq now and why it first? The Liberal Democrats' amendment is perhaps a more cautious variation, but we might be presented with it before a final vote is taken on the SNP motion. We sought clarification from the Liberal Democrats as to whether their amendment means that they agree with us that a specific military mandate is required for military action. That clarification was given. Tavish Scott spoke about the importance of expressing concern about the US Administration. Many others have pointed out that our opposition is not to the American people; it is to an Administration that is in a rush to war. If there is clear and compelling evidence, it has not been presented. The inspectors need more time; the six  undecided countries have asked that the inspectors be given 45 more days. The French, Russians and Chinese have asked for 120 more days. Who should provide the evidence? The UK Prime Minister now wants to pre-empt the weapons inspectors and set his own terms and conditions for the evidence. Tony Blair wants to bypass the inspectors and set his own six conditions. Even the US thinks that that idea is questionable. If only one of those conditions is not met, that will be a trigger for war. Is there a mandate for war on which to vote? The legality of the case is crucial to today's debate. John Swinney spoke of the references by Robert Black in The Scotsman today and other contributions. Is not it a cruel irony that Kofi Annan was at the launch of the International Criminal Court when he spoke about it being illegal to go to war without a UN mandate? As Pauline McNeill said, it is interesting to note that the UK is a member of the International Criminal Court and the US is not. I return to the key point. The First Minister glossed over the central issue, which is, if a second resolution falls, does he regard resolution 1441 as a legal trigger for war? He is hiding behind the phenomenon of an unreasonable veto, which is not grounded in international law. With the prospect of war looming, and the prospect of the latest unspecific resolution fading, where does he stand? Where is the authorisation for military action? Mike Rumbles was right to emphasise the need for a specific mandate. George Reid, John McAllion and others spoke at this critical hour of the importance of the UN. That is the key issue. We have heard many moving reflections on the consequences of war and on the humanitarian aspects. Our key question is: do we believe that the plan is to shock and awe the children of Baghdad? Is that the best route—the only route—at this time to disarm Saddam Hussein? Trish Godman talked about the hardship of the people of Iraq, as did Alex Neil, as did George Reid, as did Michael Russell. We heard about the international view in the wider debate. The eyes of the world wait and watch and worry. The voices of the world spoke—not just those of the non-aligned members, France, Germany and Russia—and they spoke of the need for time. If members read the latest, wider UN debate they will hear the views of people across the globe. In conclusion, the seriousness of the arguments that have been deployed and the sincerity of members reflect that it was right to bring this debate to the chamber today, but the key issue is time. Is it time to speak or is it time to be silent?  This is not the time for silence. War does not stop at Westminster. We must not be silent. We cannot be silent. SNP, Lib Dem, Tory, Labour, Green, SSP or non-aligned, we cannot be silent. We have a chance—just a chance—in the last days of this Parliament to speak with a unanimous voice. We have a chance to give a voice to the many people in this land who say, "Not in our name." With Susan Deacon, I share the grave anxiety of the mothers of Scotland. Those mothers and fathers want to know if the case for war has been proven before our sons kill their daughters, before our daughters maim their sons, and before a war in our name starves their children. Not in my name do we march to war, when there is still time for peace. The clock is ticking. Does it tick in this place as part of a timetable to war, or as the hand reaches midnight does it strike a chime for peace?

rose—

rose—

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. For the past four years, it has been my understanding that amendments to motions must be lodged by 4.30 pm on the day before a debate. Will you be accepting any amendments to the Scottish National Party's motion for debate tomorrow that are lodged after the 4.30 pm deadline?

Does Susan Deacon agree with me about the importance of cross-party working on Fairtrade initiatives? In the Lothians, West Lothian Council is working on a cross-party basis to support a steering group to ensure that Linlithgow becomes one of the earliest Fairtrade towns, if not the first or equal first. Cross-party initiatives in local authorities are important in pursuing such matters.

There were great hopes for the Parliament and what it would be able do once it was established. However, somewhere along the line, the Executive's performance became confused with the Parliament's democracy—after all, the performance of the Government at Downing Street is rarely confused with the job of the Westminster Parliament. Whether accidentally or deliberately, the Scottish Executive and its failures have been confused with the Parliament and its performance. That situation must not be allowed to stand. Although the debate has allowed Parliament to focus quite deliberately on the Executive's performance, it has all been rather sad and bitter. We have been in something of a time warp with all the references to the record of the Tories during the 1970s and 1980s. Indeed, the time that the Executive parties have spent on that period  betrays its lack of confidence in its own record, although I make an honourable exception for Brian Fitzpatrick's considered speech. [MEMBERS: "Oh."] I see that he is worried now. Can I have some more time for that moment of incredulity, Presiding Officer? I worry about the legacy that the Executive will leave after its first term. We have had a series of different ministers introducing variations of different programmes; however, all have taken a similar approach, which is to micromanage relative decline. Through management-speak processes and misplaced and meaningless target-led government, the Executive has created and promoted a culture that is inward-looking, controlling and obsessed with change, but it has also created a culture of "Meet the target" rather than "Make the change." It has fostered performance that is measured by Government targets; it makes meeting Government health targets a stumbling block to meeting patients' needs and it makes meeting external assessments a stumbling block to meeting pupils' needs.

I think that I must have touched Brian Fitzpatrick earlier. I apologise for doing so. We need targets and strategies, but we do not need meaningless targets that get in the way of progress. The Executive should be giving Parliament a strategy, vision and direction that will make a real difference to people's lives; instead, its suffocation of Scotland will condemn us to governance that is more like the shadow of a regional council. We needed a bonfire of the quangos and we need to get rid of the duplication of department and quango that the Tories devised before devolution in order to bypass Labour councils. We needed a smaller and leaner Government, but we did not get it. We needed an end to jobs for the boys. We needed public services that are public, an end to the march to privatisation and excess profits from public services and we needed  respect and courtesy from Government for public sector workers, but all we get is blame and name-calling. Finally, we needed democracy, decentralisation, transparency and accountability, but we got only limited movement on those. I agree with Mike Rumbles that the next Executive must put reform of local government finance, proportional representation and governance issues at centre stage. The problem is that the Executive has had four years to do so—members of the Labour party have had six years—but we have seen no significant movement. Although we have heard everything about how to deal with the symptoms of poverty and the underperformance of the economy, there has been little vision and less action to tackle the core problems that the country faces. Roseanna Cunningham and Andrew Wilson highlighted the economic growth problems that face Scotland. Our economy has great potential that is not being realised, so I ask Murdo Fraser to listen carefully to this fact: if Scotland had matched the UK economy's modest growth since Labour came to power and if it had had responsibility for raising as well as for distributing tax, we would have had £2 billion more of revenue to invest in health and education. Indeed, if we had matched Ireland's economic growth, we would have had £13 billion more. I was very struck by the Labour party's silence on its health service record. We know that waiting times are 18 days longer than they were in 1999. Moreover, its election pledge to bring down waiting lists by 10,000 was conveniently dumped when it realised what everyone had been saying. Those figures are now up by 10,000. That is some progress and some performance. There are now 1,869 nursing vacancies, which is an increase of 46 per cent since Labour came to power, and there are 600 fewer hospital beds than there were in 1999. Wards are frequently closed and operations cancelled; indeed, 15,500 operations were cancelled last year. We are paying the price of PFI. As for free personal care, George Lyon said that it was the flagship policy of the Executive parties. Well, the only flag I saw in that respect was Tom McCabe's white flag on an SNP motion. It was the Parliament that delivered free personal care. I must also point out that tuition fees have been subject to a pantomime-horse manoeuvre—they have been moved from the front end to the back end. However, everyone knows that they are still there; as the audience shouts in theatres at panto time, "They're behind you!" The Executive has hardly made a dent in poverty. Although there have been worthy and necessary education and health initiatives, they do not tackle the core problem of economic  underperformance. We are seeing a new generation of the working poor. We need a high-waged and highly skilled work force to ensure that we can all share in the country's economic growth and lift our children out of poverty. In that respect, someone should remind Bill Butler that the real rate of unemployment in Glasgow is 23.7 per cent. Under this Labour Government, the gap between the rich and poor has grown.

Unfortunately, I will not; the member did not take an intervention from me. I want to refer to the Government's document "Recording Our Achievements", and its list of legislative achievements. Do members remember the Erskine Bridge Tolls Act 2001? That emergency legislation was needed because the Executive forgot to renew collection laws. The Criminal Procedure (Amendment) (Scotland) Act 2002 covered up a legal loophole and the Water Environment and Water Services (Scotland) Bill largely enacts a European directive. Such double-counting occurs throughout the document. The document smacks of panic measures as the Executive realises that the public do not feel that the Executive has made any difference and have not experienced any improvements in their lives or their families' lives. As a result, the Executive needs to print another self-justifying brochure to tell people that there have been improvements. The Executive is so unconfident about the public's experiences of its achievements that it must produce propaganda prompts that are paid for by the public purse. Four years on, the world views the Executive's performance as one big let-down. We have had all the deputy ministers and ministers of three different Administrations with two different programmes for Government. The targets that were set were either so easy that they would not but be reached, or were so vacuous as to be meaningless. The achievements, all of which were either already in train or would have happened regardless of the hue of the Government, have been dressed in semantics to allow the Executive to pretend that it has done something when it clearly has not. Given such leadership of the country, is it any wonder that public cynicism about politicians is growing? The public is not, however, cynical about democracy or the need for this Parliament. We cannot, and should not, allow the lack of impact of the Labour and Liberal Democrat Executive to stand in the way of the progress of Parliament. We need a Government that will make the most of Parliament and which will help it grow, rather than limit it by micromanagement. We need a Government that makes social justice a  touchstone for delivery and economic growth a driver for change. We need a Government that has the determination to release the potential of this country and the drive to achieve the powers of independence that will let Scotland be all that it can be. We need a Government that has ambition for Scotland—that Government is an SNP Government.

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that it is very important to have smaller class sizes, especially for our younger pupils? Does he also agree that the problem with PFI projects is the fact that the schools are not built with more classrooms to allow smaller classes? Finally, does he agree that the only way in which we can ensure that we have the schools that our children need is to have them built not for profit, so that the privateers are driven out of our education system?

Will Patricia Ferguson accept an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Is the First Minister aware that the village of Fauldhouse potentially faces 15 applications for opencast, landfill and quarrying? The scale of that per head of population is the equivalent of 1,500 applications surrounding Edinburgh. Given that one of the applications is for opencasting in North Lanarkshire and Fauldhouse is in West Lothian, what does the First Minister anticipate will be in the white paper to cover situations in which local people feel disfranchised and do not achieve the environmental justice that they deserve?

I also congratulate Angus MacKay on securing tonight's  debate. In addition, we should extend our congratulations to People & Planet on its campaign and we should welcome the University of Edinburgh's decision to embrace and participate in the dialogue and debate to ensure that there is ethical investment. The Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning may find some challenge in responding to tonight's debate given the great deal of consensus about the importance of ethical investment and what has been achieved. I await his comments with interest. I want to touch on several points. The fact that 500 students turned out at a meeting shows that the idea that young people do not care about the things that matter, such as human rights, is misplaced. It is clear that people care and that it is important that they be given a forum and an opportunity so that they can do something practical. The success of that meeting shows that campaigning of whatever form—whether it be political with a small p or otherwise—can achieve results. People & Planet provides a good example of how well-informed grass-roots campaigning can achieve a response, and a very positive response at that. When, in a former life many years ago, I worked in financial services, ethical investment and green funds were seen as being something that only those who fitted a certain stereotype would want to take part in. However, over the years, ethical investment issues have increasingly become part and parcel of the fabric of investment. As Angus MacKay pointed out, just because money is ethically invested does not necessarily mean second-class investment returns. Indeed, ethical investment is becoming part and parcel of modern investment practices. The point that was made about leverage is important. The days when investment was just about profit and when no interest was taken in whether the investment conflicted with human rights or promoted arms sales have long gone. Corporate governance, in whatever shape or form, is here to stay. Ethical investment is not just about consumer choice; it is now part of the fabric of our investment choices. Such investments are no longer simply a nice charitable thing to do but are very much something that is here to stay. It is vital that we raise the issue of ethical investment, and perhaps especially at this time, when we reflect on the importance of human rights and on what is happening in countries such as Iraq. We must also consider what the Government itself has done and whether its ethical foreign policy has perhaps disappeared from sight. Whenever we pontificate, congratulate, comment on or debate the policies of other bodies and organisations such as the University of Edinburgh, we also need to look at ourselves and  consider the policies of the Scottish Parliament and the Westminster Parliament. I therefore ask the Presiding Officer that the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body consider what the Parliament itself is doing, to ensure that it makes ethical investments and promotes corporate social responsibility, so that we are not simply commenting on others in isolation. One offshoot that might come from People & Planet's achievement is that it might make us all look more closely at what we do. I hope that we can ensure that this worthy and important debate continues. The debate is not only about how people can use their right to demonstrate to achieve change at the University of Edinburgh but about how we need to highlight the importance of fulfilling our global responsibilities. We can do that by starting at home.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. We are now in an unfortunate position—parliamentary business could finish at about a quarter to 4 and we had expected to be here until 7 o'clock, which means that we are facing a void for the next couple of hours, although there is, of course, Tom McCabe's important members' business debate, which I hope members will stay to hear. Will the Presiding Officer give guidance on whether there is anything in our procedures—a motion without notice or another mechanism—that would allow us to instate business at this late stage? What has happened this afternoon is that Parliament, on the Executive's initiative, has not replaced an Executive debate on fishing with something else but has cancelled business—unlike the proposals put forward by Euan Robson. Is there any mechanism that could instate other business now? If not, what guidance can the Presiding Officer give business managers to ensure that this does not happen again? It was made clear that the stage 3 debate on the Protection of Children (Scotland) Bill would take only an hour and a half. It is important that we use the Parliament's time valuably.

With great regret, I stand before the Parliament—[ Interruption. ] If Labour and Liberal Democrat members have no regrets about what is happening to the fishing industry in Scotland, shame on them.  Members might remember that we last had a debate on fishing on 12 December last year, in advance of the European Union negotiations. During the Christmas recess, I asked—the request was probably unpopular—for the Parliament to be recalled so that we could have a debate on fishing. I was told that there would be no debate, because the Minister for Environment and Rural Development would give a statement to the Parliament in January and that that would give more opportunity for members to get more information. The minister did that. During that statement, the minister said in answer to my question that there would be a debate in a few weeks. A few weeks from then would have been the end of January. The Scottish National Party did not use its time in January or its time in February to debate fishing because the Executive promised, not only in December but in January, to have a debate. The substance—the biggest crisis that faces any community in Scotland—concerns me. The only thing that we have been able to do in the Parliament is to ask questions. While everybody else is asked their opinion in debate and discussion, the Parliament has never had the opportunity to have a debate, discussion or vote.

I remind members that, the first time that the Government was defeated in the Parliament was on a fishing vote. Perhaps the minister is frightened to come to the Parliament and to have a vote because he knows that, last time, he was defeated. The minister has said that the reason that he wants to move—or cancel—the debate from today's business programme and have it next week is that the Executive wants more time to consider the results of the consultation. If that is the case, why did the Deputy Minister for Parliamentary Business, who is sitting behind him, agree two days before the minister issued the consultation that it was right to have a debate? There is a bit of inconsistency in that, which is no big deal, because we recognise inconsistency in the minister's track record on the subject. The issue is one of substance. We must have the chance to debate what happened in Europe. We have not even had the chance to do that, and the minister now wants to change the goalposts and have us debate a consultation on a  redundancy deal—it is not even a recovery package. The Parliament has to wait as the minister changes the terms of the debate as he goes along. Will the minister assure us that, next week, he will not say, "Oh, I'm sorry—we've not had enough time to see the consultation results. Let's have the debate at another opportunity"? The consultation was issued on—I think—Friday; the deadline for responses is 2 o'clock tomorrow. Why had one of the people on the circulation list for that consultation not received the documents by yesterday? Members of the Rural Development Committee had to give that person the consultation documents. The minister cannot come back next week bleating that we will have to have another debate at another time. Perhaps the more serious point from the Parliament's point of view is the process, which is important. [ Interruption. ]

I ask members, even if they are not interested in the substance of the fishing issue—as many obviously are not—to acknowledge the fact that there is an issue over the process. Until we vote in two minutes' time, this Parliament's wishes, on which it voted, are to hold a debate this afternoon. The Executive now wants to cancel that debate. There is now a minute to go—until then, the situation is that the Parliament has democratically agreed that there should be a debate on fishing this afternoon. The Presiding Officer may wish to reflect on whether it is appropriate that, last night, the Executive issued a press notice, which said that the fisheries debate "has been postponed until next week." What authority did the Executive have to make that announcement? It was not made with the Parliament's authority. I ask the Minister for Parliamentary Business to reflect on some of the comments that she has made to me at the Parliamentary Bureau. I have serious concerns that the processes of the Parliament are being abused. If for no other reason than to defend the Parliament's integrity, when the Parliament decides to hold a debate, it must follow through with that debate. Any decision on whether to postpone that debate must be made in the chamber not by ministers, and must not be sneaked out late at night because it suits the minister in question. There has been inconsistency and incompetence, not only in the substance of the matter, but in the process. I ask members to vote against the business motion and to return us to holding the fisheries debate this afternoon.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Has Mr Lyon sat down because he has finished speaking or because he is giving way?

That was probably just wishful thinking on my part. [MEMBERS: "Aw."] I am sorry, that was unkind. Would George Lyon acknowledge that, in the  past 30 years, small European economies have significantly outgrown larger European economies? The larger economies have grown at only 2.6 per cent a year while the smaller ones have grown at 3.2 per cent a year. In Europe, in many ways, small is beautiful.

Economic growth is not just an abstract that allows economic or financial gurus to trade statistics; fundamentally, it is about what drives the agenda for investment in building a better nation for people. We should escape the arid arguments of the past and build a consensus for the future. We cannot tackle poverty unless we grow a high-wage, high-skill economy in which we can all share. It is obvious that the size and growth of the economy affects Governments' ability to raise  revenue, which in turn affects the amount that is available for public services. However, to acknowledge that truism simply at British state level is to fail to acknowledge the responsibilities that we have in Scotland to grow the economy to fund the future that I am sure we all desperately want for our children. Those who fail to address the issue of the powers that are needed for economic growth in Scotland are the ones who are wearing the constitutional blinkers. I listened carefully to what the minister said. He concentrated on competition from the perspective of quality. For those of us who have worked in the private sector—and not in legal practice, I might add—quality is one aspect of competition, but to base a competition strategy purely and simply on quality is to ignore the other factors. Cost most definitely is another aspect of competition. We all know that we do not want to compete on a low-wage, low-skills basis, because that is not the future for Scotland. If competition is not based on the cost aspect, on what other aspect is it based? We must ensure that we can drive down the costs for businesses, but we can do that only if we have real economic powers for the Scottish Parliament.

We must consider business rates under devolution—my colleague Andrew Wilson spelled that out—but we must also acknowledge that 70 per cent of the Scottish people want financial independence for the Scottish Parliament. It is not a crazy economic analysis, but one that is sensible and has public support. I would like to take on David McLetchie's point. He gave a narrow-minded, doom-laden analysis of public investment, which was that public investment inhibits economic growth. However, we must remember that economic growth supports greater public investment. For every £1 billion in the economy, the Government can raise an extra £400 million in revenue. To me, one of the starkest statistics in the whole debate is that if Scotland had matched the modest growth of the UK since Labour came to power, there would have been £2 billion more to invest in the public purse. Had we copied the Irish growth rates, there would have been £30 billion more.

Does Mr Monteith know what that means? It means that we would have invested in child care to allow women to get back to work  and get better-paid employment; and it would have meant that in West Lothian, instead of waiting for a start date for the Bathgate to Airdrie line, such a line would be being built and would be opening up Scotland's infrastructure. We would be ensuring that we had a growth consensus. Under devolution, there is a disincentive to taking on the growth agenda because, even if the smart, successful Scotland strategy was successful, the profits and benefits would not come directly to the Scottish Parliament, because they would go to Westminster in a greater tax take. If we were relying on performance-related pay, the Scottish Government would be giving money back to the public. I say to Rhona Brankin that it is no good saying that, in a global downturn, we are better shielded by a greater union with England. That is counterproductive for the Executive. It reinforces how bad successive Tory and Labour Governments have been for the economy and means that the Scottish Government is not facing up to its responsibilities. I detect in the minister's amendment some movement towards an open mind, to allow the factors and powers that we need to control to be identified. What business wants is not just political will from one party but political will and leadership from all parties. If we learn anything from any of our European competitors, it is that they succeed when they have a national consensus on growth. We have the opportunity to do that—please grasp it and support our motion.

It is the usually the case that the public lobbies parliamentarians. In the motion today, however, parliamentarians are being asked to lobby the public in support of the march and rally on 15 February. Perhaps that brings a new meaning to the term "power sharing", which is one of the underlying principles of the Scottish Parliament. Scott Barrie referred to Tam Dalyell MP. We all know Tam Dalyell's record, but the problem is that Mr Blair is not listening to him. In the vote on the recent SNP debate on the subject, the MSP for Linlithgow and other Labour members voted against the Liberal Democrat amendment to the motion, which supported Tam Dalyell's call for a vote at Westminster before troops were sent into action. Scott Barrie asked who represents the public: I say to him that it is neither Labour members of the Scottish Parliament, and nor is it the Labour MPs at Westminster who stand loyally by Tony Blair. That is why we need to articulate  the different opinion that is held in Scotland. We have yet to see a link between the war on terrorism and a war on Iraq. People are not convinced that such a link exists. I echo the words of the United Nations weapons inspector Richard Butler, who accused George Bush of having "shocking double standards" in considering unilateral action on Iraq. Mr Butler went on to say that a US strike without United Nations backing would breach international law and that it would "set loose forces we'd deeply live to regret." Another theme that has recurred throughout the debate is the question of what breeds terrorism. Is it a war that has no international backing or the war that is not being waged against poverty and injustice? I ask members to look closely at the motion and amendments on which they are to vote this evening. I have heard members from all sides articulating their concerns, but if they want properly to articulate those concerns, they should look to their consciences and voting buttons at 5 pm this evening.

I hope that I—along with other SNP members—can rely on your forbearance, Presiding Officer, with our requests to speak. We have not lodged an amendment to the motion because we shall support it. It was with some concern that I read the Executive's amendment, which would remove from the motion the statement of belief, that "waging world-wide war against poverty and injustice would deliver a more stable, peaceful and just world than a war waged on Iraq". That means that the Executive will ask the chamber—and its back benchers—to say that they do not agree with such a belief. I hope that other members will think long and hard when it comes to decision time. Two weeks ago, when the SNP used its time to debate war on Iraq, we raised our deep concerns that the Government was pursuing an inevitable path to war with Iraq. Two weeks on, is it more or less likely that we are on an inevitable path to war? I listened to Tony Blair yesterday in Westminster, and he responded to the question, "Where next?" with, "North Korea". When he is asked where it all ends, he does not have answer; he says that it will go on and on. That is what many people fear—a perpetual war with no end, where we are fighting against states, when we are supposed to be fighting against a terrorism that knows no state boundaries. The SNP has serious concerns. It is clear from Tony Blair's reaction yesterday that he knows he is losing public support. He cannot expect the soldiers of this country to enter a war that does not  have public support. Some 53 per cent of people would support a war only if it had UN backing; only 13 per cent support Tony Blair's position. Only last night, I was speaking in West Lothian at a meeting on the war. My constituents were desperate to make sure that their voices were heard. They do not see politicians reflecting their voices and concerns about the situation. Their concerns related to the consequences of war. We talked about the children. Half of the population of Baghdad are children. Are we prepared to support, without evidence, a pre-emptive strike and a reign of terror to which Tommy Sheridan referred? My constituents talked about the need for a war on poverty and injustice. Indeed, a man told me about his two sons, who are 19 and 21 and are on standby with the Royal Air Force. His loyalties were clearly torn between love for his sons and anger about what is being proposed in his name. We must recognise our responsibilities to our children. Last night, women were wondering what sort of example we were setting our children. Instead of endorsing the war, we should be seeking a peaceful resolution. Even Stormin' Norman Schwarzkopf has said in the press that the UN inspectors need more time. We are in a very worrying situation. As a result, we must recognise that we have a responsibility to speak out, which is why at the march in Glasgow on 15 February the leader of the SNP, John Swinney, will speak in support of the demonstration. That will be a day of destiny for many people, not least for Tony Blair. When he comes to Glasgow, he will hear the many voices of Scotland saying, "We want justice, peace and an end to poverty in our world". They want Tony Blair to think twice before he leads our country of Scotland and our Scottish troops into a war that he says may go on and on and on. This is our last chance to give a warning. We must use the opportunity on 15 February to ensure that Scotland's voices are heard.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it possible for you to give guidance on what amendments are likely to be voted on during the course of the afternoon? If the SNP motion is defeated and Tom McCabe's amendment is  agreed to, would the Liberal Democrats' amendment fall?

It is now 16 months since the atrocity of 11 September 2001, the subsequent military action in Afghanistan and the launch by the US and UK Governments of a war against terrorism. I shall focus on international terrorism, because people have doubts about how we deal with that. International terrorism knows no state boundaries. It is a 21 st century, worldwide concern, so why are we fighting back by concentrating on deploying 20 th century nation-state solutions? At what point, and for what reason that can be justified in international law, did the US and UK switch from a focus on al-Qa'ida and international terrorism to a path to a war that, if it is embarked upon, will lead to hundreds of thousands of civilian deaths? Tony Blair has gone directly from A to C, but the public is not convinced that there is evidence that the leap from international terrorism to war on Iraq can be made. Only this morning, Tony Blair was quoted as saying: "I believe that it is only a matter of time before it"— that is, Iraq— "is linked with international terrorism." He says that as of now there is no link. I agree with Tom McCabe that there must be time and there must be facts. As of now, however, there is no link and, if that is the case, Tony Blair cannot justify a military build-up that is juggernauting to war. Only two days ago—and I talk about the momentum—Hans Blix expressed his concern. He said: "There is a certain momentum in the ... build-up and that worries a great many people including myself." I know that the Liberal Democrats in Westminster  have expressed their concern about a drift to war. The public are not convinced that there is a link with al-Qa'ida. If the UK and US Governments want to go to war for any other reason, they must comply with international law. The United Nations charter gives a member nation the right to respond to armed aggression with force, although evidence and justification must be presented. The struggle was meant to be one against terrorism. I can think of no other way of increasing international terrorism and the danger to Britain than to bomb Iraq.

I am sure that the member will be happy to note that my next comment was going to be that, if the purpose is the pursuit of peace, then the road to peace must go through Israel and Palestine. There can be no peace until there is justice in Palestine. It is fundamental that the rule of international law applies. Many serious concerns and doubts have been expressed about the United Nations. We know that there is hypocrisy and the arbitrary implementation of resolutions, but without it we would have nothing. We would have a world that we would not want to know. Despite concerns that people may have, we need to remember that three of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council—China, Russia and France—issued a statement to the effect that resolution 1441 excluded the automatic use of force and that only the United Nations Security Council could authorise force as a riposte to the action or inaction of Iraq. Let us be clear about the vote tonight—members will have a clear, polarised choice. A vote for Tom McCabe's amendment is a vote to simply record a matter of fact; that amendment does not include the key issue of a second resolution. A vote for the SNP motion is a vote that international law must prevail and a statement of the absolute imperative for a second resolution before any military action. Members must look to their consciences and their constituencies and ask whether their vote tonight will encourage or discourage Tony Blair from embarking on bilateral or unilateral action on a war in Iraq. Will members give succour to that position, or not?  Contrary to some views, the SNP did not lodge the motion to embarrass the Labour party. We lodged the motion because we think that it is right to do so. It is right that we should speak out on the issue and that our democratic views are expressed. The people of Scotland did not vote for democracy only for it to be silenced. The vote tonight is important. Members must not let their silence on the issue give consent to a path to war that is not firmly grounded in international law.

I do not think that anyone in the chamber will be surprised to learn that the Scottish National Party considers that questions relating to who is entitled to stand for election and to be elected to the Scottish Parliament should be decided here rather than in London. Scotland's Parliament is the most appropriate place to decide on the issues that matter to Scotland, which include who is entitled to be a member of the Scottish Parliament. It is interesting and welcome that only the Scottish Parliament can consider and approve the statutory instrument, although it is clear that the issue is one that will be considered in the Scottish  Parliament alone when we take control. We should take control of housekeeping measures at least. No doubt other members will come to agree with me on that in time. We want the Parliament to take control of a range of issues, such as the economy, the number of MSPs, who we welcome as refugees, how we tackle poverty and how our nation is represented abroad. Even if members do not agree with me on those matters, it would be helpful if our Parliament could make its own decisions on certain housekeeping matters. We should consider how the Scottish Parliament is being asked to deal with the statutory instrument and the tortuous route by which the instrument came to us. The subject matter of the instrument is reserved, as the minister said. Despite the fact that the instrument is about who is entitled to sit as a member of the Scottish Parliament, the order was written by Helen Liddell, the Secretary of State for Scotland. The order is subject to type D procedure under schedule 7 to the Scotland Act 1998 and can be considered only by members of the Scottish Parliament. That means that the minister who is responsible for the secondary legislation is not answerable to the Scottish Parliament and cannot be called to account for the content of the instrument. In addition, those to whom Helen Liddell is answerable—elected members in London—cannot call her to account for the instrument because it can be considered only by MSPs. I am sure, as I look at the faces of some members, that they acknowledge that the scenario is rather bizarre. It is interesting that some lone voices in the Scottish Parliament want us to consider the unicameral nature of this legislature. However, what we have before us amounts to a bicameral, if not tricameral, approach to legislation and I am not sure that that represents proper scrutiny of the instrument. We cannot amend this piece of legislation; we can only accept or reject it. It was written by a minister who is answerable to another Parliament, which will not be scrutinising the order. Where else in the world would there be such a ludicrous arrangement? What other country would allow legislation about its Parliament and who may be represented in it to be made in such a manner? Instead of being able to scrutinise the legislation about who can take a seat in the Scottish Parliament, we have only a nuclear option. The order defines specific offices that are compatible or incompatible with membership of Parliament and we can either accept it as a whole or reject it. What we cannot do, as the minister said, is amend it. That is no way in which to legislate to protect the democratic process in Scotland and we should consider that in the future.  I will now consider the subject matter of the instrument. The claim of right in 1689 sought to separate the legislature from the Crown and disbarred from the legislature those holding an office of profit that was in the gift of the Crown. In that vein, most of the quangos that we—certainly the public, anyway—pay for day and daily will have their members disqualified from becoming members of the Scottish Parliament. However, there are several discrepancies and there seems to be a tendency to have over-zealous restrictions at a time when everyone is calling for a wider pool of people from which we can select prospective MSPs. For example, would our world collapse if the chairman of the Women's Royal Voluntary Service were to stand as an MSP? Under the order, that individual would be restricted. If one is a member of the Advisory Committee on Dangerous Pathogens, one must wonder why one can stand as an MSP whereas a member of the Advisory Committee on Dangerous Substances cannot. What can Helen Liddell have meant by omitting the Advisory Committee on Historic Wreck Sites? I am not sure whether there is any connection between the post of Secretary of State for Scotland and historic wrecks, but is there anything that we should know about? More important are the discrepancies in relation to public services. It is interesting that a member of the Scottish Prison Service board, with responsibilities for the running of Saughton prison, among others, will be disqualified from standing as an MSP whereas the director of the company that runs the private finance initiative jail in Kilmarnock can become an MSP. Public sector workers and civil servants are excluded from the Scottish Parliament, but fat-cat privateers who have their rates paid for them while they strip money from our public services are being allowed to stand as MSPs. On the railways, members of the Strategic Rail Authority and members of the rail passengers committee are disqualified from being MSPs, but the directors of franchises can stand as MSPs. I am not saying that any of those people should be able to stand, given their state involvement, but the discrepancies in relation to the validity of the underlying principles make it quite clear that the process is starting to unravel. Today, the Scottish Parliament has little choice but to approve the statutory instrument. However, in future, all such issues should come back to Scotland, where sensible decisions can be made in the interests of Scottish democracy. I suggest that we examine the criteria by which decisions are made about who can and cannot stand for the Scottish Parliament. The criteria must be sound and consistent and should be based on inclusiveness and common sense rather than on exclusion and historic anomalies.  We are prepared to support the order on the basis that we must do so. We need the order to be passed so that we can progress to the elections on 1 May. However, I hope that the minister agrees that we should examine the process by which people are included on the list and the principles on which our democracy rests.

I took part in the debate on the report "The Scottish Fire Service of The Future", which referred to attempts to achieve capital returns from the use and sale of fire service property. Like many members, I objected to that at the time. However, the document did not mention repeal of section 19 of the Fire Services Act 1947. That is the issue that we are addressing at the moment.

The minister says that his aim is to offer a factual account. Does he understand that our aim is to scrutinise and hold the Executive to account? If he wants to hear the views of the SNP, perhaps he should have agreed to the debate that we suggested for tomorrow morning. I have a specific question about regional management. The minister says that regional management has, in effect, been secured. My understanding is that regional advisory committees have been secured. Is there any guarantee that there will be a move and transition in respect of power as opposed to simply advice with regard to those advisory committees to achieve regional management? Secondly, on the 15 days a month at sea, the minister says that there has been a firm undertaking. Where is that firm undertaking? Was the undertaking verbal or written? If it is not a written undertaking, why not? Thirdly, does the minister think that the fishing crisis should lead us to reflect in the intergovernmental negotiations on whether Scotland, even under devolution, should have direct access to the European Court of Justice? Finally, is the minister remotely aware that he and Elliot Morley had no other option, as they had no friends, no allies and, in effect, no clout?

Margo MacDonald raised a very important point about proposals for the total bill and the impact of bringing retained firefighters' pay up to a level commensurate with that of firefighters. Does the minister share those concerns? Will he ensure that, in representing the Parliament's interests, he raises those concerns with the UK Government?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it has taken in the light of recent developments to ensure that firefighters' pensions will be fully funded without any need to cut front-line services. (S1O-6070)

Will the minister join me in paying tribute to the firefighters and to their professionalism and bravery in fighting the old town fire earlier this week? [ Applause. ] I raised the issue of pensions with the Minister for Justice in February. There are concerns that front-line services might be cut in order to tackle the pensions issue. The minister set up a short-term working group, which examined not the terms and conditions of the pensions, but the operation, management and structure of pay-outs. The minister has just indicated that about £5 million will be available this year, but my understanding is that the Executive has not in fact yet released that £5 million for this year. Will he confirm when the short-term working group is meant to report? It was meant to report by the end of this year.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I have never heard such nonsense so well scripted and so well read—[ Interruption. ]

Presiding Officer, will you confirm that when the SSI was first referred, no evidence had yet been heard by the Rural Development Committee or any part of the Parliament? Tuesday's meeting of the Parliamentary Bureau timetabled the approval of the SSI, but only yesterday did we hear of the committee's concern and of the vote that took place at Tuesday's meeting, the Official Report of which has not yet been published. When a committee has serious concerns about the evidence that it has heard, should that not be enough to enable it to ask the Parliament for extra time to debate that? Will you confirm that evidence had not been heard when the SSI was referred to the committee?

Almost 10 years ago to the day, I broke my wrist on the morning of the 12/12/92 demonstration for democracy as part of the campaign to achieve the Parliament. I know from that experience how debilitating three months in plaster was—I could not wash my hair or get the Christmas presents, for example. As Mary Scanlon said, for those who suffer from osteoporosis and cannot necessarily return to active living, it is imperative that we address the issue. We must have sympathy with osteoporosis suffers, but if one message is coming from the debate, it is that prevention and considering osteoporosis in the round for all the community are the way forward. I am particularly interested in the material on the action plan for population-wide primary prevention measures, with which the National Osteoporosis Society provided us. That material shows us the areas for intervention. Half the problem is that people are not aware that they may be at risk. Those with a family member—perhaps a mother—who has had, for example, a hip problem, may be worried that they or other female family members may have osteoporosis, but not know what to do or where to go. When they decide that they want to do something about it, the facilities may not exist for them to have the scan that can help so much. From contacts that I have had with the National Osteoporosis Society, I know that there are problems in Edinburgh, where no clinician specialises in osteoporosis. In the Forth Valley NHS Board area, there is no clinician for osteoporosis. We must address those issues and ensure that, where we can get the prevention message across, we have the facilities to follow it through. I also have concerns about the availability  of scanners. My understanding is that there are none in the Forth Valley area. The scanner at St John's hospital at Howden in West Lothian is only open on a Monday and a Wednesday. In Edinburgh, there is only one scanner, at the Western general hospital. I appeal to the minister to think about osteoporosis in the round and to think about it in the public health arena, particularly among our young people. There is a danger that osteoporosis is considered something for older people. We can change the agenda by recognising, as Michael Matheson did, that we need to think about younger people not only as sufferers, but in terms of prevention. My children get their milk and enjoy it. However, an awful lot can be done, particularly on the nutritious school meals agenda. Are we taking the calcium agenda into the nutritious school meals agenda? I understand that the minister was at last week's falls prevention conference, which was held in conjunction with Age Concern Scotland and health professionals. The National Osteoporosis Society is concerned that osteoporosis is only considered part of the older age group agenda. Will the minister reassure us that, when he considers what the Executive can do to support the osteoporosis agenda, he will acknowledge that it must be part of the public health agenda? As I have said, we should address the issue in the round. Let us ensure that we make a difference, because investment made today will reap rewards for tomorrow. If that means peace of mind for today's population and security for the next generation, we should make that investment.

Will the minister give way?

As the minister is addressing the issue of the constitution, can he advise whether the Executive supports holding a referendum on any constitution treaty? Can he explain why the Executive is opposed to direct access for this Parliament to the European Court of Justice?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it not important that the member addresses the terms of the motion? I understand that he has not mentioned the word "convention" once.

I will move amendment S1M-3678.1, in the name of Richard Lochhead, who sends his apologies for being unable at short notice to speak in the debate. Scotland's place in the wider world has been a topic of important debate, negotiation and indeed treaty not just in recent years with the development of the EU, but for centuries beforehand. The SNP agrees with the sentiment in the first part of the motion, as we recognise the role that Europe has played and in particular the important reason why the EU was established—to prevent any future European wars. We recognise ourselves as Europeans, as many Scots do. There is always a danger that, on this shared island, people speak about Europeans as "them" and do not recognise that Europe is not apart from us. We are European as a country and Europeans as a people. It is significant that there is no Scottish Parliament or Executive representation on the convention, although Business a.m. reported that Jack McConnell had pledged to fight for a place on it. He failed. Two SNP representatives—Professor Neil MacCormick and Councillor Keith Brown—are the only democratically elected Scottish representatives.

Opinion polls that take the views of Scots are significant. Many Scots see themselves first as Scots, then as Europeans and thirdly as British. That is the view of the world of younger people in Scotland in particular and we must reflect that in our analysis. The SNP supports a positive vision of enlargement, with more transparency, accountability, democracy and subsidiarity within the EU. We welcome the constitution or treaty—although we think that it should be subject to a referendum—and we see that Europe can develop in terms of confederation rather than federation. The SNP has consistently argued that any major constitutional change should be approved by  referendum, whether in respect of the Maastricht treaty, devolution or future independence in Europe. I would be interested to know whether the minister agrees with that. Scotland has played different roles as a nation state and as a sub-state. Some may want to view Scotland as a constitutional region. In our nation's history, we can point to times in which our focus has been to look north and east to our nordic neighbours—the Parliament played host to the Nordic Council seminar a few weeks ago—south to the Atlantic arc of Ireland and Portugal, east to the Baltic states and, of course, south to an auld alliance with France and a newer union with England. In that context, I recognise the work of the convention and want to draw on some of the key debates. Scotland can see itself as an aspiring member state, a stateless nation or a constitutional region. Each provides a different prism through which to look at the convention's work and each perspective offers different angles on the evolving debate. How does the current debate protect and promote the existing rights of devolved nations, particularly in an expanding Europe of accession states? From what perspective is the Executive trying to bat for Scotland? Is the Executive really batting for Britain and a centralised bigger member state perspective and clawing back from the Liege declaration and the Flanders declaration that was signed by Henry McLeish? I fear that what we have seen from the Executive is missed opportunities and mixed messages. Is it not the case that even under the limited powers of devolution, Jack McConnell is limiting the powers and influence of a devolved Scotland even further by failing to back the Liege declaration's call—which, importantly, is backed by the European Committee of this Parliament—for powers for sub-member state legislatures that would give full access to the European Court of Justice?

I am aware of that, but if Irene Oldfather reads the SNP amendment she will see that our key consideration is access to the European Court of Justice. I will develop that point further. Jack McConnell is isolated among the so-called regions with legislative competence over direct access to European Court of Justice. Bearing in mind the crisis in our fishing industry, I think that that might prove to be essential. If members consider the recent ferries debacle, they  will see that it would have been in Scotland's interest to have had direct access to the European Court of Justice when our subsidiarity was being infringed. When it comes to Europe, who is serious about this nation playing as full a role as it can? Actions speak louder than words or, I fear, the spin of the presentation of the First Minister as rapporteur of the Committee of the Regions and chair of the group of regions with legislative competence. It is interesting that that group is made up of many small regional Governments that are all calling for access to the European Court of Justice—a position that the group's newly appointed chair does not support. We are in the strange situation in which even Germany, as a full member state, calls for access to the European Court of Justice for Parliaments such as this one, but the Scottish Executive and UK Government do not. Jack McConnell has, on our behalf—although it has taken until today for the Executive to ask for Parliament's agreement to this—been talking up the need for a subsidiarity champion, yet the convention's Mendez de Vigo working group on subsidiarity has dumped the subsidiarity champion idea. The new plan is for national, member state Parliaments to review proposed EU legislation before its consideration by the European Parliament and to issue a reasoned objection if subsidiarity seems likely to be infringed. Scotland will therefore have to rely on Westminster to decide whether our subsidiarity is being infringed. That movement makes it clear that an enlarged Europe with more, but smaller, member states is emerging and that the right of independent nation states is prevailing over those of devolved states. That reinforces the argument that Scotland's interests would be served as a full member state. Who leads for Scotland? The Scottish Executive fishing minister speaks for Scotland but does not necessarily lead for Scotland. Is it not significant that the European Parliament's constitutional committee report, as adopted on 28 November this year, notes the possibility under article 203 of the EC treaty for regional ministers to represent their member state at the Council in accordance with the state's own constitutional arrangements. I had a very interesting discussion about that issue last week with the Belgian ambassador in London. How is the Scottish Executive serving the Highlands and Islands when an Office for National Statistics blunder has meant that the Highlands and Islands has lost objective 1 status? The Executive must argue for reclassification of the transitional payment as objective 1 so that the Highlands and Islands can get transitional payments post-2006.  It is important that the Executive should send a clear message. The Executive seems to want to make friends in Europe but do nothing on behalf of Scotland with that friendship. It wants to sit back and watch Westminster shape our future in Europe. I do not want to wait and watch. I want Scotland to decide for ourselves and form our own future as a full member state of the communities of Europe. I move amendment S1M-3678.1, to leave out from "Scottish Executive's" to end and insert: "Convention's proposal for a constitution or constitutional treaty for the European Union which will delimit the powers of the EU and member states; believes that the people of Scotland must be given the opportunity to approve any such treaty in a referendum; supports the Liege Declaration and the European Committee's calls for powers for sub-member state legislatures that would give Scotland full access to the European Court of Justice; urges the Scottish Executive to actively pursue this objective, and recognises that the most effective representation in the EU for small nations like Scotland is gained by full membership."

The debate is serious, because it addresses a wide range of issues—not least, crime and the provision of international arrest orders. The SNP is not against the proposals for European arrest warrants, but it is concerned about where it is legitimate to hold the detailed consideration of, and debate on, the legislation. In the European Parliament, Sir Neil MacCormick moved a constructive amendment to the framework decision on the European arrest warrant, in an attempt to build the 110-day rule into the general provisions. Sir Neil MacCormick is now calling for Eurojust—the European prosecution agency—to come to Edinburgh. Let us turn to the nuts and bolts of the SNP's amendment and to the substantive issues that have been raised. Our argument is that, if we are to debate a Sewel motion, it should cover relevant areas. We are particularly concerned about whether the issue in part 1 of the bill is about extradition or whether it is about domestic warrants. If it is about domestic warrants, it is a judicial matter, which means that it is a matter for the Scottish Parliament, rather than for Westminster, to address. Our understanding of extradition is that it requires a decision by a minister in executive Government in order to proceed. No such decision is necessary for the execution of a European arrest warrant. The fact that the execution of a European arrest warrant is entirely a judicial process means that part 1 of the Extradition Bill should be considered in Scotland. I refer members to the council framework decision of 13 June 2002, which states:  "The objective set for the Union to become an area of freedom, security and justice leads to abolishing extradition between Member States and replacing it by a system of surrender between judicial authorities." I draw Donald Gorrie's attention to that point. The framework decision abolishes extradition in European Union member countries and replaces it with "a system of surrender between judicial authorities." The judicial authorities are the court system in Scotland, not Executive ministers. That is the important distinction. The issue of deferral has been raised. It is only seven days since the publication of the bill so, bearing in mind the constitutional points that have been made, is not it reasonable to ask for a deferral so that those points can be considered? If it is decided that matters relating to the judicial system should still be dealt with by Westminster, the Executive should come back with a Sewel motion that is about all of part 1 of the bill, rather than just the functions. If Pauline McNeill thinks that it is important for the Justice 2 Committee and other committees to consider framework decisions and their implementation in relation to civil law, does not she think that it is equally important that the Justice 2 Committee, and other committees, should examine framework decisions and their implementation in relation to criminal law? Would not the Parliament be setting a good example by taking responsibility for the criminal justice system issue? Should not that issue be examined by the committee that is responsible for such consideration? There are other general problems with the Extradition Bill; for example, there are some civil liberties arguments about implementation. The Liberal Democrats' submission to the consultation raised important points about civil liberties arguments and the importance of considering the European Commission's report. That issue is worthy of consideration. I am sure that Members of Parliament from all parties will engage in such consideration at Westminster. We must consider how the European arrest warrant will be implemented by the criminal justice system here. We must have a fair system. A concern that has been raised is that executing the bill's provisions should not create a problem in relation to the European convention on human rights. One of my concerns is supported by the case of Ramda v Secretary of State  in  2002 , when the High Court said that it was no answer for the Secretary of State to invoke France's status as a signatory to the ECHR as a complete answer to complaints about the fairness of the trial.  We are dealing with big issues that cannot necessarily be addressed in a short Sewel debate, so we must deal with them again. I am particularly concerned that the renaming of the extension of domestic warrants to be interpreted as extradition will mean that powers can be transferred from the Scottish Parliament to Westminster. That would be a serious initiative to take and one that might come back to haunt us. I ask the minister to withdraw his motion or to accept our amendment, which would allow part 1 of the bill, at least, to be legislated for. The Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill is at committee stage currently, so we could be legislating now on the issues that I mentioned. At the very least, I ask the minister to consider our request because of the serious concerns that we have as parliamentarians in the Scottish Parliament. By lodging our amendment, we seek to protect powers under the Scotland Act 1998; I hope that the minister respects our right and responsibility to do so.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Has Angus MacKay read the motion that we are debating? All it says is that we should note the provisions of the Extradition Bill. The question that Parliament must vote on, which is the substance of the debate and the substance of the amendment that Christine Grahame lodged,  is about the powers of Scottish ministers. The debate is about whether part 1 of the Extradition Bill is about extradition or domestic warrants which are, we argue, a devolved matter.

We all noted the Queen's speech yesterday and the commitment to tackling certain aspects of the misuse of fireworks. Will the minister indicate whether the Executive is prepared to use the powers that it has to make either primary legislation or, preferably, regulations, to allow a reasonably speedy resolution of the problems of sale? That would mean that we could indicate to people that they will not face the problems next year that they have faced this year. I had two people at my surgery this week, complaining about their problems. Will the minister indicate whether the Executive is willing to act instead of just waiting for Westminster to act?

This is difficult for me. I agree that we do not need three hours for the Title Conditions (Scotland) Bill—indeed, I suggested previously that we should cut the length to one and a half hours. However, yet again, we face a Sewel motion on a measure that is of serious importance to the Scottish justice system. My colleague Neil McCormick MEP has already spoken on record about the consequences of European arrestment orders and their implications for the justice system of Scotland. Rather than have Westminster legislate for us, we should use our time on this important issue to make our own laws. It is with some regret that I see our time being used on a Sewel motion. I will not use up time to press the motion to a vote at this stage because we have the opportunity to do so next Thursday. I appeal to all  members to examine the matter carefully. This is an opportunity for the Scottish Parliament to say that it does not want a Sewel motion on our justice system. We want to decide such issues ourselves as there are major implications in the extradition bill. We must give the legislation enough time and we should do so by means of our own bill, not a Sewel motion.

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. My understanding is that ministers should clarify to the chamber if they make statements that are not quite true. I ask the minister to clarify the statement that he made about the set-aside rules. Did the Minister for Social Justice say this morning that they would be abolished, as the minister said, or did he say, as in the Minister for Social Justice's statement, that they would be looked at, as opposed to abolished?

Nobody denies that people want litter, graffiti, dogs' dirt and so on sorted out, but that is local government's job. It would be helpful if legislative changes and updates could be provided in respect of powers of licences and penalties, but are we seriously saying that this is the stuff that makes for the McConnell Administration's flagship legislation? That was what the First Minister claimed. When no progress can be seen—

I am sorry, but I have just started—I have obviously touched a raw nerve. I am not sure whether the Executive has moved on since the May and August announcements. I noticed that the ministers nodded strongly at Shona Robison's comments. I am aware that ministers cannot make announcements during closing speeches, but I had hoped that we would hear something on fireworks legislation in particular during the opening speech. I am disappointed that we did not. I hope that there will be progress.  I am concerned that the Executive is not selling Scotland abroad on the big-picture horizon in respect of making our way in the world and that it undersells the Parliament at home by trumpeting basic housekeeping, commonsense ideas as the best things since sliced bread, but does not come up with the legislative goods. It makes a virtue of dealing with the symptoms of decline—it should be remembered that Tony Blair adopted the Tory spending plans for public services for the first few years—but does not get on with the real job of growing Scotland's economy, increasing the public purse for local government and establishing basic policies and legislative proposals in time. The Labour-Liberal coalition likes to deal with symptoms and incremental change—otherwise it might have to come up with some big ideas. There is absolutely nothing wrong with the legislative proposals so far, apart from the fact that they have not come from the Executive, but from individual MSPs. I note Bruce Crawford's criticism that a consultation by the Executive and proposals for legislation could be the kiss of death for members' proposals. I am not necessarily saying that the minister is responsible for that—the Parliament might be—but we must be aware of the danger. Local government will and should deliver on such issues and services. Local government needs two things from the Executive—finance and the powers to do its job properly while we get on with ours. On finance, there is a problem in that COSLA has said that local authorities have been under-resourced for core services to the tune of £440 million over the past few years. On what Iain Smith said, I have a quote from the Official Report . Councillor Pentland said: "Over the three years, we identified an overall funding gap of some £440 million."—[ Official Report , Local Government Committee , 29 October 2002; c 3337.]

I will take an intervention from the minister.

We have transparency and  negotiation, absolutely. The issue is that COSLA still disagrees with the proposals. If it has not had investment in core services until now, it is no wonder that in West Lothian, for example, a £13.50 bulky uplift charge has been imposed and there are complaints that fly-tipping has increased. The issue is about basic services and basic financial proposals. I have a simple point to make about powers. The McIntosh report was debated in the chamber on 2 July 1999. The proposals were great, but there have been problems in timing and implementation. The Executive did not implement the proposals. The joint local authority-Parliament conference compact could have been up and running. I suspect that proposals for amendment of the Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982 would almost certainly have been on the table as part of that compact and we would have been well on our way to implementing proposals that have been made. The problem is that we are not getting on with the job. Tricia Marwick suggested during a Sewel debate—I think that it was on guide dogs for the blind—as far back as seven months ago, long before Jack McConnell's initial announcement, that we should have a civic government bill proposal to deal with all the individual proposals that were on the table. We could have had the basic housekeeping legislation, had we had the proposals, the finance and the powers. That is the problem. The local authorities needed that and that is what the Parliament could have provided. That is what the Executive should have been doing but it has not done so. This is not a council chamber. This is not a parish council. This is Scotland's Parliament. Duncan McNeil made a sincere speech about the needs of local communities. The problem is that it could easily have been made in Inverclyde Council. It is important that we allow local authorities to use the powers that they have and that we use the powers that we have to legislate. The most important thing is to get on with the job. Let us see some action on legislation.

My understanding was that S1M-3549 was the revised Parliamentary Bureau motion that was moved at half-past 2 this afternoon.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

No. My point of order is about behaviour in the chamber. Do not our procedures say that only one person should stand in the chamber at any time? The former fisheries minister's lack of respect for members who are raising points of order is grossly discourteous to the chamber.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I wonder whether you could clarify whether the timing for Executive responses to committee reports is covered by standing orders or whether it is a matter of protocol. I note that rule 14.1.5 in the standing orders, on the publication of documents, says that the business bulletin will indicate when publications are available. My understanding from the debate—I apologise for only having watched it from my office—is that the Executive responded to the Justice 1 Committee's very important report at only half-past 5 last night. I wish to clarify whether the Justice 1 Committee's report is a report in itself or whether it is a response to the Executive's consultation on the prison estates review. My understanding is that it is the former rather than the latter. I want to clarify whether the ministerial statement on the Executive's consultation on the prison estates review was not in itself a sufficient reply to the Justice 1 Committee's report. Is it the case that a full response by the Executive to the report was needed, given that the report raised a great many points, and that the response should not have come at only half-past 5 last night?

I thank the Minister for Education and Young People for her statement, and ask that she accepts Michael Russell's apologies. He is on a previously arranged parliamentary delegation to Quebec. I am not sure whether his remit includes repairing relationships, but that is a different matter. Let me turn to the heart of the issue. Does the minister agree that there is a difference between consultation with a blank piece of paper and the role of Government in leading the country and implementing action? I acknowledge that this is a long-term project, but point out that babies who were born within weeks of Labour coming to power in 1997 are now in primary 1. Can we ensure that the children of today do not miss out on vital Government action? I note the press release that was issued before the minister made her statement, about the fact that the Schools (Scotland) Code 1956 is being phased out. How can that happen when so many references and terms are subject to continuing negotiation? It is crystal clear from the University of Edinburgh's report that there is a strong desire for smaller class sizes, something which the minister apparently wearies of hearing about from the Scottish National Party, although that desire carries a weight of popular support. What exactly will the Government do for today's pupils that will involve investment in additional teachers, rather than just moves towards composite classes or having additional classroom assistants? In recent years the Government's favourite method of reducing class sizes to 30 in primaries 1 to 3 has  been to have composite classes. That method is not based on any sound, substantial research—something that the Government has itself acknowledged. Is the Government going to bring more teachers into the classroom, or will it be a case of trying to do arithmetic with an adult to pupil ratio instead of a teacher to pupil ratio, bearing in mind the fact that there were 95 fewer primary school teachers last year than in 2000, according to the most recent schools census? Let me turn to the consultation responses concerning an over-emphasis on external assessment, an issue that was also raised by the SNP. What action does the minister anticipate to reverse the growing trend, so that children can acquire basic skills without the straitjacket of external assessment? The report refers to choice in the curriculum. How can one have choice in the curriculum if one is in a straitjacket of external assessment? What does the minister know now that she did not know before the extensive exercise started?

I agree with many of the remarks that have been made. However, I would like to draw attention to what I see as two separate but related debates in the terms of the motion. I think that everybody in the chamber agrees on the importance of Edinburgh airport to the economy of the Lothians and Scotland. Remarks along those lines have been well made. I think that we all stand and will stand together—cross-party—in ensuring that the best case for Edinburgh airport will be presented in the future. Only 10 days ago I was taken on a tour of the perimeter of Edinburgh airport, because I wanted to find out more about the area's growth needs and where the cargo base would be sited. I happened to be at the airport in support of a constituent who had concerns about the development of park-and-fly facilities there. It is essential that we acknowledge the economic importance of the expansion and development of  Edinburgh airport—not just for the City of Edinburgh Council, but for West Lothian Council, because of the developments around Ratho and beyond. I acknowledge that any development to the east of Edinburgh airport would have an impact on the economic viability of the cargo base and any other business development at the airport—it is right that we pay attention to that issue. However, I am concerned when people link it to the case for setting up accommodation centres for asylum seekers. I disagree with David McLetchie's claim that no one disputes that accommodation centres are necessary. I do, for the same reasons that the City of Edinburgh Council suspended its discussions with the national asylum support service. The best way of dealing with asylum seekers and of ensuring that they are well cared for is to have a genuine dispersal process that allows councils to accommodate asylum seekers in the community. The children of asylum seekers would then be able to attend local schools, receive the support that they need and have their health needs met. I know that because almost two years ago, in response to a petition, the then Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee visited Sighthill to examine the consequences of siting many asylum seekers in one location.

There are two problems. The first relates to how we deal with people who are fleeing persecution. Secondly, I agree with David McLetchie that the process of dealing with applications is too lengthy and that they should be dealt with much more speedily. I turn to the proposed accommodation centre at Turnhouse. Although Turnhouse was earmarked as a possible site for an accommodation centre, it was not included in the first batch of centres. Four sites were announced, but they were all located in England. Amid widespread public concern, a number of councils in England have refused to grant permission for development of accommodation centres. The Westminster Government is having difficulties with the whole concept of accommodation centres, let alone its proposal for a centre at Turnhouse. We should turn our attention to the planning needs of Edinburgh airport and not get hung up about the idea that in the near future Turnhouse will become the site of an accommodation centre. I  do not think that that will happen. The City of Edinburgh Council was willing and able to negotiate with NASS about genuine dispersal within the community in Edinburgh. That is the route that we should follow. During consideration of the Housing (Scotland) Bill, I lodged an amendment that would have allowed local authorities to retain the control that they once had over housing for asylum seekers. If the Parliament had supported that amendment, we would have avoided the planning and other problems with which people in west Edinburgh have had to deal. At the time, I was accused of approaching the issue of housing for asylum seekers as a constitutional matter. This debate shows that my amendment was a practical measure that the Parliament could and should have supported. Had it done so, we would not be debating a proposal that would compromise the economic development of Edinburgh airport and prevent us from providing for the needs of asylum seekers and—most important—their children, in this place of which we want to be proud.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Yes. I seek your guidance. My understanding of the standing orders is that the Executive is accountable to the Parliament. If Hugh Henry, the Deputy Minister for Social Justice, was able to issue a press release moments after question time, should not he have been here to answer Mr Rumbles's questions directly?

Does Bristow Muldoon agree that West Lothian, which he represents, could be a cockpit for development, but that our problem lies in the need for infrastructure? Does he agree that transport, infrastructure and skills are crucial if we are to grow the economy not just in West Lothian but elsewhere? Will he get to the point and argue the case for his constituents instead of knocking people in the Parliament?

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to resolve any short and longer-term structural financial problems facing West Lothian College. (S1O-5469)

Does the minister recognise that the situation of West Lothian College is unique? Does he understand that it was the first private finance initiative-funded college and that it was set up by the old Scottish Office under the previous Conservative Government? Does he acknowledge that 13 staff members are being made redundant in an area where we need to ensure that students can learn new skills after the job losses at Motorola and NEC? Does he recognise that a one-off payment now to help a successful college that has to turn away students would save the taxpayer money in the long term? Does he agree that even the biggest fans of PFI—I am certainly not one of them—would never have set up a PFI contract of the sort under which West Lothian College has to operate?

Will Pauline McNeill give way?

rose—

I am not sure whether Iain Smith was in the chamber when Christine Grahame presented some views that came out of considerations of the justice budget. Those views were constructive and I am sure that Jim Wallace, the Minister for Justice, will want to read them carefully. Once again, we have some SNP ideas to help the Lib Dems on justice issues.

It is the job of the Opposition to hold the Executive to account. Members should recognise that the debate is a result of pressure from the SNP. It is the job of Government to take responsibility. I do not want the Minister for Health and Community Care to abdicate his responsibility. He should consider the abolition of deferred waiting lists. As recently as last week's First Minister's question time, Jack McConnell insisted that everything was fine in the NHS in Scotland. This week, Audit Scotland has proved him wrong. I will reprise some of the recent history of the health service in the Lothians. I remind members that the debate is not simply about statistics—it is about people. A young constituent of mine, who had been the subject of sexual abuse, was initially denied assessment because the child mental health list in the Lothians was closed. In West Lothian, general practitioners have had to close their patient lists and people have had problems accessing their GPs. Waiting times are calculated from the time that patients are referred by a GP; if there is difficulty in seeing a GP in the first place, that adds to the wait. In West Lothian, waiting times are seven days longer than they were in June 1998. Another constituent of mine who required investigative surgery for breast cancer had her operation at St John's hospital at Howden cancelled because no sterilised instruments could be provided from Edinburgh royal infirmary. Such problems arise not through lack of commitment on the part of NHS staff, but because the staff do not have the required policy and resources to deliver. We should pay tribute to those who have busted a gut and worked weekends to get the waiting lists to their present level. However, that is not sustainable. We found out recently that hospital trusts in Lothian NHS Board have had to cut back their operating budgets. The 1 per cent strategic change deduction is to pay for the private finance initiative at the new Edinburgh royal infirmary, which has fewer beds than it needs and fewer beds than the old royal infirmary. Other NHS services are suffering because of the expense of the PFI project. It is no wonder that the chair of  Lothian NHS Board consistently cancels the meetings that I arrange to discuss those matters. I want to focus on some of the waiting list information. On 7 February, under SNP questioning, the First Minister admitted that waiting lists in West Lothian were being fiddled. He said that gastroenterology had been reclassified, which had helped. It has helped only because the aim of the tick-box culture is to meet targets. We cannot have public services that are led by a tick-box culture—they must be led by patient care. Page 35 of the Audit Scotland report refers to the fiddles in West Lothian. It states: "West Lothian Trust has incorrectly used the deferred list for patients waiting for treatments of low clinical priority". In the quarter ending in March of this year, 29 per cent of waiting patients in West Lothian were on deferred waiting lists. That is the second highest figure in the country. I referred to the 1 per cent cut that is happening throughout Lothian because of the new Edinburgh royal infirmary.

Sorry. West Lothian Healthcare NHS Trust has a £5.6 million deficit. How does that relate to how we will cut waiting lists and waiting times? There is a problem in West Lothian with recruiting and retaining consultants. Staff are needed to ensure that operations can be done at their assigned time. There is also a more immediate problem. One would think that we would want to keep hospital wards open and hospital beds in operation. Why, then, did the trust management team only last week, when considering its long-term financial recovery plan to deal with its £5 million deficit, say: "The Trust Management team will recall they previously considered the bed utilisation option appraisal and agreed, in principle, to pursue the Ward 19 closure." Ward 19 is the ear, nose and throat ward. The trust management team went on to say: "This action remains an integral element of the Trust long term financial recovery plan, consequently colleagues are asked to re-endorse the principle and agree that the proposal be implemented as soon as possible." How can we close wards but keep beds open and meet the minister's targets on waiting times and waiting lists? Those targets cannot be met if wards are being closed. Why is the ENT ward in West Lothian being closed, not to meet policy resources for patient care, but to meet a long-term recovery plan for a £5 million pound deficit at the same time as we are paying for the PFI—which the Tories put in place?

It is interesting that the member considers Liam Fox to be the Conservative party's real health minister. Does that mean that the member thinks that Alan Milburn is the Labour party's real health minister?

It is clear from the U-turns and climbdowns over the policy analyst adverts that the First Minister is not in control of the civil service. Given that it is clear under section 51 of the Scotland Act 1998 that Tony Blair is in charge of the civil service, will the First Minister tell us what his limited delegated responsibilities are? When he next sees Tony Blair, in an hour's time, will the First Minister argue the case for a Scottish civil service to be controlled by the Scottish Parliament?

Next week we are due to consider a Sewel motion on the Police Reform Bill, which will introduce much needed amendments to legislation dealing with sex offender orders. It is in everyone's interest that we take responsibility for closing the loophole that exists. The issue is how we do that. My office contacted the parliamentary authorities at Westminster to find out the time scale for consideration of the Police Reform Bill. The bill originated in the House of Lords and is presently in committee in the House of Commons. The bill is due to complete its committee stage either this week or next. It must then be debated at third reading before being sent back to the House of Lords. I understand that the amendments that will close the loophole to which I referred may not be made until some time in October. Even then, the bill will have to receive royal assent before coming into force. I would like to make a suggestion to the chamber, which I am prepared to discuss constructively with other business managers at next week's meeting of the Parliamentary Bureau. Would it be possible for the Scottish Parliament to legislate on and take responsibility for the changes that are proposed? We discuss many issues, some of which are less serious than closing loopholes in the legislation that deals with sex offender orders. I respectfully request support from other business managers for revisiting this issue at next week's meeting of the Parliamentary Bureau. We could consider a bill during the first week in September, to ensure that we deliver the changes that we need to make to legislation in Scotland before Westminster does the same for the rest of the UK.

I want to talk about the practical problems of PFI and the drive for profit, and to offer some practical solutions. We are getting to the nub of the debate. The Government's argument is that if we do not have PFI, there will be no investment. That is absolute nonsense. The problem is that there are constraints. PFI is a straitjacket—at the end of the day Gordon Brown decides. He holds the purse strings and that is what limits and restricts the Parliament in what it can do in financing. I will address what is happening in West Lothian. A series of West Lothian schools are being built under PPP. The primary school at Linlithgow Bridge, which was promised 20 years ago by Lothian Regional Council, is finally being delivered. It is interesting that, because of the tight margins in the PPP project, there is no spare capacity for after-school clubs, so a local hall is being used, from which the local pensioners are being moved in order to ensure that there is enough space for after-school clubs. If we took a commonsense approach to investment, we would make sure that we had the facilities that are needed. A second example is Low Port Primary School. It has submitted a planning application to have some of its facing turned from stone into wood. Why is it doing that? Because it must save time and money. Members should think about the maintenance costs. That is an example of pushing to make sure that profits are achieved on time. Life-cycle maintenance will deprive us of investment. The extra cost of the PFI projects is equivalent to £18 million. The extra money that we must pay in interest and capital should be spent  on teachers and books. We are storing up problems for the future. Everybody knows that such projects are more expensive. Another example is Armadale Academy, which was left out of the PPP project. It desperately needs refurbishment and window replacement. A letter from the school board to the education authority states: "The School Board were, equally, horrified to learn ... that increased and unexpected costs in relation to PPP1 were diverting capital money from exactly those schools who were assured that they would benefit from their exclusion from that project. If this is the case then this is scandalous. These schools have benefited in terms of facilities and accommodation from their inclusion in PPP1 and, now, are draining scarce resources away from those schools, such as Armadale, who desperately require improved school accommodation." If that is happening in year one of the PPP, imagine what will happen in years 15 or 16. The problem with PPP is that it will drain resources. Two years ago we had a debate in the Parliament on practical solutions for investment—the SNP offered several solutions. PFI is ideologically driven, because it is constrained by the borrowing rules that Gordon Brown insists on at Westminster. David McLetchie said that the new Edinburgh royal infirmary is not costing us any money. If he had read the report of the pan-Lothian review group, he would know that we are now facing strategic change deductions—1 per cent cuts in health services throughout Lothian—to pay for the excess cost of the PFI project at ERI.

That is a case of extra costs for private profit, which is affecting Lothian health services across the board. We offered the Executive practical solutions two years ago. We raised five points. We called on Gordon Brown to open up the £60 billion war chest. That was done. We called for increased freedom for local authorities to borrow the money that they need. The SNP offered that solution two years ago, but only now is it being considered. We called for relaxation of the 75 per cent claw-back rule. That has not yet been done, but it should be. Two years ago we asked the Executive to abolish section 94 consents, but only now is that being considered. Finally, we called on the Executive to set up feasibility studies into the replacement of PFI schemes by public service trusts. I am glad that some councils in Scotland are doing that. We could do with a bit of leadership and direction from the Executive. It has not provided those, but the SNP will. We will provide the solutions; the Executive creates the problems.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I am glad that Mr Muldoon mentioned the Airdrie to Bathgate  line. The question is when the development will happen. That is the point of the debate—if we have the control, we can speed up the implementation of changes and have the rail infrastructure that we need, including the Bathgate to Airdrie line, for which people have been crying out for years. We can do that sooner if we have control in Scotland. Does the minister not think that that makes sense?

Will the minister give way?

It is not often that I quote Jack McConnell but, in the context of this debate, it is highly appropriate that I do. On Tuesday, he identified key areas on which the Government is to act: crime, health and enterprise. He said: "Their solutions require more than good laws: they need leadership—leadership that is consistent, fair and responsive."— [ Official Report , 28 May 2002; c 12131.]  I agree with that, but the Government is offering only legislation. We need good laws, but they are not enough. We should be able to take it for granted that Government is in the business of producing good law. Good law, however, cannot be interpreted as a substitute for good political leadership. Much of what is in the statement is worthy and needed, and we welcome it. Let us not pretend, however, that it bears the hallmark of a McConnell political leadership. Much of what was announced would have appeared whatever the political hue of the Government of the day. Some proposals will, no doubt, win support from across the chamber. I cite the areas of family law and homelessness. However, the issue of homelessness is not just about law; it is about what we provide. That means targets for new, rented accommodation, for example. We have a Government that does not want to govern. There have been 37 Sewel motions—laws handed over to London—which is almost as many as the bills that the Scottish Parliament has enacted. We need political leadership to break out of the spiral of decline, to energise our country, to raise the self-esteem of our people and to tackle the poverty and despair of Scots living in an economy that is not growing at the rate that it  should. It is crucial to tackle the core problem of an economic system that is dependent on someone else somewhere else making the key decisions. That is not just about providing good law; it is about political leadership. Poverty, the pressures of unemployment and a lack of self-esteem all lead to serious health and mental health problems and an alarming suicide rate among young men in this country. We need to tackle the mental health problems of our country at their root source, but not just by providing the much-needed and worthy law to deal with the consequences of the problem as it arises. That is the core difference between devolution, or administering to problems, and independence, which is about providing solutions to the core problems in the first place. We need leadership, but that requires political direction and a clear route map of where the Executive is going. All we have had from the McConnell Administration has been a debate in January on the Executive's priority list, which was significant not because of what was in it—everything was in it—but because of what it left out. We need consistent leadership. Where is the programme for government with the targets and indicators that we have had from previous Administrations? We have a Cabinet team with team-tag membership. On Tuesday, the First Minister mentioned consistency, but what consistency do we get from a Cabinet with such a membership? Government is about leadership and good public service delivery, which should be at the heart of political leadership. As we have laid out, the SNP would provide leadership in public services by rejecting the privatisation of prisons and hospital services; by embracing the culture of professional and accountable public services that are free from threat and seek only the favour of the public whom they serve; by putting the public at the heart of everything that public services do; by making the delivery of public services as simple and transparent as possible; and by devolving power from Holyrood and urging public services to devolve power, too. We would need laws to define some parts of that—for example, bills to abolish hospital trusts and to provide for our own rail system. The important point is that good law would follow good political leadership that is based on clear values and a clear direction. I will touch on the legislation that has not been included. Charity law reform is missing. We recognise the importance of people who provide voluntary and charity services—they should be a legislative priority. Where is the bill to provide proportional representation? We should have had political leadership to tackle the imbalance of  representation and the complacency and cronyism in many of our councils, but that is missing. The First Minister said it all in his gaffe in answering John Swinney's questions on PR and taking up good ideas, when he suggested that he would have to decide whether PR was a good idea in the first place. The Liberal Democrats should note that. We need good law, but this country is crying out for political leadership from its Government. It is crying out for a Government team that energises and liberates our country and our people from dependency. That means independence and the real powers of a real Parliament.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Will you explain the procedure behind the selection of amendments to the motion, in particular the selection of an amendment to an amendment? Is this the first time that an amendment to an amendment has been selected in the Parliament? Furthermore, will you explain the voting procedure and tell us at what point we will have to vote on what amendments to what amendments?

I will pick up where Kenny Macintosh left off. The debate is about modernising government. He is correct to say that the content of the Executive motion concentrates on the modernising aspect, but the SNP's amendment is about government and the delivery of services. The challenge for government is to bring those two aspects together. Today's debate is about access to information because it is about the new e-government agenda. However, it must be about delivery of services. What is the point of being able to access information about services online if the services do not exist? I will concentrate on who delivers, how they deliver and who pays. Euan Robson, who has left the chamber, pointed to the fact that post offices—I see that he is here; sorry, Euan—have traditionally been the point of access for much information. Post offices are under threat. We  must value the role that post offices have played in communities. In his opening remarks, the Minister for Finance and Public Services referred to the one-stop shop in the Almondvale centre in West Lothian, which provides an excellent service by bringing different services together. However, our problem in West Lothian is what happens to pensioners who live in villages on the outskirts of West Lothian and who traditionally use the post office to get information about their benefits. How are they meant to get to the one-stop shop at the Almondvale centre? Let us not have two tiers of access to information. Let us ensure that we allow people to access information where they want to. That means that we must make sure that post offices survive the threats that they face. We must also make sure that one-stop shops are funded properly. I have a question about the one-stop shop at the Almondvale centre: How much of its funding comes from the housing budget? I ask because much of the information that is provided is about the housing department. That is an interesting question that ministers might wish to ask West Lothian Council. On who pays, the Scottish Parliament information centre briefing for the debate states that £25 million was drawn down in modernising government fund bids to deliver e-governance and the access to information that we want from the modernising government agenda. Where is that funding coming from? I will give members a good answer. Part of what we want to do is to ensure that we deliver public services. In a debate in January, I asked Peter Peacock about council tax benefits. One of the reasons why we want one-stop shops is to ensure that people can access council tax benefits and housing benefits. The ministers will know—because they are responsible for finance—that paragraph 5.3 of "Funding the Scottish Parliament, National Assembly for Wales and Northern Ireland Assembly" states that if the council tax benefit bill in England and Wales rises faster than that in Scotland, as is currently happening, there should be an adjustment. I asked Mr Peacock in January whether we were benefiting from that and he said that we were. This year alone, we should get back £20 million because of the adjustments to the consolidated fund as a result of the benefits bill in England and Wales rising faster than it is here. In March, I asked the same question of the Minister for Finance and Public Services. I asked by how much we were benefiting and what adjustments had been made. He said that no adjustments had been made. Only this morning, I received another answer. I asked who was right: is it Mr Peacock, who said that we are benefiting, or is it the Minister for Finance and Public Services,  who said that we are not benefiting? Who is telling the truth? Andy Kerr said that Mr Peacock's "statement was not inaccurate." If it is "not inaccurate", how much money have we got back, because council tax benefit in England and Wales is rising faster than it is in Scotland? I ask the ministers to answer that question this morning. I invite Mr Peacock in his winding up to say which minister is giving the correct information, because the answer that I received this morning makes it clear that we in Scotland are missing out. If ministers want the pensioners in West Lothian to be able to access their benefits through the one-stop shop, they should make sure that the Parliament has the budget to enable that to happen. Ministers should go to Westminster and say, "We are due that £20 million." They should put the money into the modernising government fund. That would be a result, which cannot be said of this debate on a motion that disnae add up to much.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what guidance it has given to Lothian NHS Board regarding the 1 per cent per  annum strategic change deduction agreed by the board's chief executive. (S1O-5213)

I thank the minister for her answer. Is she aware that, under anyone's criteria, the strategic change deduction is a cut for the NHS in West Lothian of £1.38 million? Is she also aware that, according to the pan-Lothian review group, that money is needed to cover the £24 million shortfall, some of which comes from the overspend and overrun on the Edinburgh royal infirmary? I am aware of the situation at St John's hospital, where the accident and emergency new build is now a refurbishment—

Will the minister tell us why West Lothian patients are paying for the profits of the ERI public-private finance initiative?

I am pleased to contribute to the debate. I echo the points that Duncan McNeil made when he paid tribute to the fire service. Firefighters' dedication to public service should underpin any review of the fire service. My much-loved uncle was a firefighter in Ayr. Like many firefighters, he suffered from a bad chest and a bad back, which did not help his health. When we talk of firefighters' dedication, we must remember that their personal contribution may result in their health suffering. I am conscious that the debate is taking place to coincide with the Fire Brigades Union's conference in Bridlington. I am sure that it was not decided to hold the debate today because the minister did not want to receive the FBU's contributions at this time. Nonetheless, to ensure that the FBU's views were aired, I contacted members of the FBU from my constituency who are in Bridlington to find out their views and to raise those views during my speech. The minister will be aware that, on 7 February, I raised the issue of firefighters' pensions and pointed out that there was a crisis in provision because of a lack of proper funding. The joint fire boards had sought a meeting for months, and finally managed to meet the minister on the morning that I asked my question in Parliament. I was pleased that that meeting miraculously managed to take place. I remind members that the problem was caused by the combined efforts of Labour local authorities and the Conservative Government, which conspired to achieve a quick fix in fire brigade funding by paying pensions and running costs out of pension contributions. I acknowledge the points that the minister made  earlier in the debate when he said that he would not want to reward bad behaviour or practice by taking a needs-based approach to the distribution of moneys for pension contributions that have been made available recently. However, why should Lothian and Borders fire brigade suffer because of the bad practice of Lothian Regional Council in the 1980s and 1990s? If we do not resolve the problem and end up with a per capita settlement for Lothian and Borders fire brigade pensions, we will be back at square one in a year and the consequence for my constituents would be threats to front-line services. I welcome the long-term review that is detailed in the consultation paper, but that immediate problem must be resolved. I recognise that we must debate other issues that are raised in the consultation paper. The idea of combining control rooms is controversial. Page 30 of the document refers to the situation in Strathclyde, where five fire brigade control rooms have been reduced to one. Is the minister considering spreading that idea into other emergency services? Will others have the skills that are involved in being a controller in a fire brigade control centre? We must have a full debate on that controversial issue. I am concerned that the document says that that review of shared control rooms must be conducted urgently. Why should that review be urgent? The matter is serious and goes to the heart of the future of the emergency services. I would be loth to think that the review is about realising the capital that could be released from sales of fire brigade premises and properties. I hope that when the minister sums up the debate, he will reassure us that the review is not driven by such considerations. The debate has been wide ranging. I have picked up on pensions and control rooms, but others have talked about fire prevention. However, we have not covered the implications of fireworks for fire prevention. I hope that the chamber will have the opportunity to have a members' business debate on Shona Robison's motion on the sale and use of fireworks. We must recognise the sense of duty and the dedication of our firefighters and the public service that they provide. We should have public service, not private profit. It would be difficult to maximise resources for front-line fire services if we were to pay out profits from pumps at the same time. That is the central problem with using private finance in capital initiatives, whether for buildings or for equipment. I am glad that we are having this debate, but it should not be our last debate on the issue. I am sure that we will be able to bring the matter back to the chamber to see what progress is being made as the review continues.

Will the minister take an intervention?

When the minister addresses the retirement time bomb, will he distribute those funds on a needs basis, rather than on a per capita basis?

I had not intended to speak against the motion, but I notice that members' business for 15 May is not itemised. It was discussed at last week's meeting of the Parliamentary Bureau, and again at this week's meeting, that the debate would be a motion by Michael Russell of the SNP on the case of Shirley McKie. I understand that it may be because of a printing oversight that that has not appeared in the business bulletin.

The business is usually specified.

Correct me if I am wrong, but I think that the minister said that there is no need to reopen the devolution settlement. Is he saying that federalism is dead as far as the Liberal Democrats are concerned? Look at the faces of his Liberal Democrat colleagues. Have the Liberal Democrats ditched federalism, which was one of the core principles of the party's policy? Does the minister think that no further constitutional change is possible?

Will the member give way?

Bristow Muldoon is aware from the figures that have been released that 40 per cent of the waiting lists at St John's hospital in Livingston were deferred. Is that a symbol of a flourishing health service? Does he agree that the Parliament should have the power to decide whether it should invest in the health service? Without that power, we have had to wait for three years during which the health service has been neglected. The Parliament could have been, and should have been, investing in the health service, but we did not have—and still do not have—the power to do so.

Will the minister take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

This morning, I raised concerns about the timetabling of the statement. Under rule 13.2.2 of the standing orders, ministers can ask for urgent statements to be made. Having heard the statement, do you feel that there was anything in it that was of an urgent nature and that was not informed by Gordon Brown's statement yesterday? Was it not cover for a very uncomfortable privatisation of prisons debate this morning?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. This morning we received intimation of a ministerial statement on the United Kingdom budget, which is to be made this afternoon at 2 pm. As everyone knew the date of the budget, I am not sure why the statement is of an urgent nature. No doubt all will be revealed this afternoon. As members will want to raise a number of points of interest and ask questions, half an hour is not sufficient time for the statement. It would have been helpful to have had the statement at 12.30 pm, as that would have allowed us to move on. However, at 2.30 pm, we are up against the buffers of question time. Will the Presiding Officer take representations to move forward the start time of the statement to 1.45 pm, as that would allow more time for questions, in particular from back benchers? I would be grateful if the Presiding Officer would intimate his view to the chamber and to members who are not in the chamber this morning.

The minister may be aware that an order in council was used in June 2001 during the passage of the Housing (Scotland) Bill to reverse some insolvency legislation and to bring back to Scotland some powers on insolvency in relation to registered social landlords and receivership. Where in the jigsaw of insolvency does the balance now lie?

It is quite clear that the lean and mean Tories have never left Scotland. [MEMBERS: "Hear, hear."] The SNP has not lodged an amendment to the motion—a rare but not unheard of position for the SNP to take. It is important that the Scottish Parliament speaks with its strongest voice today. Our message is, "Let Scotland decide and let the Parliament get on with its work." The key reason why people wanted the Parliament in the first place was that they were fed up with London telling us what to do about our affairs. The size of the Parliament is our affair. The Scottish Parliament should decide its future. Let Scotland decide and let the Parliament get on with its work of serving the people of Scotland. Patricia Ferguson set out the operational reasons for keeping the number of MSPs at 129. I agree with the points that she made and I will not repeat them in the limited time that is available to me. However, I want to make some points that have not yet been covered. I was interested in the Executive's argument that any reduction in the number of MSPs could reduce the amount of scrutiny of the Executive. That would be dangerous for democracy. It is also important to note that a reduction in the number of MSPs would undermine the principle of power sharing between the Executive, the Parliament and the people, which I mentioned when I intervened during David McLetchie's speech. Any reduction along the lines proposed by the Tories would cut the proportionality of the Parliament and would mean that two parties that are currently represented in Parliament would not be represented in a future session of Parliament. Some people may not want them to be represented in the Parliament, but that is part of the argument behind proportionality in the Scottish Parliament. We should all have a bit of humility. We should  remember that the Parliament is for the people, not for the politicians. We are temporary members—some are more temporary than others, including those who continue with their anti-Scottish rants. The Conservatives are firing at the wrong target; their criticisms are criticisms of the Executive, not of the Parliament. It is clear that the number of ministers can be cut without cutting the number of MSPs.

I will give way in a second. The people will not thank the Conservatives for interfering with the Parliament that they voted for in 1999 after reading the leaflet that was delivered to each and every door and that clearly stated that they were to vote for a Parliament of 129 members.

There is a strong case for a review of the operation of the Scottish Executive. All questions of ministerial responsibilities would be up for consideration in such a review. There are two reasons for this debate. First, the debate is a hangover from the Scotland Act 1998—a piece of legislation from Westminster. [Interruption.] Mr McLetchie would do well to listen to me. Some negotiations took place around the debates on the provision that introduced the boundary links. At the time, and subsequently, Donald Dewar, Henry McLeish, Lord Sewel and John Reid expressed the view that the Government would be open to a request from the Scottish Parliament to keep the number of MSPs at 129, should the Parliament, when it was up and running—as it is—reach the view that that number was necessary for the running of the Parliament. The second reason is that the debate is, I fear, a work creation scheme for Helen Liddell. By holding this unnecessary consultation exercise, she may be pandering to some Labour MPs who suddenly realise that they are no longer the centre of attention. The only arguments that we hear for cutting the number of MSPs come from an unholy alliance of Scottish Tories, who did not want the Parliament in the first place, and Westminster Labour MPs, who resent its existence. I have some positive proposals for what could happen. I repeat that my argument is that we should let Scotland decide. We could do so quite simply. Helen Liddell had three options. She could have introduced primary legislation in Westminster to end the boundary link—she has yet to do so. She could have introduced a statutory instrument to delay the inevitable boundary review that is to  achieve coterminosity for the Parliament—that may be what she plans to do. I have serious concerns that she may be using a delaying tactic. Members should give serious consideration to what her plans might be. If Helen Liddell believed in devolution, she could easily have taken another option. Section 30 of the Scotland Act 1998 allows modifications to be made to schedules 4 or 5 to that act. She could introduce a statutory instrument—an order in council—to amend paragraph 4 of schedule 4 to give the Scottish Parliament the power to modify schedule 1. There is no need for primary legislation—let the Scottish Parliament decide. That is a serious option that can and should be considered. The public do not want the Parliament to go through exercises on form and administration, such as we have in today's debate. They want us to get on and deal with the issues that matter to them. Let Scotland decide these issues. Let us get on with our work. Let us reject the wrecking of the Tories and the resentment of Westminster. Let us protect the delicate but trampled flower that is the Scottish Parliament.

I do not know whether David McLetchie understands the principles of the Parliament. We have the Executive, the Parliament and the people and there is meant to be equal power sharing between them. Would he not be better directing his angst about legislation at the Executive? He should keep the Parliament out of that and address the issue that is before us today.

Will the member give way?

Although the motion contains the names of four members to appear as replacements on committees, one of those members is a ministerial parliamentary aide. There is an agreement among parties that they will not interfere in each other's nominations for committees. I support that agreement and will continue to support it. Motion S1M-2929 talks about substitution on committees, and I hope that the agreement will continue when we consider further substitutions. At this moment, it might be appropriate for me to say, on behalf of the chamber, that we all extend our best wishes to Karen Gillon as she embarks on her maternity leave. The next substitution will, therefore, be in the Education, Culture and Sport  Committee. My concern about motion S1M-2928 is that it has the name of Elaine Thomson. I have nothing against her performance as an individual member. Indeed, I understand that she was a diligent member of the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee and represented particularly the views of the energy industry in her constituency on a national basis. However, it is inappropriate for a ministerial parliamentary aide to sit on a committee that scrutinises the Executive. The appointment of a ministerial parliamentary aide is under the patronage of the First Minister, so the aide is beholden to the Executive. It is inconsistent for that appointee to have also a proper job of scrutinising the Executive. I alert members to the Scottish ministerial code, which states: "Ministerial Parliamentary Aides may serve on Parliamentary Committees but they should not serve on Committees with a substantial direct link to their Minister's portfolio." Let us consider the situation of Elaine Thomson. She is the parliamentary aide to the Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning and is joining the Local Government Committee. Only yesterday, that committee produced a report that discussed business rates and recommended, rightly or wrongly—wrongly, in my view—that business rates should be returned to local council control. How can a member sit on a committee that is considering business rates and take a neutral position and at the same time represent the minister's interests? I refer members to paragraph 4.10 of the ministerial code, which says about ministerial parliamentary aides: "They should also exercise discretion in any speeches or broadcasts which they may make." The paragraph goes on to say: "They must bear in mind that, however careful they may be to make it clear that they are speaking only as backbenchers, they are nevertheless liable to be regarded as speaking with some of the authority which is attached to a Minister." That is why the Scottish National Party objects so strongly to the appointments of ministerial parliamentary aides in the first place but, more important, objects to those aides joining committees. To do so undermines the committees' independence, which is so vital to Parliament. We have a situation in which probably most of the people sitting on the benches opposite have at some point been a full member of the Executive, a deputy minister or a ministerial parliamentary aide. I see Elaine Smith shaking her head. Perhaps her day will come. There is a serious point here. We cannot have a situation in which we have a  diminishing number of back benchers to serve on committees. We must preserve the committees' integrity and their ability to scrutinise the Executive. One cannot serve two masters. One cannot be a ministerial parliamentary aide and serve on a committee. For that reason, I am speaking against motion S1M-2928 and I move that we vote on it.

There is a strong argument for substitutes on committees, particularly for smaller parties such as the Conservatives. When Bill Aitken represented the Parliament on Commonwealth parliamentary business—that is interesting as we are celebrating Commonwealth day—there was concern because the then Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee was to consider the housing stock transfer inquiry and there was only one Conservative member on the committee. It would be difficult for a member to come cold to the committee and to substitute in such circumstances, much as that was needed. Perhaps we should look into that. A continuity aspect is involved. Members should not make judgments based on the cold calculation of one event at one meeting. Members need to absorb issues, particularly when it is anticipated that there will be a need for substitution. Will the member also confirm that substitution will be the exception, rather than the rule? We must ensure that members continue with their responsibilities and attendance at committees and that the quality of committee work that we have enjoyed continues.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of Lothian and Borders fire board in order to discuss funding of pensions. (S1O-4625)

I am not surprised by that answer. Does the minister concede that the meeting was convened only in the past few days, despite board members' repeated requests for a meeting with him? Will he confirm that the minimum requirement for tackling the pensions time bomb is a long-term commitment to deal with the fact that the pension scheme is unfunded? Does the minister acknowledge that the pension scheme is unfunded and that, during the 1980s and 1990s, Tory home affairs ministers and Labour councillors paid for essential fire services from the pension contributions of firemen?

Will the minister confirm whether such a ticking time bomb exists in other public services, such as police forces? How does the Executive plan to tackle that pensions disgrace?

I am pleased to say that I am probably too young to call myself a baby boomer. However, I declare an interest in that I am a mother of a son who was born weeks after the 1997 general election to the echoes of the mantra, "Education, education, education." That young son is due to start primary 1 later this year. Nothing is as precious as a child. Nothing holds as many prospects as a child's mind and their capacity to learn. The Parliament should have no greater sense of responsibility than in how it develops policies to nurture and develop the minds of our young children. A debate on education provokes passions—a passion for education and the passion of anger. I will address both aspects. The SNP is passionate about education because it affects the life chances of our constituents. We are passionate about education as parents and as Scots who are conscious of our educational tradition. Why do I get angry when we have a debate about education? The situation that my constituents in West Lothian face makes me angry. What has the Executive's education policy achieved in that area? West Lothian should be the  cockpit of the knowledge economy—it needs to be. In the interests of a better Scotland, the children of West Lothian should have the education and skills to drive us forward. West Lothian should be the cockpit of the knowledge economy, but in the latest report from Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Education, our schools come 24 th for reading, 30 th out of 32 for writing and 29 th for mathematics. More than 15 per cent of West Lothian schools have not met the target for reduction in class sizes. Let me explain what has happened in West Lothian. To meet the artificial target that class sizes should be not greater than 30, pupils were shoehorned into composite classes. For 2001-02, composite classes account for 23 per cent of all primary 1, primary 2 and primary 3 classes. There are now composite classes in 78 per cent of all primary schools. In the past year, the number of composite classes for primaries 1 to 3 has increased by 9 per cent. All of that has been done simply to meet the target.

Absolutely. Our target would be met by investment in teachers. Whereas the Executive will reduce teacher numbers by 2,900 between 2004 and 2011, the SNP wants teachers to be available to ensure that we achieve our pupil-teacher ratio.

No, I will continue to develop that point. We should listen to what teachers and head teachers say. Head teachers have told me that they would prefer the flexibility of making their own choices, rather than the dislocation and disruption of composite classes, which result from the requirement to meet the class size target. Where is the evidence that the target is working? When Jack McConnell was Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs, I asked him repeatedly to explain the educational value to schools of shoehorning pupils into composite classes, when the reduction that was being achieved was only from 32 to 30. Where is the value in the Executive's education policy? Mike Russell cited the evidence that shows that reducing class sizes to 18 can make a real difference. If we want the best for Scotland, we should examine the education system that we had in the past, which was built on a passion for education and learning. The system was built with boldness and vision, and by radical but effective policies.  Tinkering about will not make the major difference that we desperately need for young people.

I am in my final few seconds. We must decide whether we have the courage to take up the challenge of building our education system on the boldness and vision of the past. We must decide whether we will carry the torch of innovation and excellence. The SNP has the vision and a policy that can achieve that. If members are up to the challenge, they should come with us; if they are not, they should not praise what is mere tinkering with the system.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. You will note from today's business bulletin that a number of the amendments for the stage 3 debate that we are about to have were submitted after the deadline. We agreed at our debate on standing orders last week to accept manuscript amendments where they are justified. I ask you to reflect on standing order 9.10.6 and to consider producing guidance to members about what would constitute justifiable manuscript amendments. There is agreement across the parties that we should facilitate the resolution of technical and legal issues where necessary, but we cannot allow last-minute amendments to be used at any time in the future for behind-the-scenes political fixes. If at all possible, will you give guidance to members that it might be helpful if amendments were lodged before the day of the deadline to allow amendments to amendments to be discussed fully and openly in the chamber?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will ensure that planning authorities, when developing their strategic planning requirements, give full and proper consideration to the provision of local health services. (S1O-4484)

Is the minister aware that there is some urgency in the need to change those provisions? Does he agree with the British Medical Association's recent comments on the matter? We have closed waiting lists and hospitals, but is he aware that in Livingston, two doctors' surgeries have had to close their patient lists to new applicants? Surgeries across Livingston are being asked how many new patients they can take before they too have to close their lists. West Lothian is one of the few areas in Scotland that is bucking the trend, as it has an increase in  population. Does the minister agree that planning measures need to be in place sooner rather than later to ensure that people can access their doctors when they need to and that they can do so locally?

I speak against the motion with some regret, but I want to share with the chamber my anxiety and disquiet at what I see as a dumbing down—it will be evident to members who look at the business motion—of some of our procedures and the debates we are having in the Parliament. We will spend as much as an hour and a half debating the abolition of fur farming, which is hardly the most contentious issue facing the people of Scotland, whereas a debate on the Public Appointments (Parliamentary Approval) (Scotland) Bill, which is about the abolition of cronyism, will not receive a sufficient amount of time. Although we must debate bills that have been approved as part of the Parliament's legislative programme, we are spending too much time on non-contentious issues—issues that are not the big burning issues that face the people of Scotland. We should spend time debating health, education and transport. Significantly, the only occasions on which ministers debate those issues in the Parliament are during Opposition party debates. There have been Opposition debates on the economy and on transport—which the Scottish National Party secured—and on the environment and council tax, which were debated today. Over the past few months, the Parliament has not had the opportunity to debate the big issues  that we should debate. There is a danger that the Parliament is being dumbed down as a result of spending excessive time on issues that I feel do not reflect public opinion in Scotland. Because of that, I regret to say that the SNP might have to vote against business motions in future. It is essential for the working of the Parliament that we have consensus in the Parliament and in the Parliamentary Bureau. I made those points in the bureau this week. I make them again in the Parliament. I sincerely hope that in future the SNP will not be put in the position of having to vote against business motions because they do not address the issues that the Parliament should address. I will not force a vote on the business motion, but I want to express my disquiet and concern.

Will the minister give way?

I am not one of the usual suspects in this debate. I feel like a bit of an interloper. I say to Des McNulty that, when changing how we scrutinise budgets, we should consider impact assessments, rather than whether we believe the promises that are made in Government policy. I would like to focus my remarks on section 3 of the bill, which relates to the Scottish consolidated fund, and to develop some of the points that Alasdair Morgan made. I will also make a vain attempt to make this issue relevant to people's lives, by relating the sorry saga of the sinks and pans of West Lothian. Last Tuesday, Labour-controlled West Lothian Council voted to hike up rents by £5 a week. That means that rents have increased by 81 per cent since Labour took power in West Lothian in 1996. The latest increase comes on the back of a kitchen and bathroom scheme and a questionable consultation. The scheme is not voluntary. Those on housing benefit do not have to pay the increase, but if tenants have already installed a new kitchen and bathroom they must still pay an extra fiver a week—for a bathroom that they do not need and a kitchen that they will not get. How does that relate to the consolidated fund and national policy? Labour councils all over Scotland are eyeing up the West Lothian deal with interest. Such deals would allow councils to hike up rents and get housing benefit from the London Treasury to fund rent increases. Good work if you can get it. That was the practice of councils during the Thatcher years—driving up rents, but digging the poverty trap. Anorak that I am, I have read the Treasury document "Funding the Scottish Parliament, National Assembly for Wales and Northern Ireland Assembly: A Statement of Funding Policy" and I am aware that, if the housing benefit bill in Scotland increases disproportionately to that of our English counterparts, the Scottish  consolidated fund will be cut accordingly. Sections 4 and 5.3.iii of the statement, to which Alasdair Morgan referred, make that clear. I contacted Angus MacKay, who at the time was Minister for Finance and Local Government, about the matter. In his reply, Iain Gray said that if other councils took up the West Lothian scheme and the housing benefit bill in Scotland increased, the Scottish consolidated fund would be cut. Diligent parliamentarian that I am and fearing that the consolidated fund might be affected by what was happening in West Lothian, I decided to check the figures. Scotland spends more than £1 billion on housing benefit; England spends £9.6 billion.

I would like to develop my point first. In the past three years, the differential in housing benefit spent in England and Scotland has been getting bigger. However, the increase has taken place not in the Scottish bill, as I originally feared, but in the English bill, which has risen disproportionately by £192 million since 1999. Does the minister know how much Scotland is due back from that £192 million? Has the Liberal-Labour coalition asked for an increase in the Scottish consolidated fund? If so, what has happened to that? I suspect that, because the coalition does not know what the answers are, it has not asked those questions. We have not received our due. If we had done, I am sure that the story would have been all over the papers. I relate that point to Alasdair Morgan's comments about the attendance allowance and free personal care. Is it not the case that the financial arrangement that we have with Westminster is a one-way track? When Scotland delivers free personal care, Westminster takes away our attendance allowances. As the First Minister said last week, it is for the Parliament to take the decision to be prepared to pay the extra fee. However, I dispute that that means that we should rob the savings that are made. How does that point relate to housing benefit and the consolidated fund? When England takes, by charging a higher benefit bill, Scotland does not get its fair share. Does the minister agree that when Scotland delivers, Westminster takes away? Does he agree that Scotland should have control over state benefits, so that we can develop proper policies on tax, council tax and housing? As Alasdair Morgan said, that would allow us to have a budget that is not determined by English departmental policy decisions. I am coming to a positive conclusion. We could use control over housing benefit to determine  affordable rents for Scotland, which would help to move people out of the poverty trap. That practical, positive SNP policy would help the Parliament to take the argument over the consolidated fund into the kitchens and bathrooms of Scotland.

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. This is the point of order of which I gave you prior notice. Yesterday, the Executive held a press conference to announce the delay in the implementation of free personal care for the elderly. In the chamber, we have had four ministerial statements on matters related to free personal care, because it is such an important issue to the people of Scotland. It is one of the most controversial of issues and has been subject to the democratic will of the Parliament. However, although the SNP offered time during this debate for a statement, a statement was not forthcoming. Is it correct that the Executive should be allowed to hold press conferences without coming to the chamber or to the Health and Community Care Committee to make a statement? I draw your attention to page 10 of today's business bulletin. Is it appropriate for a planted question from Angus MacKay to have been published only today? Members will note the interesting triangle beside the question number. I am not sure if that is a symbol for former ministers who are hoping to ingratiate themselves with the Executive. Is such a question not inappropriate? When there are important announcements on this important policy, is it not more appropriate that—as has happened previously—the Executive should come either to the chamber or to the Health and Community Care Committee? That did not happen, because a press conference was held yesterday.

Will the member give way?

I welcome this debate, especially as it was initiated by the Conservative and Unionist Party. The economy is a broad subject that covers both reserved and devolved matters; I welcome the recognition that constitutional change can stimulate the economy and I look forward to hearing more support from the Conservatives for the SNP position. I would like to deal with some issues over which this Government perhaps does not have control. We were slightly misled by the Conservatives over  their past record. Had a Scottish Parliament had control of the natural bounty of oil, and had it invested it prudently and properly, we would not have had the situation in the Thatcher and post-Thatcher years of Scottish oil funding the monetarism of the Conservatives and the high unemployment and high claimant rates that went with it. I acknowledge the Conservatives' efforts in holding this debate, but I have some concerns about their background and their past policies. I agree with Pauline McNeill that we have to support manufacturing. We need a strategy of having high-value and high-skill manufacturing. However, 10,000 jobs, mostly in manufacturing, have been lost in the Lothian economy alone. The global situation has not been the only reason for that. I accept that Government cannot solve everything—obviously, we live in a situation of global capitalism. However, in the past few years, employers have told me that the British high-pound policy has damaged us. We are an exporting nation, and the high pound affects manufacturing. I want to get to the nub of the debate. Various speakers have suggested that all that comes from the SNP is doom and gloom. Well, if we consider the current state of the Scottish economy, it is doom and gloom. We have to consider the facts. I find it absolutely incredulous— [Interruption.] Yes, it is a good word. I find it absolutely incredulous that the minister cannot have a target of doubling the growth rate from 0.8 per cent to 1.6 per cent when the UK rate is 2.5 per cent. Is the minister saying that we are not good enough to have the same rate as the UK? Is the minister—who is not averse to setting targets—saying that she does not have enough confidence in the Scottish economy to set a higher rate?

The minister tends to judge economic rates in the same way that she judges homelessness rates; she considers a trend over one month and one month only. We should be considering what has been happening historically in the Scottish economy. It is not good. The SNP is ambitious. Sometimes we are over-ambitious, but—at the same time—we tell the truth, and somehow that is regarded as spreading doom and gloom. We cannot deal with the Scottish economy unless we deal with the facts. The minister has admitted in recent weeks that, in the Scottish Executive's first year, it took its figures for joblessness from newspapers. It took the Executive until November to decide to review that practice. How can the Executive care about people losing their jobs when it does not even  bother to count them in the first place? I want to move on to discuss the situation in West Lothian. West Lothian could be a powerhouse for Scotland. It has been extremely resilient in the face of many job losses. However, the minister says that 4,000 more people are employed in West Lothian than before the Motorola announcement. That is true, because West Lothian is one of the few places where the population is increasing. However, it is also one of the few places where the claimant count is rising—there are 400 more people on the dole now than there were a year ago. There are some things that the Government can do, and Bristow Muldoon made some valid comment on that point during question time. Perhaps the minister can address this point in her summing up. The Government expects to claw back £16.7 million from Motorola from regional selective assistance grants. I understand that £10 million has already been allocated. Will the minister commit an additional £6.7 million to the infrastructure, skills and indigenous business that West Lothian needs to ensure that we have the type of manufacturing that Pauline McNeill was talking about?

I congratulate Kenny MacAskill on securing the debate. Although David McLetchie might want to advocate the needs and interests of multinational companies, our duty and responsibility as members of the Parliament and representatives of the Edinburgh and Lothian is to represent the needs of the travelling public. The situation in Edinburgh is causing havoc. If it is doing so now, the prospects for the future, should the Lothian bus war be to the detriment of service from Lothian Buses, could be far worse.

No, let me continue. I have severe concerns that the Conservatives have a misconception. Lothian Buses operates privately, although the local authority is the majority shareholder. Surely it is a David-and-Goliath bus battle. The situation is one of a multinational against a small company. Interestingly, in Edinburgh, the smaller company has the majority share.

No. I would like to continue, if Brian Monteith does not mind. I am sorry that I did not recognise him in his new attire. Indeed, I am not quite sure whether the minister and Bristow Muldoon are wearing Lothian Buses ties. In fairness, I am sure that they are not. It is probably a Heart of Midlothian uniform. I will address the serious matter of the reliability of the bus service and provision where and when it is needed. In wars, there are casualties. I will not use that horrible term "collateral damage". There are casualties beyond Edinburgh, as John Home Robertson mentioned, and there are casualties in Edinburgh. Edinburgh Central has one of the lowest car-ownership rates of any constituency in Scotland. There are children who are subject to the pollution that the congestion is causing. There are pensioners in the Grassmarket who cannot get about late in the evening because the 36 service has been cut. Young women who are working late in the city centre face fear because there might not be a bus to get them home as bus services are being cut. The fear that women in the city are facing is serious and we should address it seriously. Because of what it is doing in Edinburgh, FirstGroup is cutting services in West Lothian. Is it any coincidence that the Linlithgow-Bathgate via Torphichen service was cut in November or that in the south of Livingston the bus services have been cut substantially? Indeed, the EX1 Armadale-Edinburgh service has been rerouted, which has  led to commuters setting up their own service—the AX1—to address the situation. I will address some of the points that have been made and were touched on by my colleague Brian Adam. If the bus war is not a predatory price war, why is the £1 fare that FirstGroup introduced, which is now £1.50, different in other cities in which they operate? In Sheffield, it is £2.30; in Huddersfield, it is £2.70; in Glasgow, it is £2.10; in York it is £2. The bus war is clearly predatory. I do not have the confidence that David McLetchie has that the OFT report will offer a solution. It may come too late. Points have also been made about the Transport (Scotland) Act 2001 and quality contracts. Those too might come too late to give any solution in the situation. We must identify what we can do. The people of Edinburgh will not thank us politicians if we do and say nothing about the situation. We heard the Tory dogma of privatisation. The Tories seem to be pursuing a scorched-earth policy on the matter. Their former leader said, "There is no alternative". There is a practical alternative. It is about regulation and re-regulation. Regulation could allow competition but much fairer competition, as has been seen in other cities.

My first concern is that the quality contracts would, as I have said, be too late to be effective. In London, there is regulation but also competition and a far more integrated service. At the end of the day, we want a better service. Let us keep our eye on the ball: our duty and our responsibility is to act for the people of Edinburgh to ensure that they have a proper and decent service. The bus wars are not serving the people of Scotland and the politicians are not serving the people of Edinburgh if they sit on their hands and offer either the scorched-earth policy of the Conservatives or the do-nothing policy that has been the Executive's policy so far.

George Lyon mentioned the central heating scheme. Can he tell us how many houses have had a central heating system installed under that scheme since it was announced last September? How many houses and pensioners are benefiting from the central heating scheme now?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it possible to lodge a motion without notice to change the business bulletin in order to put back the next item of business so that we can extend First Minister's question time and hear the answer to question 6?

Is the minister aware that West Lothian has now lost 10,000 exporting and manufacturing jobs since October  1999? Those were direct job losses, but not only is direct employment affected; indirect employment is also affected. The minister's statement refers to the allocation of £10 million to West Lothian after the closure of the Motorola plant but, in a recent written answer, she said that only £4 million had been allocated. Is the £6 million that she is announcing today additional to the £10 million that was announced after the Motorola closure or is it an allocation and release of the money that was identified in the summer?

I am pleased that we have the opportunity to debate the closure of Binny House. A number of constituents have contacted me about the matter and I know that it is an important issue in West Lothian, not least for the people who are employed there. As well as residential places, respite places are also provided. I know that the closure is causing a great deal of concern to people and organisations not only in the immediate vicinity, but throughout central Scotland and beyond. Binny House is unique. It has managed to achieve an unequalled standard of service provision for patients. The important question to ask is whether Binny House will be replaceable if it closes. That is why I am concerned about the terms of Bristow Muldoon's motion, which I have not signed because I think that its reference to a "unilateral and disgraceful decision" will not necessarily be helpful in getting us to where we need to be. We must think about where the patients' best interests lie. Those interests will not be served by Sue Ryder Care's trying to blame the councils and the health authorities and vice versa. The solution is to consider what we can do to rectify the situation.

Dialogue is the only means by which a resolution to the issue can be reached. The Minister for Health and Community Care is in a unique position and should take an active role. Everyone should be brought together. We should not forget the provision that has been available. I have a letter from a former Linlithgow constituent—a patient who has advanced multiple sclerosis, but who was previously very active. That patient requires 24-hour nursing and personal care, which the dedicated teams at Binny House provide with kind, patient and affectionate understanding. The constituent's mind is still alert, but unfortunately his body and tongue do not respond. The unique skills of the Binny House teams have helped to make his life as comfortable as possible. His case is not unique—a number of patients are in the same situation. We would be neglecting our duty if we did not seek a resolution. There is a financial issue; considerable amounts  of money have been offered by the councils. However, there is a legacy of debt and underfunding by the relevant authorities over a long period, which has built up to the current deficit. I am disappointed that the charity is not prepared to continue in the dialogue and that the decisions and the announcement were made in August. That means that there is but a short period for action. I am also disappointed that Binny House might close in February. I have seen no evidence that anybody is thinking about what can be done for the patients. The capital receipt from the sale of Binny House will be considerable. Voluntary organisations the length and breadth of the country and those that are controlled in London—where many decisions have been made—are under pressure. However, we must recognise people's needs. Can anything replace Binny House? I do not think so. If nothing can, how will we ensure that we deal with the deficit that Sue Ryder Care says exists in respect of that property and service so that the service and provision can be continued? If we send all Binny House's patients to the four winds—to the different areas from which they come—I am not sure that services for them will be provided as adequately as they are at Binny House. We must maintain a constructive dialogue. I appeal to the health ministers to do everything that they can to ensure that the quality service that is provided for patients at Binny House continues to be provided.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Could you inform the Parliament whether the Presiding Officers and the Parliament have been consulted on two amendments to the Animal Health Bill, which is currently being considered for England and Wales? The Conservatives at Westminster today tabled amendments to extend powers under that bill to Scotland. I understand that David McLetchie attended the Conservative shadow Cabinet meeting yesterday—I am not sure whether that was to receive orders. It is important that Parliament is made aware if there has been any consultation on the action that has been taken at Westminster.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to address the rise in the number of homeless people in Edinburgh. (S1O-4311)

I thank the minister for his reply. I am pleased that, after much delay, there has been progress on the rough sleepers initiative. However, I have a specific question about wider homelessness applications, which had increased according to last month's statistical bulletin from the Executive. Many low-paid workers in this city  cannot afford to live in the city in which they work because house prices are going through the roof, the council cannot afford to build houses for rent and the housing association houses that are available will be sold off under the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001. What will the minister do to ensure that we have a sufficient supply of affordable, low-cost rented accommodation in this city?

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. There is a motion lodged for debate today—S1M-2495—on behalf of the Parliamentary Bureau. I advise the Presiding Officer that the Parliamentary Bureau has not met to discuss, nor has it consulted on, the motion. Would it be in order for the motion to be re-presented at a later date in order to do two things? First, the motion could be dealt with after the vote for Deputy Presiding Officer to avoid any perceived presumption of the election as Deputy Presiding Officer of any member of the chamber and secondly, it could be approved by all four members of the Parliamentary Bureau. I have a second, more substantive, point of order. Can the Presiding Officer confirm that the role of Presiding Officers is to be independent representatives of this Parliament, and that there is no place for any member of the Executive to instruct members of this Parliament how they should vote in the secret ballot?

Yesterday was the day of the short dirks; it was not a day for Scotland and its leadership. It was a signal of weakness rather than strength. Either the Executive has been failing significantly or those who were in the right camp are being rewarded. It is particularly sad that Patricia Ferguson has chosen the Executive over the Parliament because, as Deputy Presiding Officer, she played an important role as an ambassador for the Parliament. I have witnessed her efforts and commend her on her record. However, in accepting this appointment she is a gamekeeper turned poacher. It is a classic example of inside knowledge being deployed to the advantage of a third party. Some may see that as a wise or clever move, but others have observed the way in which the Executive has used the position of Minister for Parliament to stultify and stunt the Parliament. We groan with suspicion that the appointment is more about control freakery than anything else. Jack McConnell talked about how he wants Patricia Ferguson to serve the Parliament, but if we have learned anything from yesterday's appointments it is what a centralised control freak Jack McConnell is. The issue is whether Patricia Ferguson will serve the Executive or the Parliament. I suspect that the whole point of her appointment is that she should serve the Executive. We have seen an exhibition of cronyism and of the Labour party promoting its own people before the Scottish people. The Executive is scrambling around, discovering its briefs, when it should be serving the people of Scotland. Twice in recent months the Government has been paralysed by the actions of the Labour party and by its internal machinations, connections and cronyism. That happened initially with the Henry McLeish debacle, then with Mr McConnell's inability to command the respect of his former Cabinet colleagues and his need to shore up his power base within Labour party circles. Scotland needs a First Minister who can rise above the Labour party bickering that is strangling Scotland. Scotland needs to breathe fresh air, untainted by the corrosive smell of the Labour in-fighting that dominates so much of Scottish political life. Either Patricia Ferguson's nomination is creative or it is a failure of government. There are two charges there. I challenge whoever wants to be minister responsible for Parliament to open up the Parliament, broaden the range and depth of debates and, rather than close the Parliament down, broaden what the Parliament can do. Indeed, I challenge anybody who wants to be First Minister to give opportunities to back benchers. That is a great challenge for Patricia Ferguson.  She should consider the range of back benchers and the opportunity that she has to give them more time and effort. We will have to keep those back benchers busy because otherwise they will be at her back, challenging her from within. Never mind what the Labour party has done internally, that would be dangerous for Scotland. [Interruption.]

Shona Robison puts it well—it shows a complete lack of respect for the Parliament. The Presiding Officer made it quite clear that the Parliament has a role and a responsibility to challenge each and every one of the appointments, because that is the job that we were elected to do. The First Minister used to be in charge of external affairs policy. Where is the Executive's external affairs policy now? There is no ambition. I challenge members of the Executive. They are not ambitious for others. They are not ambitious for Scotland. They are ambitious for themselves. It is quite clear that the appointment of Patricia Ferguson is not about the growth of the Parliament or about the respect that the Executive has for the Parliament. It has everything to do with the cronyism and culture of despair that is strangling Scotland and from which we have to be liberated. I move amendment S1M-2488.6, to leave out "Patricia Ferguson".

Will Lewis Macdonald give way?

I am trying to work out whether the member is being deliberately provocative. We take great exception to many of the statements that he has made. Communities in areas such as Fauldhouse, which I mentioned, are concerned about the possibility that opencast mining will be followed by landfill. I am sorry to say that John Farquhar Munro's experience does not reflect the experience of people in the Lothians.

I thank John Home Robertson for instigating this debate. The debate is essential not only for East Lothian, but for Midlothian and West Lothian as well. I have two areas of concern. The first is simply the lack of democracy in what has happened in recent months. Clearly, all the councils in Lothian have taken a responsible attitude. No one is saying that there should be no opencasting at all. Rationally, reasonably and with a great deal of consultation, the councils put forward and agreed proposals, in the joint structure plan, that they would take on their responsibilities and accept opencasting for certain sites. Polkemmet in West Lothian is a classic example. In order to get remediation and to tackle, for example, the smoking bing, we knew that we needed to reclaim that land. However, for ministers, at the last minute, to overturn things by making the amendment was a real insult to the principle of local accountability and democracy. We need to know what happened to make the Executive turn round and reject what had been a cross-party and cross-council consensus in Lothian. John Home Robertson is absolutely right: it is not only that certain sites will have opencasting, it is that other sites will be under threat. In recent months, we have had debates in this chamber on urban regeneration, and I have made the case that we had to open up central Scotland—and the west of West Lothian in particular—for opportunities in, for example, transport and housing. That cannot be done if a threat of opencasting hangs over those areas.  Fauldhouse is a village at the back of beyond. It feels forgotten, and it is forgotten when it comes to regeneration plans. Opencasting, quarrying and dumping would mean that that village would be lost, surrounded on all sides by dumps and mining activity. Are we prepared to leave Fauldhouse village in that position without speaking out and championing its cause? However, there is a strong case to be made for a specific presumption in favour of opencasting when councils are able to identify areas that can and should be available for it. I do not know what happened in the past few months, or what happened in June, to make the Scottish Executive overturn an understanding and overturn democracy. What does all this mean for this Parliament and its relationship with the people of Scotland? I understand that moves are afoot to extend the centralisation of control and planning for the building of houses, so that local communities cannot have an input. I wonder whether that is part of a regular drawing up of local authority powers to the Executive. I hope that the minister will address that issue in his remarks. What factors are open to the local community in areas such as Woodbank outside Armadale, where applications for opencasting have been rejected by the council, have gone to the Scottish Executive on appeal and that appeal has been rejected? Having fought off such an application once, does the community know whether it might come back again? It is extremely worrying from an economic point of view. We do not necessarily need to extend opencasting from an employment or energy perspective. We must take a responsible attitude that says yes to some opencast mining but ensures that the local community has input into that. I hope that the minister can give us some reassurances on two counts: the impact of opencasting and the detrimental effect that it can have on communities, and, more important, the democratic deficit that has been laid open by the decision. Let us hope that this is not the end of the event.

I want to take this opportunity to reflect on the fact that the Parliament has lost a great deal of time and impetus because of the activities of Labour party politicians and their careers, past, present and future. When considering the parliamentary timetable, we must ensure that we do not lose any more time. It is significant that on Thursday 22 November we will not lose question time and will be able to proceed with a great deal of business, but we are being forced to change our timetable so quickly because there is no contest within the Labour party for the nomination to the office of First Minister. There has been a backroom fix that means that next Thursday we will be faced with a coronation of sorts. I resent the fact that, as a member of the Parliamentary Bureau, I have been placed in a situation in which I have had to be part of a back-room fix to bring forward a timetable to ensure that we have an election. We will not stand in the way of an election taking place, but we want to put on record our growing concern that Labour party machinations to get its machine politicians in place is disrupting the business of the Parliament. It must stop soon. We need to get on with our business. I shall not move against the motion, but I want to register our concerns.

That does not really matter.

Will the member give way?

We were all shocked by the events of 11 September. It is right and proper and responsible that the nations that make up this state take action to protect themselves and their citizens and contribute to international anti-terrorism efforts. The prevention of terrorism, as an aim, is undoubtedly a good thing. However, it does not automatically follow that any legislation on the prevention of terrorism will automatically and undoubtedly be a good thing. It needs to be tested and challenged and, after two months of preparation, to have only a day or two of consideration on the Scottish areas affected is not acceptable. We have two areas of doubt with regard to the proposed legislation. We have doubts about how we deal with the devolved aspects of Scots law, and we have doubts about the internment proposals in the UK bill. We have serious concerns on a point of fundamental principle regarding the right to trial and the effectiveness of detention without trial. We have serious concerns about the effect of that on the Scottish criminal justice system. Furthermore, I am concerned about the human rights aspects. Other members have dealt with and will deal with that matter, but I ask members to reflect on what other nations, for example the United States, are doing. The new anti-terror laws being adopted there allow foreigners awaiting deportation or charge to be detained for only seven days. That is different from what is being proposed in the Anti-Terrorism, Crime and Security Bill, and we should reflect on that. I will turn to the legislative aspect. Gordon Jackson and Mike Rumbles, for example, have asked what parts of the Sewel motion we are opposed to. I will make it quite clear. It would not matter if SNP members were to support all aspects of the areas that the Executive wants to give over to Westminster—that is not the subject of the debate. The debate is about whether we should consider those aspects in this chamber or allow them to be considered down at Westminster. If some members do not understand that, no wonder 25 Sewel motions have been passed unopposed by the Parliament.

Exactly. The motion before us is printed on page 23 of the first version of today's business bulletin. It is interesting that the Executive recognised overnight that, had it left the motion as it was, without reference to the Executive memorandum, it would itself be allowing and instructing the UK Parliament to cover aspects relating to all devolved matters. How is detention without trial practised? Does it not involve the Scottish police forces? Does it not involve the Scottish criminal justice system? Of course it affects devolved matters. If ministers themselves suddenly recognised, only the night before, that they had to reduce the scope of their motion, they are recognising the danger that the Government is turning Sewel motions into a pick-'n'-mix. Ministers have chosen the bits that they want—and I am pleased that they have taken responsibility for crimes of racial hatred—but that is still a pick-'n'-mix. They cannot treat Scottish legislation and the Parliament in that way. We must ensure that we have responsibility. We have been consistent in our arguments. We opposed a Sewel motion sometime last year when we were considering a question relating to the military police. Either we take responsibility for our actions seriously, or we do not. This is a very serious matter. I would challenge the Conservatives: if they consider the list of provisions that they would want to oppose at Westminster, they will find that those cover the areas covered by the Executive memorandum. Would it not be better if the Parliament's justice committees had more time for consideration of such matters? The Scottish Conservatives should remember that they have only one MP. Are they seriously saying that they can better defend Scots law with one Tory MP at Westminster than the justice committees and the whole Scottish Parliament? We must guard our Scottish justice system jealously and we must guard our citizens from attack. The two things are not mutually exclusive. The Scottish Parliament can and should deal with issues for which it is responsible under the Scotland Act 1998. I fail to be convinced that we should not take up those responsibilities. I am not convinced by the arguments that the Scottish Executive has made in the chamber, because we can and should deal with these issues.

I, too, noticed that point. The bill can be interpreted as compatible if a derogation to remove parts of the ECHR takes place, which has happened in the past few days. Is not that, in itself, worrying?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Your statement raises some serious concerns, but I would like to ask about two specific points. First, has there been a request from any member of this Parliament to deliver a personal statement? Secondly, is it in order for members of the Executive to be questioned about their current parliamentary responsibilities in relation to their current register of interests and about how that relates to their ability to carry out their duties as members of the Executive, particularly with reference to the ministerial code of conduct and the code of conduct for members?

On a further point of order, Presiding Officer. I was quite specific. Our responsibility as a Parliament is the accountability of the Executive. Our ability to question whether members of the Executive can carry out their duties and responsibilities to full effect is a very current issue. Seriously under question in current circumstances is whether the First Minister can carry out his responsibilities bearing in mind the weight of public opinion and interest in current issues.

I want to reflect on why we are here and on UK policy over the past 10 years. It is indicative that this will be the fourth change and the fourth piece of legislation in 10 years. That tells us that UK policy has been unsatisfactory in the past and the extension of where we are now perhaps reflects an ill-thought-out process in the past. The SNP has been consistent. When the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 was before the Westminster Parliament, we voted against it because we thought that elements of it, including the voucher system, would be divisive. That is something to reflect on. We should also think about where we have come from as a Parliament.

I would like to move on. It is important that we make a distinction between asylum and immigration. The Home Secretary's statement was entitled "Asylum, Migration and Citizenship", and it is a positive step that we are making such distinctions. Nonetheless, we should think about where we are as a Parliament. It was a tribute to the Social Justice Committee that it responded to a petition from the Actions of Churches Together in Scotland, the Scottish Refugee Council and others.

I support Johann Lamont's point. One of the recommendations in the committee's report was that Glasgow City Council's powers should be reconsidered. We wanted a pilot exercise whereby the council might be given complete control over the dispersal of asylum seekers in Glasgow, which should be welcomed. I am not sure where we are with the policy of having accommodation centres—centralised initial points—and then dispersal. I would like to know whether, if it were possible through the new  system to restore to Glasgow City Council the power to determine dispersal within the city, the minister would welcome that and whether the idea could be lodged as an amendment to the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987. We had the opportunity to do that in June, but that course of action was rejected and the SNP was vilified for somehow creating constitutional mayhem. Some very derogatory remarks were made at that time. Nevertheless, we must think carefully about our responsibility and about what we can do. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton made an important point about abolishing the voucher system. The statements from the Government tell us clearly that vouchers are not being abolished but are being superseded, which is an important distinction. Save the Children believes that the voucher system should end immediately rather than being phased out. When the Social Justice Committee went to Glasgow in December, we said that there had to be an urgent review of the voucher system. However, the minister's statement makes it clear that change may not take place until autumn next year, which is two years after the recommendation was made. If the Parliament had any ambition, we could come up with a bill—whether it be a member's bill, a committee bill or an Executive bill—to amend the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 to restore powers to councils to provide cash. There is a debate around whether cash is what is required. I know that the minister believes that the electronic voucher system would be sufficient, but I am sure that someone who went into a small corner shop to buy a loaf of bread with their electronic voucher card would be seen as being different from other people. The problem would be the same as that which was created by the voucher system. There is a problem with the delivery mechanism for vouchers. One of the complaints of local councils who, as Mike Watson said, want to embrace this process, is that the vouchers arrive too late and are often sent to the wrong addresses. Such problems would still exist with the electronic voucher system. We should listen to the concerns that we are hearing about whether NASS will provide pre-school support for children. I am concerned about accommodation centres. When is a detention centre not a detention centre? When it is an accommodation centre. Do we want families with young children to live in such places? When asylum seekers come to this country, quite often they go to where they have connections and contacts. Are they going to be shipped down to an accommodation centre in the south of England instead? There are practical reasons why, although we welcome the movement on the part of the Executive, we are convinced that the system has not been changed to the degree that the Executive was moving towards and that the  Scottish Parliament wanted.

Mike Watson raises an important point. We all want to see an enhanced dispersal system that is sensitive and offers choice. The concern is that David Blunkett's proposals will not provide that. I was particularly concerned to read in the Edinburgh Evening News this week that the City of Edinburgh Council is set to drop the asylum seeker plan because of David Blunkett's proposals.

If it were possible for this Parliament to achieve abolition of the voucher system—by repeal or amendment of the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968—would the Conservatives support a move by the Scottish Parliament to do so?

On a point of order. [ Interruption. ]

I refer to the unfortunate spectacle involving the First Minister and David McLetchie that we witnessed during today's First Minister's question time. Is it the case that, had David McLetchie phrased his questions properly under rule 13.3 of the standing orders, he could have questioned the First Minister? Is it the case that, having refused the question on the basis that he did, the Presiding Officer had the opportunity to provide equal treatment to the First Minister? The First Minister went on to give a personal statement without having requested to be allowed to do so under rule 13.1. He gave what I thought was a pale imitation of a personal statement, which consisted simply of reading out a letter. Is it the case that, if the First Minister wants to end further speculation, he is still able to make a personal statement with comment under rule 13.1 and that the appropriate way for that to be done would be through a request to the Presiding Officer?

rose—

Our amendment is clearly intended to define how we see the Parliament and its role within the European Community. Do we see ourselves and, more important, do we expect others to view us as a nation or as a region? Is this institution a  national Parliament or a regional assembly? Do we see ourselves as the equivalent of Brighton and Hove City Council, home to UK delegation leader Kenneth Bodfish? Is the Committee of the Regions the summit of our aspirations or is the Council of Ministers our platform? The amendment gives the Executive the opportunity to think twice about the bodies from which the nominees are taken. The issue is not with the individuals nominated. Should the Parliament reject the amendment, to further Scotland's interests—one of the SNP's aims—we would be more than happy to nominate Irene McGugan. Of course, if Scotland were independent, we would decide on double the number of representatives that is proposed in the motion. When Romano Prodi, the President of the European Commission, addressed the Committee of the Regions on 20 September, he said: "What we want today is a Europe built from the bottom up which takes full account of the various political levels. You, working 'in the field', at the level closest to the citizens, are a direct link between Europe and the diverse realities of different areas." I will make some points on that in our limited time. I recall that, several years ago, during the preparations for the Parliament, Councillor Jean McFadden delivered a conference speech on Calton hill in which she warned that the Parliament could become a Trojan horse that would suck up local government's powers. In proposing members of the Parliament rather than councillors for the Committee of the Regions, we are removing the role that councillors hitherto had on that committee.

My time is limited; I have only three minutes. Article 203 of the Treaty of Rome allows Scottish ministers to attend the Council of Ministers. The Committee of the Regions is consulted by the Council of Ministers, so by attending both—if ministers did that, as we would expect them to—Scottish ministers would consult themselves. It is clear from the proposals that the Executive prefers attending the Committee of the Regions to the Council of Ministers, but that is part of its attitude of not taking attendance at the Council of Ministers as seriously as it could. The heads of the delegations to the 222-member COR from Denmark, Finland, Ireland and Sweden—many countries that compare with Scotland, apart from the fact that they are independent—are all members of local authorities. I am a list MSP for the Lothians. Paragraph 2 of  schedule 1 to the Scotland Act 1998 defines eight regions of Scotland. We would be well served if we considered that reflecting the diversity of Scotland's regions is not necessarily best done by the Parliament's usurping what could be a useful role played by councils. I move amendment S1M-2340.1, to leave out from "endorses" to end and insert: "supports the Committee of the Regions as an institution of European co-operation based on the role of regional government and in promoting the regions of Scotland in that role proposes that the full and alternate members representing Scotland are elected members of Scotland's local authorities including Councillor Christine May and Councillor Keith Brown as full members and Councillor Corrie McChord and Councillor Hugh Halcro-Johnston as alternate members and instructs the Executive to return to the Parliament with four additional names of councillors as nominees."

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Bearing in mind the interest in and importance of the subject, would it be possible to suspend standing orders for 10 minutes and to move other business and decision time back by 10 minutes to allow further questioning?

I congratulate Mary Mulligan on bringing this important subject to the chamber for debate. I am pleased to follow Iain Gray, who has experience of working for Oxfam. In fact, one of my first experiences at this Parliament, in the new consensus, was holding hands between Jack McConnell and Iain Gray at one of the cancel-the-debt events. Overseas aid and development have always been very much part of my politics. When I first went to university, everyone was rushing to join the Labour students or the nationalists, but I joined Third World First. It was the first organisation I joined. I add my congratulations to Linlithgow Oxfam group. As has been said, it is very much part of the town of Linlithgow. Before I even moved from Edinburgh out to Linlithgow, I had heard about Linlithgow Oxfam and the work that it was doing. The roots that it has planted in that town are very important. The work of Linlithgow Oxfam and of other voluntary organisations and local churches shows that the town has an awareness of international responsibilities. We should reflect on the fact that Mary Mulligan's motion was lodged before the recent attacks on the World Trade Center. Because of that event, we have come to focus our attention on the problems of poverty and conflict. This evening's debate was relevant before those events and it is relevant now, but we have to reflect on what it means in today's perspective. Poverty fuels conflict, and any response from the west has to address the absolute importance of urgent international aid. The work of groups such as Linlithgow Oxfam is part of the consciousness of ensuring that our country is aware of that need. We must be ready to take our responsibilities. When we talk of responsibilities, we have to decide what this Parliament can do. We know that hunger can harbour hate, but what can we as a Parliament do? Yes, we can have a minister for  voluntary organisations who can talk about the support we can give voluntary organisations. Yes, we have an important cross-party group on international development, but we have to ask what we can do as a country, as a nation. We should reflect on what the Executive is doing and what it can do. What powers does it have? Of course, I am a nationalist and want to ensure that we have the powers and responsibility to meet international aid obligations. The Scottish Parliament does not yet have such powers, but in the weeks and months ahead there should be an effort and a contribution from the Executive to show that, hands across the nations of the world, this Parliament has a role to play. I congratulate Mary Mulligan on securing the debate. I also congratulate Linlithgow Oxfam group. I remember its monthly sales in the Low Port hut—I used to take my young son there regularly during maternity time to ensure that I got toys and clothes. Linlithgow Oxfam group plays a valuable role in its contribution to Linlithgow's civic life. The group and Mary Mulligan's motion bring to members a sense of our duty and responsibilities as a Parliament.

Robert Brown may recall a meeting of the Social Justice Committee about 18 months ago—I think—when Wendy Alexander gave evidence. Members of the committee questioned whether it would be possible to deliver the new housing partnership. We thought that money could be released and put into immediate and desperately needed investment in housing. Does he agree that it is worrying that the stewardship highlighted 18 months ago is still being perpetuated by the Government?

This is the second time that a Minister for Parliament has been forced to come to Parliament to move a motion without notice to provide for a ministerial statement on care development. Indeed, the first time that such a move was required was to establish the care development group. The SNP has been right to demand that the Parliament should have the opportunity to hear the results of that group's inquiry and the response from the Executive. The SNP has offered its time on Thursday for the issue. We do not know what is in the statement—we will have to hear it—but if it is not satisfactory to the Parliament, we will have the opportunity, because of the provision made by the SNP in its own time, to debate this important issue and vote on it. We welcome the opportunity of a ministerial statement—a move that has been forced by the SNP—and we look forward to hearing that statement and having a debate tomorrow.

I have some concerns about the motion that is before the Parliament. On Tuesday, when the Parliamentary Bureau discussed the business timetable, we were unaware of information that has since appeared in the press and in a written answer yesterday. We would like to know how on earth the Government managed to underspend this Parliament's and the public's money by more than £700 million. We would have expected an explanation to be provided in a ministerial statement. It is interesting to note that the Minister for Finance and Local Government had an unfortunate experience when making ministerial statements in the chamber. On 28 June, he thought it appropriate to make a statement in the chamber about a budgetary matter that involved only £489 million in new money and realignment cuts. However, he is unable to make a statement to Parliament on a matter involving almost double that amount. Although I am minded to oppose the business motion, on this occasion I will support it. However, the matter that I have raised should be referred back to the Parliamentary Bureau for its meeting next week.

Will Sarah Boyack give way?

Will the member give way?

Lewis Macdonald made a point about economic advantages. Surely the economic situation would be improved if taxes were increased and revenue sent to the Exchequer rather than having back-door stealth taxation by bridge tolling. That issue has to be examined and the SNP motion would allow the committee to examine it.

Will the minister confirm that  because, as of this moment, there are no tolls on the bridge, introducing the proposed legislation is, in effect, increasing the tolls?

Annabel Goldie's comments underline the reason that the SNP does not want the matter to be treated as an emergency motion. Instead, we suggest a period of six weeks to allow the council its statutory right to consult and to allow the Parliament further consideration via the Transport and the Environment Committee. This is a blunder that has financial consequences. However, we argue that it also has democratic consequences. It denies the provisions under the New Roads and Street Works Act 1991 for local authority consultation, which is very serious. The minister said that the matter raises no new issues, but there is a new issue, which is that introducing the primary legislation here denies West Dunbartonshire Council the right to the  provision of a six-week consultation. The council is on record as objecting to the denial of that right and that should be addressed. The SNP raised the point yesterday that, under rule 9.21 on emergency bills, it is not quite clear—

Members might have seen a published amendment from the SNP that has not been accepted. Our amendment argued initially that, under paragraph 5 of rule 9.21, the Parliament has the right to debate an emergency bill over a series of days, rather than on one day. If my recollection is correct, when we previously had an emergency motion—on the Ruddle issue—it was the Parliament's view that the matter should be dealt with over a series of sitting days. It is therefore the right of the Parliament to decide that it does not want to deal with the matter in one day but, rather, over a period. The basic issue is that of democracy. The minister said that there are no new issues, but the matter uncovers existing concerns. In the explanatory notes that were published with the bill, part 5—on the background—states: "Section 4(2) of the 1968 Act provides that tolls cannot be set at a level that would, in aggregate, exceed the amount needed to cover the relevant costs attributable to the Bridge set out in Schedule 2 to the 1968 Act." Quite clearly, from the minister's comments, they do. The minister said that if we do not pursue this emergency legislation and reinstate the tolls, there will be a loss to the transport budget. That is a far cry from what comes under this provision, which is costs for the bridge only. So the matter does bring in new issues and create other concerns and the Parliament deserves to consider those issues.

Far be it from me to question a former deputy minister, but the issue here is whether the matter should be considered as an emergency motion. The member raises valid points, but those points are for stage 1 and any further consideration of the matter. The point the member raises is whether this is a stealth tax. Is it a way in which the Government can plunder the  people of West Dunbartonshire for the transport budget elsewhere? Consideration of the member's points will take longer than the hour that we will have if the motion succeeds. He underlines the SNP's case, which is that the matter should not be treated as an emergency. I referred to the rules under the standing orders. When is an emergency an emergency? Under our rules, it is an emergency when the Government says that it is. I think that we have the time to consider the matter, which has great implications, not the least of which is protection of the democratic right to a six-week consultation period. That would be the sensible and practical route to go down but, more important, it is the constitutional responsibility of the Parliament to ensure not only our rights, but the rights of councils and the public to have their say in issues such as this. That is why the SNP opposes the motion.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Further to that point of order, it is not clear whether, when Parliament has made the decision, the matter becomes an emergency. The decision as to whether it is an emergency—before the Parliament has voted—has been made by the Executive. The Parliament has not yet made that decision.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

I acknowledge that agreement was sought and we thought that it had been achieved. We were clear about the need to move forward and we managed to get some agreement on that. We appreciate the work of all the business managers; however, agreement was not finally achieved and we are against the motion on that basis.

I oppose motion S1M-2172 for two reasons. The first is simple. In managing business, the demands of party conferences should be reflected. Democratic policy making may currently be the preserve of the SNP, but such demands should be reflected and we are disappointed that they could not be accommodated. The second reason is more important. Parliament's job is to champion the democratic integrity of our new constitutional framework. The Executive has let itself and the Parliament down with the Erskine bridge affair and the shambles with which the Parliament has been presented, but more important, it has let the people down. We have just seen the bill today. Rule 9.21 of standing orders makes it clear that there is no definition of emergency bills—it is for the Executive to present its definition of an emergency bill. I have serious concerns. We must ensure that the message gets across that we cannot allow a Government that is caught out acting illegally simply to rush through legislation that retrospectively conveys legitimacy on the initial illegality—that is neither responsible nor democratic and it is a bad precedent to set in the Parliament. We should not endorse a rewriting of history. Collecting money from travellers illegally is highway robbery—at one time, it resulted in capital punishment. Whether heads will roll in this instance is a matter for later, but we cannot afford to allow Parliament's democracy to be hijacked to rewrite history. The Government has come up with a procedure, cap in hand before the Parliament, and asked us to adopt it. The procedure would hijack democracy and we oppose the motion on that basis.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I understand that a written question was lodged today concerning the Regulation of Care (Scotland) Bill. The Parliament may be surprised to learn that we have tried to amend UK reserved legislation. I thank the Executive in advance for its answer. The SNP would like to complete the powers of the Parliament in areas such as finance, but we want to do so deliberately, not by accident. I understand that it is in nobody's interest to delay the progress of the bill, but I am concerned about how the Parliament has been informed about the problem and its remedy by use of section 107 of the Scotland Act 1998, which is what I understand has been agreed to by Scottish ministers today. Do you agree that it is important that the Parliament should take a close interest in any proposed use of the Scotland Act 1998 in respect of our legislation? Will you reassure the Parliament that the procedure that is being followed today—a written question being lodged and answered on the same day—is not a precedent? Also, will you look at a procedure to determine how the Parliament views this use of the act? It may have more serious significance in future.

rose—

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

We have again, with some anger and frustration, to use parliamentary time to expose the Executive's incompetence and its fixation with spin over substance in relation to carrying out its duties to improve the lives of people in Scotland. Considering that the people about whom we are talking are the most vulnerable and frail in our society, we are right to call the handling of the central heating initiative a scandal. We are right to describe as a disgrace ministers' delays in addressing obvious flaws in the scheme—flaws that have been pointed out to them since October. The central heating initiative is no small, incidental Government initiative; it is billed as the flagship policy to deliver social justice. It was billed and launched as a £350 million initiative—a far bigger budget than another project that we will discuss this afternoon. The £350 million tag is an illusion, because only one third of it can be accounted for. However, it is absolutely right that we use Scottish National Party chamber time to expose the fundamental flaws in the system. As the motion does, we welcome the initiative to try to tackle fuel poverty and the initiative to install central heating in houses. However, if we are using public money, we want to ensure that we use it widely and we need to ensure that it reaches the people who need it. The initiative "was fanfared as the most exciting initiative in years but it is merely a cruel deception on some of the most vulnerable in society". Those are the words not of an SNP spokesperson, but of Garry Coutts, who is the chair of housing and social work in Highland Council.

The minister will excuse me for pointing out that it is the responsibility of the Parliament to ensure that, when public money is being used to helping our pensioners, it reaches the people who need it. The scheme was started in April 2001, but I suspect that very few people have benefited from it as yet. Our motion contains positive proposals for rescuing what should be a good scheme, which could put it back on the rails and ensure that we provide central heating for those who need it. The Government is moved more by headlines than it is by the harsh realities of people's need for the dignity of a warm home. An estimated 4,000 old people die in Scotland because of the cold and the Government is more interested in big fancy launches—as happened last September—than it is in whether the scheme is workable. That means another winter in an energy-rich nation for the fuel poor and another year of missed opportunities to start putting that right. Why is it that one journalist, in following up an SNP initiative, can in one afternoon find out from Scottish councils that only 8,000 pensioners—rather than the promised 30,000 out of 100,000 tenants—can access the scheme? Why can that journalist also find that the Scottish Government with all its officials and contacts with Labour councils does not know those figures, or that if it does know, it refuses to act? Either way, that is incompetence. The Executive has talked about using the best information that is available at the time, which came from a 1996 survey. Scotland is a small country; surely to goodness the Executive can talk to people to understand what is required and then get on and deliver the system.

It is interesting that, on 10 May, in answer to a parliamentary question that I asked of the minister to find out whether she was planning to review the Executive's position on support to pensioners with partial or old central heating systems, I received a reply that stated: "We have no present plans to review the position."— [ Official Report , Written Answers, 10 May 2001; p130.]

Why is it, then, that on Sunday we finally got an agreement and an admission from the Executive that it is considering extending the scheme? That is to be welcomed, but it should be done because the Executive is accountable to the system.

I want to move on. Of course we welcome the inclusion of a fuel poverty statement in the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001. We called for such a statement many months ago. The central heating initiative had the potential to deliver and it still has, but only if the Executive listens to criticisms when they are made. It is interesting that, in the first year of the Parliament, questions on fuel poverty and the warm deal far outnumbered questions on other matters. Those were the subjects about which members wanted to ask the most questions because there was a problem with the warm deal. The SNP and other parties said that the problem was that the warm deal did not have a heating element and that it was just about draught-proofing and insulation. Pressure from the Parliament led to the introduction of the central heating initiative.

It is quite clear—as Bristow Muldoon knows well—that when the SNP was in control of West Lothian Council, it initiated a good number of such schemes to ensure that pensioners were protected. West Lothian Council, when it was led by the SNP, introduced winter bonuses to help the pensioners in West Lothian. I know that Bristow Muldoon has a particular interest in West Lothian. I will move on to the national aspects of what we want to cover. There is another important point in the motion. Let us consider the situation of councils that are considering stock transfer. I raised that issue with Donald Dewar way back in October. I managed to secure an assurance that, whether tenants voted yes or no, they would be able to access funds for central heating. The only difference is that pensioners in stock transfer areas will have to wait until after the ballot on stock transfer to find out whether the vote is yes and whether the money will come from the new housing partnership budget. If the money comes from that budget, it cannot be part of the £350 million initiative.

If the tenants vote no, they will end up joining the back of the queue for the scheme and there will be no guarantee that the funds will be available. I will quote Karen Whitefield. In the Social Justice Committee, she rightly put it to the Minister for Social Justice that "At present, the Government has allocated £110 million for" the scheme and that "Obviously, that means that there is a shortfall." She asked the minister whether she was "confident that the funds will be available after 2004?" The minister replied: "I am confident that they will be available."—[ Official Report , Social Justice Committee , 23 May 2001; c 2478.] But where is that money? How does the minister know that she will get that money? If it is part of the £800 million that is likely to come in at the next spending review, and if the Executive has yet to allocate it, does that mean that education does not get the money, or that our old folk—who are seeking free personal care—do not get it? The minister cannot give that guarantee and, if she cannot give that guarantee now, why did she announce back in September schemes that are worth £350 million? The problem lies in the strict rules, which say that the provisions apply only to people who have no central heating. They do not cover people who have old, ineffective, broken or partial systems. I do not expect the minister personally to assess everybody's homes.

Well, we could send her out on that mission. There is a central question: does the Executive trust the councils to understand what stock they have, who needs it and why the programme is so centralised?

I have given way too often. [ Interruption. ]

Page 154 of the budget document—of the minister's budget—says, "We have allocated £110m". That is all that is allocated to the programme. It is absolutely welcome—we have called for it—but I urge caution and concern. I look around the chamber and I do not see Angus  MacKay but, if I were him, I would be seriously concerned. If we look at the communities budget and consider the competence—or incompetence—of it, we see that in February, 48 per cent of the rough sleepers initiative funding was allocated but not spent. We also see that 50 per cent of the new housing partnership budget was allocated but not spent, and that 50 per cent of the money for the empty homes initiative was allocated but not spent. I am seriously concerned: we should ensure that the poor and vulnerable families who should be serviced by the communities budgets do not allow themselves to be cut off, and I am worried that there might be some clawback of any underspend. I urge you to defend your budget strongly, minister, and to ensure that that does not happen. In order to ensure that, however, you must have the confidence of the chamber that you are spending the public's money wisely. I want now to touch on the private sector aspects of the scheme. Although the programme was launched in September last year, the private tendering for the managing agent has not been completed and is unlikely to be completed until autumn this year. I have some concerns about its implementation. We have heard in other debates about the average age of gas fitters being 50. There is an aspect to what the minister intends to do that suggests that she wants to repeat the problems of the warm deal, by relying on new deal applicants to do the work. What will be their period of training? When will they be allowed access to homes so that they can implement the scheme? Would you, minister, let a young lad on the new deal fit your granny's central heating system? Some serious safety questions must be addressed. In conclusion, I say that the Parliament is about accountability, and although the central heating initiative is a sham and a shambles, by agreeing to the motion we can rescue the initiative, put it back on track and put an end to the misery of so many pensioners and young families who want warm homes. I move, That the Parliament notes the introduction of a national central heating installation programme announced by the Scottish Executive on 19 September 2000; welcomes the principle of the programme, but expresses regret that the original amount of money announced to be invested in the programme was exaggerated, that those living in public housing in proposed stock transfer areas have been barred from participation, that the definition of eligibility to take part has been drawn too tightly and that those with old, ineffective, broken or partial heating systems have been excluded; believes that the Scottish Executive should come forward with an accurate appraisal of the investment available for the programme and new eligibility criteria which expand the range of people able to participate, and further believes that the programme should include those living in the public sector in proposed stock transfer areas  and those with old, ineffective, broken or partial heating systems.

I, too, congratulate Cathie Craigie on the Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Bill. I appreciate the time and effort involved in preparing it and the constructive dialogue with many parties that she carried out during that process. Her reference to the Keeper of the Register of Inhibitions and Adjudications, when we were discussing amendment 6, indicates the technicalities involved and the more obscure organisations with which she has had dialogue. There are times in the Parliament when we debate issues that make us ask, "What difference will this make to people's lives?" Passing the bill will be one of those moments when we can say that we will make a difference, just as the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Act 2001 will have a positive impact on people's lives. In England, for every 100 orders for possession that are granted, 60 are suspended; in three quarters of those cases, the debtors resume payment. That means that 45 out of 100 people are able to stay in their homes. If the same thing happens in Scotland, we can say that the Parliament has made a difference to people's lives. I congratulate Cathie Craigie on introducing the bill. The issue has been a bit of a relay race. I remember trying to amend the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Bill to introduce suspended repossession orders, way back in the summer of 1999. Robert Brown, in the Family Homes and Homelessness (Scotland) Bill, also wanted to address that issue. However, it is Cathie Craigie who completed that valuable work by lodging this member's bill. It has been pointed out that Scots law refers to standard securities; technically, we should be talking about the Standard Security Rights (Scotland) Bill. I hope that the fact that we are not is not evidence of a creeping anglicisation that will appear in other bills in future. I am sure that the Parliament will protect Scots law in future. Some issues that have been raised are recurrent themes. We must pay tribute to Robert Brown's dogged pursuance of advice issues—they will be raised time and time again when we  discuss debt issues in future. We have to look at the practice and the practicalities of the impact that the bill will have and we may have to change things in future. However, there is good will behind all aspects of the bill and it will receive support, as it will help many people. We sometimes have to reflect on definitions. It is up to the Parliament to consider the status of definitions in primary legislation. A member's bill may not be the best way to address that issue, but I am sure that it will come back time and again. Again I congratulate Cathie Craigie. The bill will make a difference. More important, it tackles an issue to which the Parliament must return again and again. All of us wanted to do something about debt and homelessness when we were elected, so I am pleased that we will be able to do so today.

The SNP will support the motion, but with some reluctance. As members will have gathered from the stage 2 debate, the bill is flawed in many respects. I hope that there will be urgent action in the areas that we have pointed out. I would like to thank the clerks and our own staff who have worked on the bill under duress and  extreme pressure. It is meant to be a flagship bill, but it was put forward under cover of a general election with amendments at stage 3 to be lodged only on Friday. One of the concerns that we should have about the bill is the tight timetabling between the amendment schedules. I also want to record in the Official Report my support for and thanks to Johann Lamont for her convening of the sessions. She was very fair. The SNP has concerns about the bill—we have articulated them in the previous hours—but a number of the bill's sections are SNP policy. We came to the Parliament on that policy, as outlined in our manifesto. Valuable homelessness legislation, a single social tenancy, increasing tenant participation, a single regulatory framework, the abolition of Scottish Homes, strategic powers for local authorities, cross tenure and improvement grants for pensioners are all in the SNP manifesto. I am very pleased that the Executive has taken up those issues. My concern is that the bill could have been a very good, historic bill—one that we could celebrate. Unfortunately, we cannot. The bill does not provide the mechanism to deliver stock transfer. That comes from the 1987 Conservative legislation. The bill has been corrupted by considering aspects that facilitate stock transfer—in particular, I refer to the extension of the right to buy and to schedule 8. We want improvements to Scottish housing. Robert Brown made the important point that housing is not improved just by legislation. The Executive should bear that in mind and consider housing policy and investment—the policy of wholesale stock transfer and the investment that is not reaching tenants. The Executive is failing on those issues. I support the bill because much of it will take housing forward. We have needed such a bill for decades. However, I will add a note of caution. If we expect Scottish people to look to this Parliament to deliver on housing, policy and investment are needed, as well as legislation. The Opposition will certainly pursue the Executive on those matters in the months and years to come.

The minister has talked about her achievements. She mentioned the central heating initiative. She knows fine well that barely 8,000 properties in the whole of Scotland—not the 100,000 that she mentioned—are likely to benefit from that scheme. She spoke about achievements under the new housing partnership programme. Perhaps she could tell us exactly how much investment there has been in housing—in bricks and mortar—over the past four years, since the new housing partnerships came into being. The problem is that the Executive has underspent and that there has been no investment in housing under new Labour.

Amendment 176 would amend section 80, which deals with grants for housing purposes. As drafted, the bill would give ministers the power to grant moneys to local authorities to provide support for improving, adapting and repairing properties that are not on the authority's housing revenue account—for example, properties that are owned by housing associations. It has been argued that housing associations must be given some protection. If local authorities have the power to make development grants available not only for their own stock, but for housing association stock, they might give preference to their own stock at the expense of housing association stock. Amendment 176 carries through some of the arguments that have been heard during previous debates on the powers that should be granted to local authorities to make development funding available for cross-tenure stock, even when that stock is not transferred. My view is that there is a strong argument in support of that proposal. I am not saying that such a power should be exercised by all councils. Amendment 176 would give ministers discretion in deciding which councils should have that power. It would also give ministers flexibility in allowing councils, on certain occasions, to have that power without necessarily transferring all their stock. We have spoken to a number of councils and we believe that amendment 176 would be a useful provision, although we do not necessarily believe that all councils should receive that power. However, I suggest that well-run councils such as Clackmannanshire Council and Angus Council—which are run by the SNP—would be prime candidates. I would allow the minister discretion on which councils should be allowed development funding. That would be fair. Amendment 176 is constructive, and I look forward to the minister's comments on it. I move amendment 176.

Lowest.

A part of the bill that I support gives strategic powers to local authorities. Development funding should follow that—especially in councils that ministers are confident could execute such powers fairly with the support of RSLs in their area. I point out to Margaret Curran again that on 1999 figures, Angus Council has the lowest rents in Scotland. Tenants there have double-glazing and central heating. When the SNP inherited Angus Council, it had the second highest rents in Scotland. It now has the lowest. There are good councils—I include some Labour councils—that are capable of responsibly managing development funding for their stock and other RSL stock. They might choose not to exercise that power; all amendment 176 would do is provide councils with the opportunity to exercise the power should they so wish.

As someone who has called for 18 months for an amendment on fuel poverty, and who knew that the first version of the Housing (Scotland) Bill would not include anything on fuel poverty, I am delighted that the bill now includes a commitment that a statement on fuel poverty will be produced. I will not press amendment 199, as the minister has given a commitment to a September commencement, but I will press amendment 200. On reporting annually on the progress that is made on fuel poverty, I remind the minister that a concession that we got in relation to the social justice annual report was that an indicator on fuel poverty would be included. It would be difficult for the minister to publish an annual social justice report that included an indicator on fuel poverty, if there had not been an opportunity to measure and report on progress. I will press amendments 201 and 202.  Amendment 199, by agreement, withdrawn.  [Amendment 200 moved—[Fiona Hyslop].]

Section 78A provides for a statement on fuel poverty. The whole chamber welcomed the fact that the Executive agreed to introduce a statement on fuel poverty at stage 2. At stage 2, Robert Brown moved an amendment on warm homes, which, unfortunately, was not incorporated in the bill, although I understand that parts of it have been included and the Executive has given commitments on the matter. An issue that remains is the time scale: when will the provision come into force? Section 78A says: "The Scottish Ministers must, within 12 months of the coming into force of this section" publish a statement, but leaves it at the ministers' discretion when they introduce the section. If amendment 199 were agreed to, ministers would have to produce a statement "within 12 months of the date of Royal Assent of this Act". I will be interested to hear what the minister has to say about the time scale. Amendment 200 tries to reinstate some of the original warm homes amendment so that there is direction as to the content of the fuel poverty statement. The statement should talk about the efficiency of appliances, thermal efficiency and regular energy audits of homes. Indeed, the original warm homes amendment said that that had to be done at time of movement of occupation, but it might be better if the provision were a bit looser to allow some flexibility. Amendments 201 and 202 talk about the time scales for review of the statement and the performance of the Executive. As it stands, the bill states that there should be a review every four years. Amendments 201 and 202 request that we recognise, as I think the Parliament does, that fuel  poverty is such an important issue that the statement and the Executive's performance should be reviewed annually. The amendments are fairly straightforward. I move amendment 199.

I said that this would be the interesting section of the debate. I wish to put it on the record, as I have done on a number of occasions, that the SNP is opposed to wholesale stock transfer, but we support small-scale stock transfer where tenants want it. We should reflect on why it is—

Let me finish my point. We have had an interesting debate, and there are some interesting points to respond to. If the Executive is confident about the position that it is proposing for Glasgow, why is it worried about ballots for onward transfer? Why does the Executive not support those ballots? If it is confident about its position, why does the Executive not put the council on the ballot? The Deputy Minister for Social Justice said that the Executive is lifting Glasgow's debt, but it is not. The Executive is servicing the debt for a period. No guarantees have been given on the future. Council tax payers in Glasgow could end up footing the bill in future years if the Executive has a mind to let that happen in future. This is an apposite challenge to the Executive. If the Executive does not support ballots on onward transfer, tenants in Glasgow will think, "What have you got to hide?" We have had some interesting responses from the minister. I will read the Official Report with interest, as I am sure will many people in Glasgow. The Key said that there would be onward transfer if it was financially viable. If it is not financially viable, is the Executive saying to Glasgow tenants that the process will stick at wholesale stock transfer because community ownership cannot be guaranteed and defined, as Bill Aitken said, as including all of Glasgow? The amendments in the group have been a vehicle for exposing some of the contradictions at the heart of the Executive's policy for Glasgow and other areas. The Parliament would fail in its duty if it did not address schedule 8 and how you want to go about your ballots, and if it did not expose the problems at the heart of your so-called flagship policy.

It has been a long day: we have had the controversial, we have had the constructive, and we have just had the technical. I might refer to this group as the interesting one. We are now starting to address some of the contemporary and topical issues that face local authority areas where the council has taken the decision to consider wholesale stock transfer. When we have concluded our consideration of the bill, we will perhaps consider the timetable and the speed with which it has been gone through. I suggest that schedule 8 was not, perhaps, given the attention at stage 2 that it merits. I am pleased that we now have the opportunity to pay it more attention at this stage. I say to Johann Lamont that it is true that I did not at stage 2 lodge amendments similar to these, but I am very pleased that these amendments have been accepted for consideration at stage 3. There is a variety of amendments in the group. They are intended to address community ownership. The minister and deputy minister have frequently referred in numerous housing debates to the community ownership strategy that the Government is to embark on, but never once has community ownership been defined. We are giving the Parliament the opportunity to define community ownership legally. Such a definition would allow us to give out instructions on how to ensure that communities' and tenants' interests are protected in ballots. Amendment 127 proposes that, when a ballot goes ahead, there must be a statement of whether the relevant body expects to become a "community ownership landlord". Amendment 146 defines "community ownership landlord" and bases that definition on an RSL that has 5,000 or fewer properties. The city of Glasgow is not a community and Dumfries and Galloway is not a community. Smaller-scale stock transfers and communities—

I ask the minister to allow me to develop my point. She will have an opportunity to come back in. We should also consider the ballots. I have a challenge for the Executive. If it is confident about the merits of the case for wholesale stock transfer, will it include a question on the local authority, which would allow tenants to make a choice? The idea behind amendment 196 is one that the SNP has argued for long and hard. If a ballot is to be held across a city or across an authority area, the results should be declared on a ward-by-ward basis. That would allow a community that wished to move ahead on stock transfer to do so, but equally it would ensure that a community that did not wish to proceed would not have to. Separate ballots on small transfers would not be required. The argument about cherry picking has been made before. The lenders have not been concerned about small-scale stock transfers; rather, they have been concerned about how to manage the scale of the Glasgow stock transfer. That is where the pressure from lenders has come from, although they appear to have come to some kind of arrangement. Amendment 197 deals with how a ballot should be conducted and gives the Parliament a range of opportunities. For example, it would allow ministers, if they so chose, to ensure that a small stock transfer included in the ballot a question on disposal. In Glasgow, ministers are simply proposing a transfer to Glasgow Housing Association, which is a big monolith. Amendment 197 would ensure an onward transfer ballot and would give people the opportunity to move towards small-scale community ownership. If the Executive has nothing to be frightened of and if it is saying that that is what it wants to do, we should include in the bill the proposals in amendment 197. That would protect tenants and they would know that they will not be stuck with GHA, which is Glasgow City Council mark 2. In England, concerns have been raised about circumstances in which a ballot is lost, but the authority ballots again and again until it gets the "right" result. Amendment 197 would ensure that if a ballot is lost—if, for example, Glasgow tenants vote no—there is no opportunity for the authority to try again and again until it is successful. If we are to bandy about terms such as community ownership, which is proposed in the Executive's housing strategy, we must know what they mean. Wholesale stock transfer in the city of Glasgow is not what I consider community ownership to be. My amendments would clarify matters. As I said, I am challenging the Executive—if it is confident about its proposals, it will have no problem with my amendments. I will  listen with interest to the Executive's comments on them. I move amendment 127.

On what grounds can Cathie Craigie guarantee tenants that if they vote yes in a ballot on wholesale stock transfer in Glasgow—we do not know whether they will—transfer will be automatic? If she read the latest edition of the GHA's The Key  magazine, she might find a different idea being articulated.

It has been an interesting and enlightening debate. I would comment particularly on the Conservatives applauding Johann Lamont's contribution.

No, I want to move on. Where are the political parties when it comes to defending social rented housing? The SNP is four-square behind defending social rented housing. That has been the purpose of the amendments in this group. The Executive has talked about the strategy for achieving the aim of having 80 per cent home ownership, with the other 20 per cent in social rented housing. Will that be sustainable or adequate? We live in a world in which people's lifestyles have changed. Young families are being forced on to the mortgage ladder because no social rented housing is available under this Government. We have heard promises of 20,000 houses being built over three years. However, they are housing association houses that, five years later—that is, in eight years' time—will be sold off. That will be the result of the Executive's actions today unless Parliament agrees to amendments 9 and 13. The Executive talks about a duty towards tenants. Let us have a duty towards homeless families; let us have a duty towards those who cannot currently access housing; and let us have a duty towards future generations who will want to access housing. The Executive talks about balancing rights. That is what this debate is about. Is balancing rights across tenancies more important than defending social rented housing? I am on the side of defending social rented housing; the Executive is on the side of balancing rights. How can we have equality of rights when we already have eight different types of right to buy? When the minister talks about driving towards equality of rights, does that mean that she will take away exemptions on  right to buy for charitable housing? How can people have equality of rights if they are poor? If people are poor, they cannot afford to buy a house. If people are poor, we have a responsibility to ensure that social rented housing is there for them. The bill, as it stands, will not allow that. The amendments in this group will.  Amendment 9 moved—[Fiona Hyslop].

We move to what is perhaps one of the bill's most controversial aspects—the extension to housing associations of the right to buy. From the time of the bill's introduction, the matter has been the source of much contention and discussion; indeed, there has been some movement from the Executive. However, the SNP still thinks that to preserve for the future the availability of affordable housing, the Parliament should not extend to housing associations the right to buy. I will be quite clear: the SNP recognises that it should support the existing rights of both council and housing  association tenants if they currently have the right to buy. However, we oppose the imposition of the extension of the right to buy on housing association tenants who currently do not have that right. Amendments 9 and 13 are inextricably linked and should both be agreed to if the argument behind them is to be advanced. It might have been easier if the Executive had put clean copy into the bill and simply transposed the right to buy in the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987. However, we have had to use a rather mechanical means to stop extension to housing associations of the right to buy. Amendment 13 is a clean-cut amendment that would remove from schedule 9 any reference to the right to buy for registered social landlords. Amendment 9 would preserve the right to buy for all RSLs who currently have it to ensure the status quo for housing associations. We are simply asking that there should be no change that dilutes the availability of affordable housing for housing associations. We must remember that fewer than 100 council houses have been built in Scotland in the past year—not just in Edinburgh, not just in Glasgow, not just in Fife, but in all Scotland. How can we house the record levels of homeless people when that amount of council housing is being built? I refer members to housing revenue accounts comparisons. Compared with constant prices in 1999-2000, the housing support grant in 1979-80 was £564 million; the grant in 1999-2000 had fallen to £11 million. Rents currently pay for housing in the council areas in Scotland and the Executive's plans for housing associations will reduce the availability of money for investment in housing. We must preserve our communities, so we must ensure that the bill means balanced communities. How on earth will families be able to stay with their relatives if we destroy the availability of social housing throughout the country?  I have heard arguments that our amendments on the right to buy might affect the modernised right to buy for council tenants, but they would not. They seek merely to keep the status quo for housing associations. The Government has inserted a reference to pressured areas to ameliorate matters and to delay the inevitable. However, the inevitable will happen. Members must look to their consciences and ask themselves what they did on this day to preserve for the future the availability of social rented housing. The only houses that are being built at the moment are housing association houses, which the Executive plans to sell off. That might not happen next year or in five years and it might  not happen for 10 years. However, there will still be no houses available. At issue is the legacy that we pass on to our children and where they will be housed—not in 10 years' time, but in the more distant future. I know that in parts of this city, in other cities and in rural areas there will be no houses available for future generations. This is a test for the Parliament; it is a test of whether we are committed to public housing for the future, which the SNP is. Other members who have the inclination to put their hand where their conscience is should support amendments 9 and 13. The amendments would preserve the status quo and prevent the extension to housing associations of the right to buy.

The debate has been about the relationship between RSLs and councils and how they provide their services. I have two brief points. It is unfortunate that some of Cathie Craigie's proposals on contracts were not lodged at stage 2 or at this stage, as they might have strengthened the bill. That will come later on, in the amendments that the Executive expects to lodge. However, we have the responsibility at stages 2 and 3 to scrutinise amendments—whether they are from the Executive or a task force—in open debate. That is what stages 2 and 3 have been about.

I want to brief, as I am conscious of the time. The Parliament will decide the appropriate way to scrutinise the amendments. I appeal to members to include in the bill the statutory duty to co-operate and to recognise Tommy Sheridan's point, which is that we have to deal swiftly with  homelessness so that we ensure that satisfactory provision is provided. The SNP will support his proposals on that. If the Executive is so concerned about housing associations' ability to house homeless people—if it has doubts—perhaps it should think again about transferring all the stock of seven authorities to housing associations.

Section 4 sets out the relationships between registered social landlords and local councils in providing housing for homeless people. Amendment 6 would give RSLs a statutory duty to co-operate with the local authority on providing accommodation and on "alleviating and preventing homelessness", to help councils exercise their duties. At present, a voluntary code of guidance, issued by Scottish Homes, requests RSLs and housing associations to have a duty to co-operate.

Let me develop my point slightly. That might be helpful.

I will explain my point and then allow an intervention. The bill will make Scottish Homes' responsibilities part of the responsibilities of the Scottish ministers, so the guidance and the duty will be passed to ministers. It would be extremely useful if the bill placed a duty on RSLs to co-operate with councils. At stage 2, there was some controversy when the Social Justice Committee agreed to an amendment, which I moved, to ensure that councils had some understanding of housing associations' policies.

Please let me develop my point. The member will have an opportunity to speak later. My amendment placed a duty on councils to have regard to the allocation policy and other policies of a registered social landlord. I appreciate that the homelessness task force was asked by the Executive to consider what would happen to a council, such as Glasgow City Council, that transferred all its stock to RSLs. How can a council reasonably allocate "appropriate accommodation"—as section 4(2) puts it—if it has not had regard to the allocation policy and other policies of the registered social landlord? A purpose of the bill was to achieve balanced communities. If we want balanced communities in which members of a family can stay together to create sustainable communities, regard must be had to provision for ethnic minorities, people with disabilities and elderly people. It is not suggested that RSLs would be prevented from taking on their responsibilities. To reinforce that point, amendments 7 and 8 were lodged. The Executive's amendments say that RSLs must comply unless they have a good reason for not doing so. That is rather weak. We should be more specific and say that RSLs can fail to comply only if they abide by strict guidance. It is interesting that the Executive has lodged amendments in that vein. It is undoubted that members of all parties are committed to ensuring that homeless people are given priority, but if a ballot in Glasgow or other areas goes ahead, a council may have no stock yet have to provide accommodation without understanding or having regard to the policies of RSLs.

If Karen Whitefield had listened at stage 2—

At that stage, I made the point that we have to look in the round at the balance in the relationship between RSLs and councils. At stage 2, I was inclined to the view that a statutory responsibility on RSLs to house homeless people ought to be included in the bill, but the point was well made that homeless people are housed not only by being provided with a roof: other services are involved and RSLs might not be best placed to provide them. We propose a statutory duty to co-operate that is similar to the code of guidance that currently exists, but we have given it the force of law. The amendment tightens up homelessness legislation and provides the solution that we are looking for. I move amendment 6.

It would show more respect for the Parliament if we recognised that the clerks and the Presiding Officers would not accept amendments to the Housing (Scotland) Bill were they not within the competence of the Parliament. Legislation affecting housing is most definitely relevant to this Parliament.

Let us be clear. The Presiding Officer made it clear that amendment 21 is competent. To say that it is not is mistaken. Housing services provided by councils or others are within the competence of this Parliament. Asylum seekers use services, such as the national health service, that are provided by public agencies in Scotland. We must recognise that. We can do something useful with the Housing (Scotland) Bill if we allow councils, rather than NASS in Croydon, to decide where people are housed. Councils will know what is practical and what is impractical far better than NASS. On priority need, Tricia Marwick made the point well that amendment 2 addresses those 16 and 17-year-olds who are not in care. We must decide whether measures on priority need should have the force of law or be dealt with in guidance. A clear choice must be made. A measure of this Parliament is how it treats vulnerable groups. We can either support those vulnerable groups here and now in the Housing (Scotland) Bill, or we can wait for another task force and another report at another time. I suggest that we do it now.

A nation should be judged on how it treats the most vulnerable people in society and Parliament should be judged on the steps that it takes to support the most vulnerable groups in society; that is what section 3 is about. I will deal first with amendment 21, before dealing with the amendments that address priority need, and the remaining amendments in group 3. Those who seek asylum from persecution and violence are some of the most vulnerable people in the world. Today, the Parliament can decide how to respond to their housing needs. We can also consider whether our councils are the most appropriate bodies to have the power to house asylum seekers—by treating them as homeless—as has been the case in the past, or whether the faceless, distant and bureaucratic national asylum support service in Croydon best serves that purpose. What would amendment 21 do? It would restore to councils the powers that they had to house asylum seekers prior to the enactment of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. It would allow asylum seekers to be designated as homeless under the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987. Councils are in a far better position to respond to needs and to move asylum seekers if more appropriate accommodation is needed—for children, for example.

No—I want to move on. Once NASS allocates an address from its pool of addresses, that address cannot be changed—however inappropriate it might be. When I deputised as convener of the then Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee late last year, I was pleased to arrange—with the agreement of the committee—for us to take evidence on a petition on housing needs for asylum seekers. It was interesting that, the very week that the committee went to visit Sighthill in Glasgow, NASS devolved in practice to Glasgow City Council the powers that we seek today to make councils have in law. That was too late, because some arrangements had already  been made. Why are those matters relevant at stage 3 of the bill? I am pleased that amendment 21 has been accepted for discussion at stage 3. At stage 2, eyebrows were raised over its relevance or appropriateness. However, asylum is most definitely a topical issue—for all the wrong political reasons in some quarters. I want to put it on the agenda for the right reasons—to address the compassion, flexibility and standards with which we treat those who seek asylum.

I am trying to discuss who has the power to decide on accommodation issues. I am not going to argue over a constitutional point about who decides British citizenship. The matter is very serious: at stage 2, I was accused by Labour members—as is happening now—of somehow trying to make constitutional mischief. We heard cheap and feeble jokes about Sean Connery, but the situation is desperately serious. It is so serious that, when the cross-party group on refugees wanted to lodge a motion for discussion during members' business, we decided not to lodge it in the name of an SNP member because we might have been accused of making constitutional mischief. Indeed, we asked Cathy Jamieson, who lodged that motion—

The vast majority of asylum seekers end up having their applications approved, and remain here as refugees. Scotland and, indeed, England have a long tradition of housing those who seek political refuge. We will be addressed in only a few hours' time by a man who sought political refuge from the British Government. Only a few weeks ago, Cardinal Winning wrote in a national newspaper about our responsibilities as a country and as a society to support asylum seekers. Housing is only one aspect of the problems that face asylum seekers. There are many others, but we are not here to address them today. We are here to address the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987 and the Housing (Scotland) Bill and how they treat homeless people. At stage 2, the Minister for Social Justice rejected the argument that I advanced. She said  that one could not give a statutory right to housing if the individual concerned did not have a statutory right to remain in the country. That response was flawed—Government does have a responsibility to house asylum seekers while they are seeking asylum and before a decision is made on whether they have a right to remain. The issue is not new. I raised it in June 1999 with Donald Dewar. We can make a decision on the matter if we want to. Amendment 21 might not help to tackle racism and other problems that asylum seekers face. However, agreeing to that amendment would be a signal that this Parliament is prepared to take on its responsibilities and to deal with this issue compassionately and practically. I will talk briefly about the other amendments in the group. At stage 1, the Local Government Committee report recommended that priority need be given to 16 and 17-year-olds. Often, the Government's answer to suggestions that we should progress in a certain way is to set up a working group or task force. I know that the homelessness task force is considering the need to specify priority needs in future. It might be that we can abolish priority need and similar references. However, such legislation might come too late for many 16 and 17-year-olds. If we have the opportunity—as we do today—why do we not give dignity and respect to 16 and 17-year-olds and give them priority need in the bill? Amendments 23 and 24 are technical. The minister will speak to them. We welcome the reference to children in amendment 25. At stage 2, Robert Brown lodged many amendments on that issue and I am pleased that we will discuss it again today. We regard amendments 192 and 193 as quite sensible. This is a test of the Parliament and of how seriously we take our responsibilities. Asylum seekers and their housing needs are very much the responsibility of the Parliament. I would like to restore to our councils the powers that they had prior to the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. That would be simple and practical, and it would send a very strong signal. I move amendment 21.

To ask the Scottish Executive what the latest figures are for the percentage of those leaving the new deal who enter unsubsidised employment. (S1O-3552)

I am grateful for the March figures. Is the minister aware that, as of the end of February, only 11 per cent of all those who went through the new deal secured unsubsidised employment? That figure is well down on the original expectations for the new deal and it is certainly down on the expectations of young people. With that in mind, is the minister prepared to argue the case for this Parliament to have control over the new deal, so that resources can be redirected to suit the Scottish economy and to get a better deal for Scotland's young people?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to review its policy on the closure of small rural schools. (S1O-3486)

Is the minister aware of the anger and dismay that is felt about the recent announcement of the closure of Abercorn Primary School in West Lothian? Does he remember stating in the Parliament six months ago that the process for a decision by the Executive usually takes three months and that an announcement was due in mid-February? Why did the announcement take so long and cover the period in which primary 1 applications had to be made? Will he review the obviously poor and flawed consultation process? Will he adopt SNP policy, which presumes against rural school closures?

Will the minister explain how he proposes to get class sizes down to 30? There are classes in West Lothian with more than 30 pupils. My daughter is in a class that has 32 pupils. Whom will the minister have disappear over the next few weeks so that he can justify his position? Is the minister talking about only a couple of hours a day with an additional teacher? Is that his explanation?

Some members have asked why we are having this debate. I have noticed from my postbag, as other members may have done, that this is the time of year when applications for primaries 1, 2 and 3 are processed. I am being contacted by constituents from Livingston and Linlithgow, where next year's class sizes are planned to be 32 or more. That is the allocation that has been made, so the idea that class sizes in primaries 1, 2 and 3 will somehow be reduced to 30 by August is frankly not believable. What is believable is the Parliament's capacity to have a vision of where it wants education to go. The Scottish National Party's proposals are radical but this is, after all, about what we should do. I have heard much sympathy expressed for the idea of getting class sizes down to 18, but I have also heard a lot about why the Executive cannot do it and why it is not practical. That shows what is so wrong with the current position in Scotland. I anticipate some arguments about why we should not have that size of class on educational grounds, but—

Let me develop my point, please. The idea is that we are unable to have such small class sizes because of the practicalities. I say that we in leadership—in the Parliament—should decide what we want to do and then work out how we can do it. To those members who say that that is an uncosted policy, I say that the revenue cost of such proposals would be £100 million, or less than a quarter of what the Parliament could have spent last year from its underspend but did not. Points have been well made about the need for capital investment. Of course, there will be such a need, but let us use a Scottish trust for public investment, which would work out far more cheaply than the Executive's public-private partnership plans. Let us ensure that we use the wealth of Scotland to work for Scotland. Let us use our oil wealth for our education.

I am limited for time and want to develop some specific points. Let us look at the reality—not many members so far have talked about the reality for parents and children. In West Lothian, people have approached me to voice their concern that they cannot get their children into primary 1 classes because of overcrowding. There were 133 applications for deferrals from parents of four-year-olds and four-and-a-half-year-olds who felt that their children were not able or ready to go to school. Of those, only 84 were granted an additional pre-school year. Forty-nine pupils in West Lothian have to go to school even though their parents do not want them to because—I refer members to the minister's amendment—the Executive is pushing its targets for three and four-year-olds. Something is far wrong when, to reach targets for three and four-year-olds in nursery, the Executive pressures four-and-a-half-year-olds to enter primary 1. Everybody should know that now is when councillors assess the applications. Does the minister intend to examine the flexibility of education legislation to see whether we can change the assessment of applications? Rural schools were mentioned. A Conservative member made a useful point about falling class sizes and the closure of rural schools. In West Lothian, the minister has announced that Abercorn Primary School is to close. Let us consider how  that closure will impact on class sizes across West Lothian. The classes of Low Port Primary School, Springfield Primary School and Linlithgow Primary School will not reach the class size target of 30 because Abercorn Primary School down the road has been closed.

I have 15 seconds left, so I will have to finish. As Mike Russell said, failure is more expensive than ambition. If we are to take our nation to where it should be, the one thing that we can offer our children in primary 1, 2 and 3 is confidence. If confidence is to be instilled in them, children must receive attention when they are young. That is the message that we should take from the chamber. Let us be about ambition, not about failure.

Bill Butler said that it is a fact that pupils in primaries 1, 2 and 3 will be in classes of 30 by August. I have a daughter, who is currently in a primary 1 class of 32. Which of her fellow pupils should she expect to disappear over the next 12 weeks so that the Executive can reach its target? What Bill Butler claims is not fact—it will not happen and Bill Butler should face up to that.

rose—

The First Minister mentioned central heating as a key tool to deliver social justice. According to councils in the Lothians, barely 60 pensioners in the whole of the Lothians would benefit from the central heating scheme. How can the First Minister justify that, and how can he justify the fact that—according to his own statistics in the social justice annual report—one in four pensioners lived in poverty when Labour came to power and are still living in poverty, and one in three children lived in poverty when Labour came to power and are still living in poverty?

The minister may be aware that the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland sent to members the document "Architecture: An Agenda for Scotland". In the nine points for early action, it asks the Executive and the Parliament to "raise level of 'tolerable standard' for dwellings". Only yesterday, the Executive rejected that. Another point for early action is to "implement change in the law of the tenement". Again, when are we going to get the law of the tenement—[ Interruption. ]

I am very aware of the time. Thirdly, the organisation asks for the introduction of "energy assessments at point of sale for domestic property" which is a point that Robin Harper raised. Why is none of the architectural bodies' proposals included in the Executive's policy? Indeed, where is the policy?

Will the member give way?

Will Karen Whitefield give way?

The debate has been interesting. I appreciate the tone with which the Minister for Social Justice opened it. She started by talking about regeneration over the past half century. I was struck by the fact that some of the first regeneration, particularly in this city, happened many centuries ago. Part of the social re-engineering then was the development of the new town on the other side of Princes Street. Interestingly, the issue of new towns was one of the themes that kept coming up in the debate. Kenny Gibson talked about the impact of new towns on Glasgow. We also heard from Margaret Smith that we may have another new town in Edinburgh, but this time on the waterfront. Bill Aitken, who traded guilt with Frank McAveety over Glasgow, used the term mea culpa. It struck me that we are having a debate about urban regeneration, yet as Robert Brown pointed out, the debate is unfocused, because it centres on a statement that we have not yet received, although the minister said that she was canvassing views on what should be in that statement. I make the plea that in examining regeneration we do not just consider cities and larger areas. Given what has happened in West Lothian with Motorola and Bathgate, the issue is also about towns. In its drugs inquiry, the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee looked at places in Ayrshire and Fife. I hope that the minister will consider the west of West Lothian and the east of Lanarkshire, because regeneration should not be seen only in terms of cities and urban areas; it is about wider communities. Some interesting comments have been made in the debate. The Minister for Social Justice referred to the new executive agency that will take over from Scottish Homes, which will be addressed in the long haul that is the passage of the Housing (Scotland) Bill. Therein lies one of the problems, because we are not sure what we are focusing on. I hope that that will become clearer as we move along. I welcome the announcement of £3.7 million to support community representatives. I have said before in the chamber that we have received representations from members of SIPs who feel that they do not have the support that they need to be equal players in the regeneration process, so I am glad that there has been a response to that. Kenny Gibson talked about the doughnut effect in Glasgow. Johann Lamont also talked about  Glasgow. I agree that cities should be hubs, and that they can be dynamos. How we view situations is as important as what we do. In a considered speech, Des McNulty said that policies should not just be talked about, they should be delivered. Kenny Gibson made the point that environmental improvement is important. That is one theme that must be part of urban regeneration. Infrastructure is also needed. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton referred to the need for job creation. Sometimes getting people to the jobs is the problem, not creating jobs. That is why the transport infrastructure and regeneration arguments are important. Robert Brown made an unusually party-political, point-scoring speech. Are the pressures of 400 amendments to the Housing (Scotland) Bill getting to him, or was the speech influenced by an announcement a few days ago? He talked about poverty, which is at a high level and has hardly been alleviated. The Scottish Parliament's responsibility is to contribute to ensuring that regeneration is not only economic, but social. The UK Government's response to the proposals of the English urban task force talks about the need for civic leadership, which Frank McAveety mentioned. What is the balance between urban renaissance and helping deprived communities? At what point do those tasks meet, so that we are not simply helping poor people—the patronising attitude of the past that has bedevilled so much regeneration? We must develop partnerships that work. I intervened to ask the Minister for Social Justice about local authorities, which she had not mentioned and subsequently did. An equal partnership is required. I will be interested in the developments on community planning, which will make a difference. Kate MacLean mentioned Dundee. In talking about the city of discovery, she attempted to rediscover the cities review that is disappearing off the radar. A serious point must be made about Dundee. This week, the director of finance at Dundee City Council said that he had been allocated only £8.4 million for capital projects, when the council needs £428 million for a decent level of capital provision. Our cities have problems, but they also have opportunities. They need leadership. It is up to the Scottish Parliament to make a difference to regeneration. Mistakes have been made. I am glad to say that the SNP was not party to the problems of post-war Scotland, which Robert Brown mentioned, where communities were devastated because of a lack of regeneration and housing provision.  Much reference was made to community ownership and new housing partnership arrangements. I warn members that all parties examine the issue from the point of finance, or of getting the vote through. It is about time that we dealt with regeneration quality issues and ensured that we have the best provisions for the future. We should learn from other places. Kenny Gibson talked about Phoenix and Baltimore. We must look beyond our horizons and consider international best practice. Our regeneration policies must be fit for a first-class Scotland in a first class new century.

The minister is now eight minutes into her speech. She talked about partnerships, but the one element that she did not talk about—she may well be about to—is local government. She talked about the importance of investing in public services. Did the Westminster Government's decision to follow Tory spending plans between 1997 and 1999 hamper the delivery of what ministers now want to do and the restoration of public service investment to the levels that are required to achieve the regeneration policies and partnerships that the minister talked about?

Presiding Officer, I would like to raise a point of order about the democratic and decision-making processes of the Parliament. I am not sure whether you are aware that the Housing (Scotland) Bill is progressing through Parliament and that the Social Justice Committee is meeting four times over the next six working days. Amendments to 70 sections are to be lodged over the next three working days. That is placing severe strain on all concerned—I recognise the efforts of the clerks and the convener. The average length of a bill is 25 sections; the Social Justice Committee has to deliver, in six days, what other committees have several weeks to deliver on much smaller bills. I am concerned about the democratic process and how scrutiny can best be exercised. I ask for your direct intervention to ensure that the standards of accountability and scrutiny that are expected from the Parliament are realised.

It should be noted that all the high-powered, high-profile contacts by this Government and others failed, unfortunately. Will the Government reflect on the successful policy and style of the German Government on the issue? Furthermore, in her on-going discussions with Motorola, will the minister urgently press that company to ask its work force to release their contact details? Unfortunately, some of the workers do not have direct contact with the workers forum that has been set up to deal with the questions that the management has directed them to deal with, and they might not be back at the plant for several days. Bearing in mind the fact that the management is unfortunately not recognising the unions, we must ensure that the workers receive the answers that they desperately require.

This debate comes hard on the heels of the statement on  Motorola and I wish to refer to that in my speech. It is striking that 5,500, mostly manufacturing, jobs have been lost in the Lothians in the past two years. We have become very good at reactive skills and retraining—the minister made a point on that in her statement, in relation to Continental Tyres—but we are not very good at being proactive about skills and retraining. That is the balance that the debate should focus on. I want to discuss education as a form of infrastructure for government and give some examples, but first I will tackle some of the points that the minister made. She was being deliberately disingenuous when she talked about the SNP's legitimate and serious calls for pressure to be put on Motorola to offer—at no cost—its plant to public agencies in order to secure work for the future. Why is it okay for £17 million to be clawed back in payback for public investment from regional selective assistance, but not okay also to claw back the plant, which has benefited from that public investment? Is it because the first is contractual, while the second is moral? If the first is contractual, it would have happened anyway, as the Motorola officials said last night.

The minister must take into account the fact that, as she herself said, the public agencies—Scottish Enterprise and Locate in Scotland—should be part and parcel of marketing the plant. However, the benefits from that should not be in the form of profits to Motorola, but should go to the community of West Lothian. When I visited Motorola in the summer, I was told an interesting story about its modern apprenticeship or skillseekers programme—I am not sure which. Under the programme, four young people came to Motorola from Lanarkshire. Only one of them failed the programme, but all four had to give up the opportunity of jobs. Why? Not because they—including the three who succeeded—were no good, but because they could not get to the factory because of transport problems across West Lothian. It is not just a matter of education, but one of transport—of infrastructure. Let us take the example of Continental Tyres and the retraining of its former employees, which has been referred to today. Why was it so important that the Parliament took action to secure a better redundancy package for the Continental workers? Because that bought more time for the  workers to get better training and skills, in order to get a better job. Let us take the other example in West Lothian: Project Alba, which has to scour the world for graduates because it cannot secure the number of graduates that it needs. Let us consider other areas, such as construction, as this is not just about high-tech skills. We need to rebuild Scotland, but there is a dearth of the skills that we need in construction. I will reflect on the valuable speeches of Irene McGugan and Duncan McNeil, who said that we have to learn to learn. When I worked in business and was recruiting, we wanted flexible minds—the ability to learn—but we also wanted people who had social skills. If profit will come from ideas in future, people must be able to communicate their ideas. Part of the problem that business faces relates to personal development, and addressing that must be part and parcel of what we do. I am concerned that the minister over-invests the new deal with the idea that it provides retraining and skills for the future. It is about job readiness—nothing more and nothing less—and it is wrong to suggest anything else. On universities, anyone watching the Scottish Parliament debating the subject of skills for the future would ask what skills those are, but I am not sure that they would know that from the Government speech. We need to decide what we want to specialise in—biotechnology, electronics, or finance—and, as has been said, focus on that. We need to invest in our intelligence capital and reach a critical mass so that we regain our reputation as one of the highest-skilled peoples in the world.

The redundancies will be a blow to West Lothian and Bathgate. We can bounce back, but we need the vision, the resources and the political will to do so. The plant was built with public money, with roads, power and utilities supplied by the public purse. Does the minister agree that, as the plant has had huge amounts of taxpayers' money poured into it over the years, the public and the local community should be secured something in return? Does she agree that the site is a valuable asset that should be made available to public agencies at no cost, to secure jobs for the future? What will she do to ensure that that happens? The minister said that the public purse should finance a marketing plan to allow Motorola to profit from the sale of the plant. The workers have paid the price for their good productivity with the loss of their jobs and there must be a payback to the West Lothian economy to secure those workers' futures. What will the minister do about the plant?

I thank Karen Whitefield for lodging today's motion for debate. I often disagree with her, but I am pleased to support her motion in this case. Indeed, some time last year, we both attended a public meeting in Bathgate on the matter, from which she was lucky to escape unharmed after confessing that she is one of the people from Lanarkshire who bring their car to Bathgate and park it in Bathgate railway station car park. I point out that there has been a long history of campaigning for the reopening of the line. People such as Councillor Jim Sibbald of Armadale were part of earlier campaigns that took place 20 years ago or more. Although Karen Whitefield refers to the Airdrie to Bathgate line, I would like to point out that the line should be known as the Bathgate to Airdrie/Shotts line. Certainly, the late Jim Walker of Bathgate ensured that I always refer to it in such terms. The reopening of the line would deliver practical benefits and send out a signal about how we see strategic economic development and regeneration for the Scotland of the future. I am disappointed that the Government has failed to respond positively up until now. I hope that we will hear some positive comments in the minister's response. From a practical point of view, the M8 is grinding to a halt. Commuters now move across Scotland. For example, I understand that after the opening of Croy station, the busiest part of the line was Croy to Edinburgh, not Croy to Glasgow. A lot of the traffic that goes along the M8—indeed, throughout central Scotland—is not from city to city but between Lanarkshire and West Lothian. If we want to take the heat out of the Edinburgh property market, let us consider new build in West Lothian, which has one of the fastest-growing populations. We need to think about what has  happened in the past. Bathgate and Airdrie are the towns that have suffered the most in the past 30 years. It is interesting that executive housing is now being built on the old Leyland site in Bathgate. We need to consider the fact that we are encouraging businesses to locate on the M8 corridor and need to create access for more than just car users. We should also think strategically. There is an artificial divide at Harthill. It is not just a matter of salt 'n sauce v salt 'n vinegar on chips. We need to ensure that we bring Scotland together. We need a focus that allows us to open up the potential of central Scotland in its own right for business and residential development. We need to regenerate former mining areas such as Blackridge, Armadale, Caldercruix, Plains, Airdrie, Shotts and—dare I say it—surrounding villages. They are, too often, forgotten lands, although we can be sure that the west of West Lothian and the east of Lanarkshire are remembered when it comes to deciding where to site opencasting and where to have landfill sites. We need imagination and vision. There are businesses that are prepared to invest and build in the area. People want to live there because they can see the practical solutions that it can provide to accessing other parts of Scotland. If the Executive is seriously considering ideas, I suggest that a practical solution would be to consider setting up a Scottish trust for public investment. Councils may want to bypass the Executive to do that. As Karen Whitefield pointed out, the reopening of the Bathgate to Edinburgh line showed that the line was highly profitable. There is great potential in the reopening of the Airdrie to Bathgate line, but we need leadership, imagination and vision. We need a practical demonstration that the central belt can be not just an intercity commuting corridor but the heart of Scotland, in which Harthill is considered not just a border gateway, but the centre spot of a vibrant region that reaches east and west. Reopening the Bathgate to Airdrie/Shotts line would do just that.

It is working now.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

One of the areas that we have not covered so far is the evidence that we received on our visit to Dublin, where it was quite clear that there was an input at local and national level from people who had community experience. What steps is Margaret Curran taking, now that she is a minister, to ensure that Scotland has the same perspective?

Will the member give way?

I commend Karen Whitefield on her presentation of the report of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee. I also place on record my thanks to the clerks and to the special advisers who were involved in preparing the report. I want to emphasise one thing that Karen Whitefield said—the committee's view that this was the start, not the end, of the Parliament's continuous examination of this issue. I also note Iain Gray's personal commitment to this issue, first as Deputy Minister for Community Care and now as Deputy Minister for Justice. I am not quite sure whether we heard, in his earlier aside, a plea to keep his present job or a pitch for another job. If anything is certain about the drug issue, it is that there is no one drug problem and there is no one drug solution. The public are sick of glib  pronouncements from politicians about drugs and I am very pleased that, in this Parliament, however slowly, we are developing a more progressive and less sensationalist attitude to the drug issue—an attitude that recognises the complexities. Politicians and the Executive cannot be expected single-handedly to rid Scotland of the harm that drugs cause in society. We are all in this together and drugs affect us all. That means that all of us have a responsibility in dealing with the issue. The tone of the debate here in Scotland has allowed us to start to build a broad consensus. I hope that the minister can acknowledge that he has space to move into wider areas, rather than the traditional law enforcement aspects that dominated when Westminster controlled this issue. We can start talking more about drug misuse as an illness that needs to be treated, without the political posturing that marked so much of Westminster's attitude in this debate. When the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, of which I was a member at the time of this inquiry, decided to address this issue, there was much debate about the inquiry remit. One of the main arguments was that we should tackle alcohol as part of a wider substance misuse inquiry; however, it was decided to tackle illegal drugs, although where we came across reference to alcohol we would include it. Indeed, one of the points in the report is the link between abuse of alcohol by parents and the propensity for abuse of illegal drugs by their children. I also argued that we should embark on a cross-cutting inquiry with members of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, the Education, Culture and Sport Committee and the Health and Community Care Committee to examine the issue, but that was rejected, because at the time we agreed that the committee would kick off the inquiry, and if the Parliament chose to advance it in a wider area it could do so. We recognised that drug misuse knows no class boundaries, but we decided that we would examine the impact of drugs on deprived communities. The committee did not, and does not, argue that serious drug misuse is confined exclusively to deprived communities. However, it was in recognition of the fact that the inquiry could not deal with all aspects of drug misuse that we decided upon a narrower remit. The inquiry does not look at justice issues, health issues or education issues in any depth, although there are references to them. We held two inquiries in the committee last year. The first was on housing stock transfer, which was a technical inquiry that was mainly, although not exclusively, about housing finance. The drugs inquiry was quite different. It took members out of  the parliamentary complex and into communities throughout Scotland. The inquiry was first and foremost about people's personal experiences. We received very touching, sometimes heart-rending, stories and accounts from mothers of users, users themselves and grandparents. I thank them for sharing their personal experiences with us. I will reflect on some of those experiences before moving on to some of the recommendations and the Government's response to them. I visited the kingdom of Fife with John McAllion, and it was clear that heroin was prevalent throughout that county, for example, in small villages in the Levenmouth area. The report highlights our concerns that rural areas often are badly served by medical support. I spoke to a young mother, who had been a wife but is now a widow, and has become a criminal. She was no different from most people in society. She was happy and content with a job until, in her mid-20s, with two young children to look after, her husband died suddenly. She could not cope. She began abusing alcohol and then descended into illegal drug abuse. Frighteningly rapidly, she started taking heroin, while still holding down a job and with two young children. She was getting through the pain. Things got worse, she was using more and she lost her job. She started shoplifting in Kirkcaldy, requiring £80 a day to feed her habit. She was caught, jailed and fined, and her children were taken into care. The young woman decided to come off drugs and was prescribed methadone as a substitute. She reacted badly to it, but she could not get an alternative, because her general practitioner was unable to prescribe anything else as she already had a prescribed commitment. She wanted to go into residential rehabilitation, but that was a pipe dream because, as the report says, rehabilitation provision is woefully inadequate. She wants her children back desperately. She wants to get off drugs and to secure a happy home with her children. She knows that she has to get off drugs and stabilise herself. When I met her, she had decided that the only way to get herself off drugs was to start using heroin again and steadily reduce the dosage herself. She was doing that, but she had to keep stealing to feed her habit, which meant that she was still part of the massive criminal activity in this country. She is as much a victim as she is somebody committing a crime. When people think about drug abuse and abusers, they often do not think about women with children. As part of the inquiry, I visited Brenda House, which provides residential treatment for women with children. At that time, its future was not secure, and although it provided services for women from all over Scotland, City of Edinburgh  Council was picking up most of the tab. We must support women with children, and I welcome the Executive's response on that. Women under-report drug abuse and abuse drugs longer before they report for help, because they fear what will happen to their children. We have to send out a strong supportive message to those women who want help. We launched the report in a hostel in the Grassmarket, and in the same room I met staff from homeless projects in the city. They were frustrated and concerned about their clients, who are so exposed. I was struck by the compassion of homeless and rough sleepers as they spoke of their concern for other rough sleepers, especially younger rough sleepers and ex-offenders, who quite easily fall into drug abuse. I was told that if we do not get them before they have been on the streets for six weeks, they will be on hard drugs. The growth of heroin use by rough sleepers, particularly in this city, is alarming. The other alarming concern that was expressed to me was the ticking time bomb of hepatitis C among drug users. Young people in this city are sharing needles and using heroin as part of their social scene because it is trendy, but they ignore the message about clean needles. They think that it is just the old druggies in Edinburgh who die because of AIDS, but it is the younger users who now are catching hepatitis C. The long-term impact on our health service is serious. Hepatitis C can be extremely debilitating, and indeed it is a costly disease to treat. Frankly, the Executive's response to the committee's recommendations on this issue was weak. I would like to hear more about the public health campaign and the planning and provision of medical treatment. In Wester Hailes I heard of the problems faced by family self-help groups, which are struggling even to book rooms to meet, let alone provide telephone lines and staff to help the mothers and fathers of drug abusers. I heard from parents and police about the black market, which is a consequence of the need to finance an expensive habit through crime. We have to replace the cycle of drugs and the related black economy in our deprived communities with something positive if we are to break the cycle for the next generation. That means jobs and hope, rather than desperation, misery, depression and hopelessness. That means the regeneration of our communities, investment and jobs. Those are as much a part of the solution as are law enforcement or education. That is a key recommendation in the report. We heard in committee from grandparents who are struggling, with little support, to bring up grandchildren whose parents are users. The Executive's response is weak on that issue. Those  grandparents want changes to social security system rules. I know that that is a reserved matter, but the Executive should take up the views that are expressed in the committee report and those of the grandparents. Will the Executive make representations on that issue? Leaving it all to emergency social work payments is not what those grandparents want—that is not sufficient. I will go over some of the Executive's responses. The Executive says that DATs will be required to sign up to jointly agreed plans, but I question how much clout the DATs will have if they do not hold the purse-strings. We found that much depends on the calibre and enthusiasm of individuals to drive matters forward. I know that Angus MacKay was involved in meeting all the DATs to find out what they were doing. I hope that that monitoring will continue. In its response, the Executive talked about national standards for all DATs and social inclusion partnerships, and joint working. We would like more detail on that. Recommendation 7 in the committee's report is on training and employment opportunities. We welcome the announcement of the resources for this area. The cost of implementing the Beattie committee report is £22.6 million. The Parliament would welcome more information, as part of a continuing discussion on this issue. Recommendation 8 is on the new deal. I am concerned about personal advisers and how they will be equipped to deal with people who are seeking help. Iain Gray mentioned that health board allocations for drug treatment centres are to be based on a formula that links to deprivation and need, in balance with GAE and social work, but the formula must also link to prevalence and service provision. I echo the point that was made to me by professionals in Edinburgh, which is that Edinburgh has to provide national resources. If Arbuthnott is developed, there is an issue about what will happen in Edinburgh and Lothians.

I appreciate that intervention.  This is an issue that we must come back to, because the jury is out about the specifics and the research. The commitment to making sure that we have more information is welcome, because one of the committee's criticisms was that the evidence that we heard, at least initially, from civil service officials left us questioning its robustness. We welcome the Executive's response on recommendation 29, on female drug addicts with children. Recommendation 31 is about the Scottish Drug Enforcement Agency and the need for monitoring and accountability. That is a serious point, which has been expressed to me by senior police officers because, as Iain Gray said, the accountability of the SDEA is not as overt as it could be.

I welcome that comment. I simply wanted to put our concern on the record. We can monitor how the SDEA is accountable through the minister and to the Parliament.

About £100 million will be awarded through all the funds. However, there is concern about the speed with which that money will reach front-line services. There must be some monitoring of its progress from announcement to delivery. I spoke to Lothian Health Board and social work departments, which raised issues about that. I call again on the Parliament to implement the report's final recommendation—recommendation 36—which says: "A cross-party inquiry, commission, committee, or other structure should be initiated by Parliament to inquire into the broader problems of 'substance abuse'." The Government recognises that that is not its responsibility. If I may use the term "you" in the proper debating sense, perhaps it is for you, Presiding Officer, and the Parliament to respond to that recommendation. The inquiry and its recommendations are already dated. The drugs issue moves quickly. The use of heroin and its increased availability in this city were brought to the committee's attention 10 months ago. At that point, there had been an explosion in numbers in the previous 12 months. We must constantly report and make recommendations to keep up to speed and be  relevant.

That is why we must undertake a continuous study and accept recommendation 36 for a cross-party inquiry commission that constantly reports to Parliament.

In the Executive's response, I notice the identification of the need for new deal personal advisers to be able to refer on drug users as part of their work. I have serious concerns about the training of those advisers. The expectations of what they can do are perhaps a bit too high.

Fuel poverty causes a great deal of debt. One of the problems when the £200 winter-fuel allowance cheque arrives is that for many pensioners it goes nowhere near paying for their fuel. I have heard stories that it goes straight to loan sharks, who are using and preying on pensioners. The money goes straight to finance debt. That is why we have to ensure that there are credit unions, not just in some communities, particularly for pensioners. There is a lot to be said for using credit unions to avoid exactly the sort of trap to which Donald Gorrie refers.

I hope that I will not receive too many groans when I say, "credit where credit is due". The minister knows that the SNP—and I in particular—are not backwards in coming forwards when we have things to criticise, whether it be wholesale stock transfer or the extension of the right to buy, but I hope that she also recognises that when we see initiatives that we welcome, we give credit where it is due. We gave credit to the Executive on its domestic abuse strategy and I welcome the action plan and the funding that has been announced this week. I would like to pay tribute to the members of the many credit unions for the time and dedication that their work demands. It is important that this Parliament supports that work. A good friend of mine was involved in the creation of the Gorgie/Dalry Credit Union in Edinburgh. I went through the birth pains with her so I understand the perseverance, the time and the patience that it took to set the credit union up. I have also recently visited Blackburn Seafield and District Credit Union in West Lothian. I pay tribute to the sterling work that it does. An issue that has arisen in its work is the continuing development, training and support that is required. The action plan has recognised that such issues have to be tackled. In the Parliament, a number of debates and inquiries have pointed to the need for community-based cheap credit facilities. Time and again, we have come back to the fact that there are real money problems in Scotland. Only last month, the subject that I chose for a member's debate was debt awareness. Robert Brown has raised the issue of homelessness. Yesterday, we perhaps did not spend long enough on the point that he has been arguing on the need for independent advice on money matters. I am sure that we will come back to such issues. Cathie Craigie's Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Bill has also raised the money problems that people experience. The minister has mentioned fuel poverty. We can address all those issues. Credit unions will not solve all the problems, but again and again in evidence we hear that credit unions can often be a solution that allows people to get on a firm financial footing.  In debates during the passage of the Abolition of Poindings and Warrant Sales Bill, we heard compelling evidence of the problems in society and of the need to ensure that we have solutions that are different from the ones that are at present on offer. For a country racked with debt, it is remarkable that the credit union movement is so underdeveloped. In Canada, each province has a central credit union that provides investment of funds, liquidity and access to payment systems. They also serve as provincial trade bodies, linking with a central credit union. Interestingly, Québec has its own separate structure which, among other things, acts as an industry self-regulator and is linked to public authorities. There are similar arrangements in Poland, and it will be interesting to see developments on such issues in the action plan. In Australia, a service corporation for the whole country has branches in each state. It combines trade association functions and services such as liquidity management, corporate banking, treasury insurance and mortgage securitisation, and IT financial management and planning. In Ireland, the Irish League of Credit Unions is a trade association and sponsoring body for credit unions north and south of the border, and has an extremely good track record. We welcome the action plan, but it puts into perspective how far we have to go if we are to ensure that the credit unions of this country match what is available in other countries. It would be an achievement of this Parliament and ministers if we facilitated an expansion in credit unions. However, there is a danger that this could be too much of an apple-pie debate. We need to make progress. Key questions have to be asked. The action plan was meant to address the findings of the report "Credit Unions of the Future", some of which are very pertinent. There is an issue about the role of the regulatory system and the FSA. As somebody who used to work in a business that was regulated by the FSA, I realise the importance of having financial regulation, but how will it operate on a UK basis? I do not mean to make a constitutional point, but if we are to support credit unions, how will we co-operate and ensure that what is required in Scotland is served by that UK function? The central research unit of the Executive also raised some issues. It asked whether we need a statutory instrument similar to that which was required in Northern Ireland. It will be interesting to see what legislation may be required in Scotland. Is it possible to have a compulsory share protection scheme for members? How do we deal with the size of common bonds? Do we need to go to Westminster to get agreement on that, or can we do it here? We need to examine equal access, and IT training, equipment and software. This is a  challenge for Scotland. We are one of the financial services capitals of Europe. We should be looking for support, particularly with regard to equipment. We have to look also at local issues. Visible and affordable premises are required. One of the reasons Blackburn Seafield and District Credit Union is successful is that it has the use of local authority premises and is centrally based for those who need it. Accessible and affordable training and support must be available and it is important that there are connections to training for union management and access to in-depth specialist support. Those services are needed. We need to find where the funding will come from and how it will work. So much is dependent upon the action plan of the Scottish credit union partnership. We do not have full details of that, but no doubt they will be forthcoming. There are concerns about liquidity issues and regulation by the FSA. I hope that the minister will address them, because she will be familiar with the concerns expressed in the Sunday Herald about how credit unions will cope. There is the question of whether we will have different versions of credit unions, that is, version 1 and version 2. I have not worked out what that means, so I hope that we will have an explanation. I also have concerns about local authorities being responsible for eight of the action points. Some of them are self-evident, for example with regard to education, but where will the funding come from? We need to identify how we deal with debt in this country, and how much credit unions and the strategy will be the responsibility of the joint ministerial committee on poverty. Will the minister raise that issue when she next attends the committee? We need to look at what is happening in America. I know that Jackie Baillie and Wendy Alexander went to America. I was interested to hear about the Community Reinvestment Act. Many of the powers in that act would be reserved in this country, but I am interested in hearing the minister's comments. I will end by paying tribute to the work of those who are involved in this field. Blackburn Seafield and District Credit Union says in its promotional leaflet: "The Credit Union motto is 'Not for profit Not for charity But for service'". I hope that this Parliament, and the ministers of the Executive, can serve credit unions as well as credit unions serve the people of Scotland.

Does the minister think that having 80 per cent home ownership and 20 per cent rented accommodation is sustainable or realistic? Does she believe that that situation will provide an adequate supply for Scotland's housing needs?

The minister is back-tracking.

On the issue of community ownership and the sale of land, I understand that the bill requires councils to use any profits and receipts from land sales to pay off debt. If we believe that, as the bill proposes, local authorities should have a strategic role, surely they should be empowered to decide what they want to do with such receipts.

Does Keith Harding agree that the common housing register should be strengthened in statute?

Will the member give way?

I have a brief question. Is amalgamating housing associations the way out of the problem? Will Scottish community housing associations end up more like their English counterparts? In England, large bodies are prevalent, unlike the small community-based associations that are traditional in Scotland.

Will Karen Whitefield give way?

What does Robert Brown believe the Government's housing strategy to be?

Will the member give way?

I congratulate all the committees involved—the Social Justice Committee, the Local Government Committee, the Equal Opportunities Committee, the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee—on their work on the bill. Their reports are most helpful to Parliament in informing our work. I also congratulate the Minister for Social Justice on getting a bill on housing to the chamber. We have waited a long time for its publication, from the publication of Calum MacDonald's housing green paper in February 1999, to the publication of the consultation document, to the bill itself. However, I am disappointed that we have not grasped the opportunity for a comprehensive bill on housing. I note that we have extended the debate by half an hour, but we still have too little time to allow all who want to speak to participate. Last year, we had a full day's debate on housing, during which the minister who was responsible for housing discussed just a fraction of what might be in the bill. Now we have the bill itself, yet we have less time for debate. Something is amiss, and I intend to write to the Procedures Committee about the situation. The Housing (Scotland) Bill is the longest and most technical bill to have been introduced. As I have longer to speak than other members, I will make the point in my time, to save others from using their limited speaking time to make the same point. There is frustration around the chamber that we cannot do justice to all aspects of the bill. I pay tribute to the witnesses to whom the committees spoke, particularly those tenants who do their work for the betterment of housing policy as volunteers. As the Executive chose to publish the bill just before Christmas, the committees effectively lost a month of work, and some  organisations had difficulty in sounding out their memberships before giving evidence. The bill was promised several times during 2000, but it took until the end of the year to publish it. The committees make a valid criticism that the evidence stage had to be concertina-ed. I highlight the Equal Opportunities Committee's points about equality proofing. The bill was meant to be the first to be equality-proofed. I am not sure—but I am happy to be corrected—whether I see evidence that the bill has been altered to take into account the needs of women, children, members of ethnic minorities and disabled people.

I refer the deputy minister to the Equal Opportunities Committee's comments about the needs of children. I recognise that the CRE made those comments, but I also recognise what the Equal Opportunities Committee's report said about the needs of children not being met. In campaigning for the establishment of a Scottish Parliament, many of us used the state of Scotland's housing and the need for housing legislation to argue the point. How many of us, eager in anticipation, were elected to the first Scottish Parliament for 300 years keen to ensure that housing was at the top of the agenda? If ever there were an issue that desperately needed the Parliament's attention, it was and is Scottish housing. Therefore, if I have been criticised for nagging about the publication of the bill, that is justified. We all want a bill on housing to be enacted. Surely that was why the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee was the committee that had the most applications for membership. The SNP, Labour and Liberal Democrat manifestos on housing showed that there could be consensus on housing in the new politics. Parties made commitments to a single secure tenancy, a single regulatory framework, abolishing Scottish Homes, establishing a homelessness task force, introducing legislation, introducing single housing plans and developing a strategic role for local authorities, among a range of objectives.

I want to continue.  This is the first bill on Scottish housing in 13 years. We should be celebrating. Why do I not feel like celebrating? Because somewhere along the line, that collective vision of what Scottish housing across all tenures could be has been subverted. I say that more in sorrow at a missed opportunity than in anger.

In a second. The opportunity has been lost to a fixation about something that is not in the bill. That is the perceived need to smooth edges on the Government's only housing solution—stock transfer. That is in danger of corrupting what could be a very good bill. The Government does not need the bill to allow it to undertake the wholesale stock transfer. It can use Tory legislation for that. Somewhere along the way the Government has lost sight of the ball. Where is the strategy that underpins the bill? I did not hear the minister mention strategy once. Where is the vision? Where is the joined-up government? The only strategy that is apparent is the drive to achieve 80 per cent home ownership in Scotland and 20 per cent rented homes.

Stage 1 examination is about the principles of the bill. I want to address the strategy that underpins those principles. The aim of 80 per cent home ownership and 20 per cent rented homes is unrealistic, unsustainable and will lead to welfare housing and dislocation of families and communities as the limited availability of rented accommodation casts to the four winds communities and different generations of the same family in search of homes. The bill's accompanying policy memorandum says that the main aim of the bill is to contribute to the overall aim of fostering successful and balanced communities. How can a community be balanced when shortage of available and affordable rented accommodation puts people from the community in search of limited accommodation? The minister talks about social justice. She should note that the committee supported her view on social justice by only one vote. Some of us, of course, respect the majority of a committee vote or a vote in Parliament.  The minister was at the Chartered Institute of Housing conference today. What is balanced about an escalation of repossession and the pressure of home ownership as articulated very clearly by the CIH in Dundee this week? What is balanced about creating conditions for more repossessions? If the vision and strategy that underpins the principles of the bill is to move to an 80:20 split, there is a real danger that the supply of housing in Scotland will be damaged.

My understanding is that there is only one mortgage rescue scheme in operation, although a number of housing associations are considering mortgage rescue schemes. The minister mentioned the strategic use of the right to buy. That is the probably the nub of a lot of the issues with the bill. I am sure that a number of people will contribute to the debate on the right to buy. Those who can buy and want to buy can afford to buy their homes. I ask the minister not to destroy the only supply of homes that we have with an unsustainable strategy. That is where the bill is taking Scottish housing. I appeal to the minister to be her own woman. I know that she is perfectly capable of asserting herself. I appeal to her, for the sake of Scottish housing's future, to cast aside the strategy of her predecessor and think long and hard about where she is going with her housing policy. There is much to commend in the bill. There is much about homelessness, regulation and the role of local authorities on which we can all agree. I would rather concentrate on those aspects than on the divisions that have been artificially introduced because of an ill-thought-out over-promotion of home ownership. What is not in the bill? Our job today is to consider the scope of the bill. I propose to identify what we had expected to be in the bill from previous ministerial announcements. The bill has become the social-rented-housing-with-a-little-bit-of-private-repairs-added-in bill. The opportunity for a comprehensive bill has been lost. There is little in the bill about the private sector, although most of Scotland lives in that sector. There is no independent, guaranteed survey. There is no  seller survey, as is being introduced in England. There are no energy audits to accompany surveys. There are no proposals for the vital area of common factoring, although I notice that Cathie Craigie brought that up in discussions in the committee. There is no provision in law for common housing registers to be established, although I note that there was some discussion about that. I am sure that a lot of that could be dealt with at stage 2.

I want to move on. I am pleased that the minister will introduce something to address concern about fuel poverty at stage 2. I hope that it is not a hand-me-down version of the English Warm Homes and Energy Conservation Act 2000. What is not in the bill has bred myriad task forces on home improvements and reform of tenement law, which is promised but for which we still do not have a date. There is an issue as to what provisions for homelessness there are and are not the bill. People are already saying that a second piece of legislation is required. The minister is breeding champions at a fast rate. Serious concern has been expressed in committees and in evidence that too much is being left to guidance outwith the bill. I note that the Social Justice Committee wants to be involved in post-enactment scrutiny. However, the problem is that Parliament will have to legislate for provision, the detail of which has not been decided in published guidance. What should be in the bill? Let us go back to the lack of strategic thinking in housing policy. Two key issues affect housing today: its affordability and its supply—or lack of supply. Sixty per cent of Scots and 80 per cent of people living in Glasgow rely on some form of housing benefit. Rents are too high in many places, which can often prevent people from returning to employment and thereby raising family incomes and relieving poverty. Housing benefit is reserved to Westminster, but we must have control over housing benefit in Scotland if we are to have meaningful control over housing policy. When it comes to housing, the Executive is not averse to amending schedule 5 of the Scotland Act 1998. Only this morning, in committee, the Executive introduced an affirmative instrument that amends schedule 5 of the Scotland Act to bring powers of insolvency of registered social landlords back from Westminster to Scotland. The House of Commons and the House of Lords gave their permission this week to allow the devolved Administration to affirm that. If  the Government is serious about making an impact on Scottish housing and achieving a radical housing bill, it should take action to bring housing benefit under the control of the Scottish Parliament, so that we can drive down rents and increase the incomes of families living in poverty. The minister seems to think that we have rent harmonisation in Scotland, but rents at Angus Council are £28 a week, and at Glasgow City Council they are £45 a week. That is the sort of issue that we should address. The bill does not help to address the supply of housing. Indeed, by proposing the extension of right to buy, it will actively reduce what is available. There is an opportunity for us to release powers in Scotland for housing. We need to move the debate to think strategically—for example, how can the bill help to improve the supply of housing? Let us consider some of the issues. I welcome the single secure tenancy. That is in the SNP's housing policy, in our manifesto. On right to buy, surely right to rent is just as, if not more, important. Extending the right to buy will effectively take away the right of the public to have access to rented accommodation. I ask the minister to consider the European convention on human rights and whether one tenant in one housing association in one pressured area could threaten to take the Executive to court. The concept of pressured area status protecting housing associations could be undermined.

I am sorry, but I am short of time. The minister talked about building 4,000 houses a year, but those are housing association homes, which could be sold in 10 years' time. That is not a good use of public money in the supply of housing. It is not best value.

I want to move on. I am conscious of time. There is a strategic role for the local authorities in the single regulatory framework. I welcome that, but there is an issue about what the relationship will be between the national executive agency and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. COSLA would wish the Scottish Executive to set out its rationale for turning Scottish Homes as it currently exists into an executive agency, rather than establishing a separate independent agency for regulation and monitoring. We must engage on that at stage 2. How do we ensure that there is a regulatory body that is independent from the policy-making arm of Government? When the role of Her Majesty's Inspectors of Schools was considered, it  was clear that the regulatory function had to be separated out from the policy function. I want to ensure that we have definitions at stage 2. Everything on the national executive agency seems to refer to the powers of the minister. At stages 2 and 3, we might be voting on important aspects of the future of housing without knowing their detail. On private owners' grants for repair and improvements, a more strategic approach is required on owner-occupation and the private sector. The minister recently announced an improvement task force, but few details are available on its remit and time scale. There is on-going consultation on the index of housing quality, but no apparent legislative base for the outcome if consultation is positive. On means-testing of grants, the Local Government Committee said that it "remains unconvinced by the proposals and calls on the Executive to consider further with the Housing Improvement Task Force, whether more suitable arrangements can be brought forward." That view was echoed by the Social Justice Committee, which is not yet persuaded by Executive arguments. In conclusion, I return to the point that the bill should be driven by a strategy and a vision that joins up Government thinking. The bill could become the midwife of welfare ghetto housing in this country. It could destroy the community volunteer basis of the housing association movement in Scotland. We do not have joined-up government in Scotland. Jackie Baillie talks about expenditure on housing, but only 48 per cent of the rough sleepers initiative money and 50 per cent of new housing partnership money has been spent. We have stagnation in council house building and record levels of homelessness. Where the Government is allowing houses to be built by housing associations, it plans to let them be sold off in 10 years. Rather than being a reason for celebration for this Parliament, Government housing policy and this bill are rapidly descending into dislocation, delay and discord. The bill needs to be rescued. I implore the minister to throw it a lifeline at stage 2.

Will the minister take an intervention?

The minister talks about the need to unify the right to buy. Will she explain to Parliament how replacing the two rights to buy that exist with seven different rights to buy will unify the right to buy in a single social tenancy?

There is an issue about the right to buy in relation to current council tenants. There is recognition that we must protect existing rights and the minister is correct in seeking to reform some of those rights. However, how on earth will extending the right to buy to housing associations—thus reducing the supply of rented accommodation—help us to tackle increasing homelessness? How on earth can the minister justify the suggestion that having seven different rights to buy is some form of unifying provision?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

At Energy Action Scotland's conference in December, I spoke to suppliers who were concerned about the central heating initiative. Most of their engineers are in their 50s and the suppliers were concerned about training. Donald Gorrie talked about training and training arrangements. Does he agree that those must be looked into, to ensure that we have good-quality, safe central heating system initiatives?

The Labour-led council in  Glasgow has appalling housing conditions, which are leading the minister to consider wholesale housing transfer. Does Cathie Craigie think that a pensioner in Glasgow will be able to access the central heating scheme on 1 April this year?

On additional measures, the Executive's motion talks about proposals for a new index of housing quality. Would it help fuel poverty if the bill raised significantly the tolerable standard? Does the member regret that the new index of housing quality will be supplementary rather than statutory?

This morning,   members were shivering, complaining about the cold and uncomfortable. I note that the temperature has risen with the hot air that has been expelled since then. I do not accuse the minister of that. Indeed, I welcome the fact that she is finally putting targets for reducing fuel poverty in the Housing (Scotland) Bill. However, why has it taken until now to do that? Why were targets not originally included in the bill? People campaigned for them day in, day out. Why did people such as those from the warm homes campaign have to give evidence to the Social Justice Committee without anything in the bill on which they could comment? They have had to wait until this late stage.

No. I am only 40 seconds into my speech. It is apposite that we discuss fuel poverty today. As we shiver from the cold for a couple of hours, we must recognise that it is our duty to represent those people—particularly pensioners—who sit frozen in their homes hour in, hour out, day in, day out and week in, week out. They cannot afford to pay for the fuel that they need to heat their homes and they live in homes whose heating costs are extortionate. The minister should feel uncomfortable when we discuss fuel poverty—and not just because the air temperature has been freezing recently. We live in a country where inequalities are increasing, where the poor pay most for their fuel and where the rich pay least. If the poor pay by pre-payment because they cannot afford to take the direct debit discount, they pay 9 per cent more.  When Frank McAveety was Deputy Minister for Local Government, he told the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee that he would engage with the utilities and would try to meet the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets. My understanding is that ministers now say that the issue is a reserved matter and will not take it up. The definition of fuel poverty that is most often used is of a household that needs to spend in excess of 10 per cent of its income on fuel to maintain a satisfactory heating regime. The 1996 Scottish house condition survey estimated that 30 per cent of Scottish households lived in fuel poverty. Today is 1 March, but snow is on the roads and Scotland has crawled to a standstill. People in countries such as Finland and Norway cannot believe that, as a cold country in the northern hemisphere, we cannot cope with a snowfall. In 1998, issue 316 of the British Medical Journal said: "Winter mortality rates in Siberia do not increase, in spite of temperatures sinking as low as -25c. This is thought to be because indoor temperatures in Siberian homes are kept relatively high." We should be a modern country. We have discovered oil, yet our country has people who are fuel poor. It is about time that we got off our knees and started acting like a modern country by raising conditions to meet the requirements of the 21 st century.

We have measures on succeeding and investing. The minister talked about the investment in housing that is needed. Why do we not do what the Norwegians do? Why do we not use our oil wealth and invest in our public infrastructure to build the quality housing that we need? It is an absolute disgrace and it is obscene that thousands of people die from cold-related illness every year—last year, it was 4,000—in Scotland, which has so many energy resources and is a wealthy country. The Executive should invest in central heating and allow councils to use their capital receipts and to borrow. It should provide the vital public investment. We could use public service trusts, bonds and a variety of initiatives to invest in housing. The minister must take that seriously. Investment must happen now. She has too many initiatives that are not delivering. The money for  the rough sleepers initiative has not been spent. The minister mentioned £350 million for the central heating initiative, but she can identify only where a third of that will come from. We need action now, not later. What could we do? We must invest in housing. We could follow the examples of other countries and invest in our infrastructure to ensure that we have quality housing. We should invest now. That is better than the jam tomorrow of the never-never land of wholesale stock transfer. I heard the minister taking a pasting on the radio today. She is in trouble on that issue. We have no action—nothing is happening in housing in Glasgow. Pensioners are not going to get anything. Will the minister tell me whether pensioners in Glasgow will be able to access the central heating initiative as of 1 April this year?

When? Will it be 1 April? I doubt it. The problem is that Scotland needs its own fuel poverty strategy.

No. I am moving on. The problem is that London decides what Scotland does. It decided that there would be an amendment to the Housing (Scotland) Bill on targets when we had this debate, and not in January. The minister has still not answered the question. If she was part of the UK strategy, when were the meetings? What did she say? How did she influence the UK fuel strategy? Our problem is that, although there are some commitments and some proposals, they are slow and ponderous and they lack funding. The Government's proposals still beg too many questions for Scotland to feel confident that this brave new Parliament in this energy-rich country is tackling fuel poverty. People have campaigned for years on this issue. The Deputy Minister for Social Justice will remember, from the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, that the first issue that Communities Against Poverty wanted to tackle was fuel poverty. On Friday night, I spoke to Gordon Wilson, former SNP MP, who championed the cause of the cold climate allowance in London, which eventually led to the implementation of the winter fuel allowance. Margaret Ewing has campaigned on the issue for years. Last year, Robin Harper secured a debate in which he asked  for energy audits to be included in the bill—those have not been delivered. We are at last getting targets, but they should have been provided for in the original bill. These are things that people have campaigned long and hard for. I am angry, because our country is full of resources and we can tackle fuel poverty. We should invest in housing now rather than later. The central heating initiative is the big suggestion. It is welcome but, if Dumfries and Galloway, the Borders, Glasgow, Aberdeenshire, Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles consider stock transfer, will they get central heating on 1 April? According to the Executive, the programme is a five-year plan. The Executive will not be in power in five years' time—we want the investment now.

No. I have finished. I move amendment S1M-1700.2, to leave out from "commends" to end and insert: "recognises the consistent calls from a number of parties for fuel poverty to be tackled as an early priority by the Executive, particularly in a country which has so much fuel wealth but also so much fuel poverty, is disappointed that the Housing (Scotland) Bill as currently drafted contains no targets for the eradication of fuel poverty or other measures previously indicated in earlier consultation documents, is further disappointed in the lack of detail, funding and timetabling of the Central Heating Initiative particularly for pensioners in areas where councils are considering wholesale stock transfer of council homes; recognises that Scotland should have its own Fuel Poverty Strategy, and calls on the Executive to address all these issues as a matter of urgency."

At what point did the minister want to bring this debate to the Scottish Parliament, given that she obviously had to wait for London to decide its UK fuel strategy? What communications and meetings has she had to debate the UK fuel strategy and when did those take place?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister take an intervention?

On that point, what is Mary Scanlon's response to the views expressed to me by a GP who retired at the time when the Tories were still in power. When I asked him how he felt about retiring, he said: "When I joined the medical profession, I wanted to be a doctor. When I retired I was an accountant". That was the result of Tory policy.

I have been asked why we are holding a debate on a topic as depressing as debt on St Valentine's day. Perhaps it is reflective of the dour thrawnness of Scots. However, as the manager of the citizens advice bureau in Livingston told me, debt and money worries have broken many a relationship. The work of advice agencies in helping people to deal with their debt issues can often save pressured relationships in the process. Indeed, I understand that one of the stories surrounding St Valentine—whether it is true I am not sure—is that he gave money to three sisters who, for some reason, were deemed too poor to get married: credit for love. On a more serious note, I am pleased to have been given the opportunity to raise these issues in a members' business debate. Since lodging the motion, I, like other members, have been contacted by a number of organisations, who have expressed their approval that we are dealing with the subject directly. I want to talk about the state of debt in the Lothians and in Scotland. Citizens Advice Scotland estimates that, in the Lothians alone, it deals with at least £10 million of personal consumer debt. The Advice Shop in Bathgate estimates that its clients have £3 million in different kinds of debt. The debt case load is increasing. Penicuik CAB tells me that it has dealt with 58 per cent more multiple debt cases. Since 1979, total unsecured consumer credit in the UK has increased elevenfold.  Debt is caused by several factors. Poverty is a prime cause, as is easy access to expensive credit and personal problems caused by relationship breakdown, pregnancy or death, which can make a bad debt situation spiral out of control. There is also a generation issue. Older people worry mercilessly about going into debt and will not eat or heat their homes so that they do not do so. The younger generation are armed to the hilt with store charge cards and, in some cases, build up £20,000 to £30,000 of unsecured consumer debt in their early 20s, while staying at home with their parents. On poverty, one of the issues of concern is the operation of the social fund, which is meant to be a safety net for the poorest in our society, but operates to exclude the very poorest in our society who cannot afford to repay the loan and are therefore refused. When we judge ourselves on social justice, we should ask what this policy does for the poorest, most marginalised in our society. We owe an enormous debt to Citizens Advice Scotland, which is organising this debt awareness day. It has 57 member citizens advice bureaux, which deliver the service through 130 service points. Last year, one in 11 Scots used their local CAB. Each CAB is an independent charity and must raise its own funding, most of which comes from local authorities. They have 1,800 volunteer advisers, which make up 90 per cent of the Scottish CAB service. We express our thanks for their service. It is interesting that 77 per cent of all Department of Social Security forms and packs refer clients to their local CAB for general advice—they are part and parcel of the public service. I will mention several issues that are of concern. We must consider the impact that water charges will have on debt. Bill Scott, the director of Lothian Anti-Poverty Alliance, stated in yesterday's Edinburgh Evening News : "The poor are finding it increasingly hard to pay and, worse, because water charges are combined with council tax bills, thousands of families faced with the stark choice of feeding the children or paying the bill then default on both. The increase in water charges, as well as ruining people's lives, is also ruining local authorities' ability to collect local taxes and thus pay for vital services . . . For many, large increases in water charges may be the straw that breaks the camel's back." That is another reason why this debate on debt is pertinent. I will also raise concern about irresponsible marketing techniques. In this day and age, money is sold aggressively and mercilessly: from flyers through the letterbox to adverts in the paper and satellite entertainment adverts. Although consumer credit is reserved to Westminster, if we are serious about tackling debt and poverty we must tackle the extortion that takes place, in the  name of legitimate lending, by disreputable lenders. As a nationalist, I would argue for those powers to be under the control of this Parliament. The main point is that whoever has those powers must take action. I hope that Margaret Curran, in her speech, will take the opportunity to report—as we do not often get the opportunity to hear about the outcomes of the joint ministerial committee on poverty—on debt issues and on the operation of the social fund, which I mentioned earlier. Most debtors have multiple debts to several creditors. The City of Edinburgh Council's money advice team found that 71 per cent of people seeking help with mounting debt owed money to five creditors or more. Concerns have constantly been raised with me about the recent increase in debt management companies, some of which charge between 15 and 25 per cent interest in fees for taking on consolidated loans. If someone is on a good salary, it may make sense for them to have someone manage their debt, but if they are on a poverty income, that is an excessive charge. We must ensure that people know that free independent advice is available. Let us turn to solutions. The bottom line is that we must tackle poverty by increasing the incomes of the poorest in our country. The powers to do that are not as yet available to this Parliament. We must work in whatever way we can and make representations to London that the consumer credit legislation must be addressed; lending at an interest rate of 400 per cent must not be acceptable. In addition, something is needed to fill the gap between ability to make payments and bankruptcy. We must provide advice services when people need them. Many CABx are only open on certain days. I understand that the average number of hours that a CAB is open has reduced from 25 hours to 24 hours a week in the past year. Debt advice must be seen as part of the Government's broader social inclusion strategy. The answer lies in providing independent advice agencies with a stable and secure financial framework which would allow them to concentrate on providing their core services effectively and to continue the types of innovative schemes such as the Edinburgh in-court advice project that I hope will be expanded to other courts. We must ensure that people are aware that they can access free independent money advice before they get locked into expensive loan consolidation deals. While welcoming the national debt line phone service, we should agree that it complements rather than replaces a face-to-face service. Face-to-face counselling is often required as it gives the individual personal support. I have received representations from advice workers that  they could counsel 50 per cent of cases initially through telephone, but not the 70 per cent that it has been suggested that the national debt line would deal with. Perhaps the minister could address that issue in her response. We must ensure that, wherever possible, there is common practice among creditors and that credit unions are encouraged, supported and developed to provide a community-based, low-cost access to credit to cut out the loan sharks and other legitimate but predatory lenders. Our message today must be to seek advice early—the value of early advice as a preventive measure should not be ignored. Scotland is a place where we do not like speaking about money, whether it is about what we earn—unless it is a tabloid discussing MSPs' salaries—or what we owe in debt terms. Today, by having this debt debate, the Scottish Parliament is itself facing up to one of Scotland's most serious problems and identifying some solutions.

Does the minister agree that the £13 million that has been spent on developing the proposals could have delivered 5,000 central heating systems and double glazing for 2,500 homes? Is not it about time that the Government started to invest in front-line housing services, rather than consulting tenants about something which at the end of the day is Hobson's choice?

I thank Cathy Peattie for obtaining the debate. I am sure that there will be other debates that she will lead, when we will be able to hear the other six pages of her speech. She should not worry—I am sure that she will get her opportunity. I am pleased to speak in the debate. We all agree that volunteers are very much the life-blood of our communities. In our work as MSPs, all of us recognise, and are humbled by, the work and sheer commitment of the people who work in our communities. Part of the point of the Parliament is to recognise the civic role that the voluntary sector and volunteers play in our life. Having the Parliament has given us the opportunity to expose and celebrate that. Cathy Peattie made the point that volunteering is sometimes seen as a soft issue. It is far from that. The people who volunteer in our communities often deal with the hard edge of problems in society, whether with drugs or issues of domestic abuse. That aspect must be emphasised. I took part, as I think we all did, in volunteers week. This year, I managed to make a Cinderella carriage out of a Tunnock's teacake at the brownies in Linlithgow, which was—I must say—challenging. More seriously, when I took part the year before, I helped at St Michael's day care centre in Linlithgow. I was struck by the fact that some of the volunteers who helped the elderly were in their 80s themselves. Last week, I got a phone call expressing concern that the centre was going to have to lay off a member of staff and the cleaner and would have to cut the hours when old folk could go to it. We must remember that volunteers are often at the hard edge of the hard  decisions that are made about public finance. I felt very sad to hear about the day care centre, not least because it was where I had spent my volunteers week. We must also think about the politics of volunteering; it is not only a soft issue. Only last week at the Social Justice Committee, a housing association volunteer expressed her strong views. Regardless of what we all think of the politics of the right to buy, that volunteer was questioning her future commitment to volunteering because of the political decisions that the Parliament might make. The Parliament will have to make some hard political decisions that are of relevance to volunteering. Another issue is the transmission of funding to tackle the social inclusion agenda. There are social inclusion partnerships, but I would question how central the role of volunteer networks and exchanges is within them. I would like the minister to address that point. This is a great opportunity to ensure that the social inclusion agenda is delivered, but the people in the voluntary sector, who can often deliver it, are not sure that they receive the credit and funding that they require. I hope that the Parliament can advance that agenda. We need core funding for the voluntary sector. We have received promises, but we are waiting for delivery. I am hopeful that it will be delivered. We must pay tribute to the UN international year of volunteers and to volunteers, but we should not think of volunteering as a soft issue; it is a hard issue and the Parliament will have to take tough decisions, which will affect the lives of those in communities where volunteering is so important. I congratulate Cathy Peattie; I am sure that she will be able to deliver the next six pages of her speech on another occasion.

To ask the Scottish Executive what percentage of the rough sleepers initiative budget for 2000 has been spent rather than allocated. (S1O-2879)

If the minister is saying that less than half of the rough sleepers initiative budget is being drawn down, I think that is a disgrace. If she recognises the problems, especially in Edinburgh, will she take action to ensure that local authorities—especially the Labour ones in Edinburgh—spend the money? She will be aware that Castle Cliff, barely 100 yards from the chamber, would make ideal facilities for hostel provision. Will she make representation to her Labour colleagues in the City of Edinburgh Council—and specifically the council's spokesperson on equal opportunities—to ensure that homeless people in Edinburgh get the facilities that they deserve?

Of course those are important issues, but homelessness under this coalition is at record levels. Temporary accommodation, the impact of which on children in particular is an important issue, is at record levels. What is the Executive delivering? Yes there is a commitment, but is the Executive doing?

In the content of the programme for government, not much has changed from mark 1. There is an improvement in the presentation: we do not have the outsize coffee table version that we got last time. That version had a delightful picture—to allude to Annabel Goldie's speech—of the then Minister for Communities taking a cup of tea. I am sure that the Minister for Social Justice was quite relieved that she did not have to pose in a similar fashion for the new programme for government. Does it not occur to the people who write such documents that some of us might read them and contrast the second programme for government with the first? It is clear that not much has changed. We were promised that bad and unpopular policies would be dumped. What has been dumped? I have not heard one speech on what has been dumped, because, despite that promise, nothing has been dumped. The Parliament and the Opposition parties, in good faith and with good grace, recognised that the First Minister might want to put his own stamp on the Government. However, it seems that the stamping of authority has brought on a bout of  foot-and-mouth disease. He mouths the word "Government". When is a Government not a Government? When London tells him to use the term "government" in general terms, but on no account to describe the Executive as the Government of Scotland. The First Minister puts his foot in it by tripping all over the issue of free personal care for the elderly—he got there on the Monday, but only by trampling over Cabinet colleagues and Labour back benchers. I listened carefully to Cathy Jamieson's comments on the Sutherland report. She talked about "proposals" rather than an unequivocal commitment. I will read her speech in the Official Report with interest. The First Minister was seeking to put his stamp on the Government when he wanted to brand the Edinburgh International Conference Centre with a projection of his own image. I must warn the First Minister that there are young children living around Morrison Street in Edinburgh. Those children need to sleep at night and their parents were very relieved when his project did not happen. The Parliament recognised the delay in the document with good grace and would have accepted it had the Executive proposed something different from what we had first expected, such as getting rid of the extension of the right to buy and the privatisation of trunk road maintenance. The vanity of projecting one's image on to a building pales into insignificance beside the Executive's decision to delay its programme for government—barely altering it—just so that it could be launched on its 100 th day in office. That is vanity rather than statesmanship. John Swinney and Phil Gallie made some important points on police numbers. It was also interesting to hear David McLetchie's comments on the Tory policy on care of the elderly and the threats of privatisation. That is another matter that we will pursue, to find out exactly what the Tories propose for our old folk. It was interesting to hear Mike Rumbles talk about reasons to be cheerful—as far as I remember that was a number by the late Ian Dury and the Blockheads.

I respect Phil Gallie's comments, but the way David McLetchie referred to the private sector seemed to indicate that the Conservatives want to develop it far further. There is a commitment to social justice among members of the Labour party and the SNP. I listened with interest to Hugh Henry's comments  on the wonderful world of Paisley. Does he know how many of his constituents are among the 16,000 more children who are living in households on income levels below 70 per cent of average income? Under Labour, the number of children living in such households has increased. When Cathy Jamieson talks about the Executive's commitment to social justice, she should remember that it is delivering that commitment that is important. The Executive's own figures show that it has not delivered on child poverty.

I want to end child poverty, but that demands action and delivering on commitments. The Executive's figure of 70,000 children relates to 1996-97 rather than to 1997-98. The change took place in the year before Labour came to power. The Labour Government has failed to deliver on child poverty.

The minister has made her point and I want to move on. Donald Gorrie made an important speech on the importance of the voluntary sector in delivering social justice, and the significance of core funding to the voluntary sector. Dennis Canavan talked about the Scottish Parliament being able to take a more enlightened approach. That was an important point. I would like to reassure Pauline McNeill that the revenue costs of the SNP's health policies, which she seems to welcome, are less than last year's NHS underspend. Fergus Ewing and Alex Johnstone made important speeches on the rural dimension and the absence of substance in "Working together for Scotland". We must begin to talk about the problems of rural poverty. There have been references to social justice figures. We want to use statistics on improvements in social justice, but I should point out that the Executive has used the Department of Social Security report "Households Below Average Income" as its baseline. Are members aware that the report says: "It should be noted that results for Scotland do not include people living north of the Caledonian Canal"? That means that half the landmass of Scotland and about 175,000 people are excluded from the figures. We have heard about the poverty incomes of £5.76 a week and that is the reality that we should be discussing in today's debate. The document does not represent a programme  for government—most of it is a programme for administration. Furthermore, it is a programme for the administration of decisions that have been taken elsewhere—by Europe or previous Governments, and that goes for Helen Liddell and her targets for computers in schools, too. Having studied the programme for government, I realise that two things have been dumped. I wonder whether they are deliberate omissions. One is a pledge to tackle the problem of persistent reoffending. That pledge has disappeared, although I thought it was rather good. The pledge to train 5,000 new child care workers by 2002 has been removed. Was that considered a bad policy? I rather liked that pledge, too, but I suspect that it does not appear in the new document because there are only 11 months to go and the Executive has reached only a third of its target. Out of 157 pledges made by the Government, almost 60 per cent are either reannouncements, commitments from the previous programme for government or EU directives. There are 12 pledges on the environment, 11 of which are EU directives or reannouncements. What has happened? On the empty homes initiative, the Executive is sorry, but it is not delivering its pledge of 900 such homes by 2000 because it turns out that that was a typographical error. Homelessness is at an all-time high. The number of homeless people currently living in temporary accommodation is higher than when the coalition first took office. That is what is happening under new Labour. We want a Scotland that can embrace wider powers. There have been brief moments in which we have glimpsed what the Scottish Parliament can do when it acts in the collective public good. That is what Dennis Canavan meant about the Parliament's enlightened approach. As Margo MacDonald said, we can do so much more. We have the ideas, vision and passion. Independence and the use of the Scottish Parliament's full powers would mean a Government of substance, not just semantics. "Working together for Scotland" is a programme for administration, not government, and Scotland deserves better.

Will the member give way?

Will the pensioners who live in the seven local authority areas where stock transfer is proposed be able to receive central heating as of April 2001, or will they have to wait until after the stock transfer? Is the £350 million announced tied up with stock transfer, or is it available separately?

Will Mike Rumbles give way?

The First Minister made an important statement when he said that central heating would be available immediately. Does that mean that pensioners in Glasgow will get central heating immediately in April 2001, or is it dependent on the stock transfer balance?

I was brought up in Alloway and I am pleased to contribute to the debate. Burns should not be only about Burns suppers in January. The point has been made that we should make more of Burns throughout the year, particularly for children. I attended Alloway primary school, which has successfully promoted Burns.

I am also pleased to welcome the debate. The issue has been a long time in gestation in the Parliament—I raised it 18 months ago and sought to change the very complicated Conveyancing and Feudal Reform (Scotland) Act 1970 during the passage of the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000. Robert Brown subsequently introduced—in the Family Homes and Homelessness (Scotland) Bill—measures that are similar to those in Cathie Craigie's Mortgage Rights (Scotland) Bill, which she introduced in July. Even before that bill was published, Cathie had managed to secure cross-party support. The bill is the latest in the "your sofa is safer than your home" saga—people's sofas can be protected from repossession, but their homes cannot. It is important to note that a member's bill  can make a real difference to people's lives—Cathie Craigie's bill is a good example of that. It is estimated that 900 out of the 2,000 repossessions that take place would be prevented if the bill were enacted. Cathie Craigie talked about "avoidable homelessness", which is an important phrase. The bill is about ensuring that people can make financial arrangements to prevent repossession. It is another example of the way in which the Parliament's committee structure has worked well. There was cross-party support for the bill when it was published, but in the evidence that was heard by the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee—which I served on at that time—several concerns were raised. I expect those issues to be raised in amendments at stage 2, not least because of some very pertinent points that were made by the Council of Mortgage Lenders. The problem must be addressed. It is common sense that we should help people and try to ensure that they can come to some arrangement for repayment. However, paragraph 12 of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee report highlights the points that were made by the CML. We should recognise the steps that lenders have taken to assist borrowers who have repayment difficulties when we assess whether a suspended order should be granted. We should also recognise the inconsistencies in advice and decisions. The issue of advice to sheriff courts is important and might have a financial implication. I hope that the Executive will provide assistance on that. The Government said that it was happy to support the bill. It was also happy to provide assistance in the drafting of the bill. That is an issue because, although such co-operation makes for better legislation, we should note that Robert Brown—whose bill was introduced at about the same time—was not provided with such assistance. The minister explained when she gave evidence why that was the case, but there is a problem; members' bills are meant to be equal, but some are more equal than others. That matter must be addressed, especially in relation to the introduction of bills by Executive party members.

I acknowledge that, but I have concerns about the Parliament and the way in which bills are introduced. The issue could have been dealt with by the Executive, which could have introduced an appropriate bill.  Cathie Craigie introduced her member's bill in July. Before that, Wendy Alexander said that there was no problem, but that the Executive would make legislative provision and consult on the matter in "Better Homes for Scotland's Communities". However, the issue was not even mentioned in the consultation document. The Housing (Scotland) Bill—which was published in December—is clearly about the social rented sector. It does not cover the private sector. I do not know whether Cathie Craigie was clairvoyant in anticipating that. Did ministers know in July that the proposed housing bill would cover only the social rented sector? Is that why they were so keen to support Cathie Craigie's bill? That is an important constitutional issue that the Parliament must address. I support the bill and I congratulate Cathie Craigie and Robert Brown on the work that they have done. We must, however, address the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee report's reservations on reasonableness, advice and implications for the legal aid bill, as well as the points that Cathie raised on expiry dates. Members should support the commendation of the Edinburgh in-court advice service. I plead that members' bills do not become the playthings of ministers. They must not cover up for deficiencies in legislation or be used as mechanisms to massage away the Government's broken promises. Wendy Alexander promised to include mortgage rights in the consultation paper, but the matter was not included. I am pleased to support the bill, which is necessary. I congratulate Cathie Craigie on introducing the bill and for the hard work that she has done to ensure its development thus far. However, we must ensure that the Executive takes responsibility and uses its time to address such issues, rather than relying on members to introduce legislation.

Home is where the heart is, but it is also where the danger is. Members may recall that in April I lodged a motion calling for a home safety bill and statutory powers. I was disappointed that no Labour members signed that motion; perhaps it was because I did not mention East Ayrshire. We should recognise the work of those councils that are promoting home safety. I congratulate Cathy Jamieson on her election as deputy leader of the Labour party in Scotland. We must put the issue in context. There are three times as many accidents in the home as there are on the roads, although there is a greater awareness of the need to tackle road safety. We must consider mandatory powers. We should consider the options and the direction that those should take. Many members of the Scottish Accident Prevention Council are councillors and I welcome those members who are in the gallery, including the SAPC chairman, Brian Topping, who is an SNP councillor in Aberdeenshire. As the SAPC has pointed out, it is councillors who are asking for statutory powers. In this day and age, when people believe that the Scottish Parliament is sucking up powers from local authorities, it is interesting that local authorities and councillors are asking for some kind of statutory responsibility. The Executive has a duty to respond to that. We also have to consider the health dimension.  If we are to have joined-up thinking, the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care should look at the budgets of accident and emergency departments. I note that the number of accidents requiring emergency hospital admissions has almost doubled in the past 20 years, with a resultant cost to the taxpayer. This is about common sense and joined-up thinking. I was pleased to host a meeting of the SAPC in the Parliament in April. I have a young family; to be told of the dangers that my three-year-old could get into because of his strength was an education. A lot of good work could be done to make people more aware.

Indeed, we must ensure that we have joined-up, commonsense thinking. I am worried that the cut in the number of home helps might mean that that opportunity is limited. Richard Simpson's proposal for home helps is an example of the sort of creative thinking that we should be encouraging, but people should be recompensed for the duties that they are expected to carry out. Margaret Jamieson talked about house fires and the fabric of buildings. She also referred to the Housing (Scotland) Bill, which was published yesterday. I am not sure that the scope of that bill would allow what she is proposing, although I would like to see her suggestion taken up if possible. The home improvement task force, which was recently set up, could consider provisions for smoke detectors and other basic issues. We might want to have a home safety bill, and the Executive may publish a home improvement bill. We have discussed energy audits in this chamber, so why do we not have safety audits? This is about developing a culture of safety in the home. A number of members have made positive suggestions. I will be interested to hear the minister's response, because there is a will to make something happen. That something may be small but, as Margaret Jamieson mentioned, it could make a big difference to people's lives. We do not want to hear about tragedies at Christmas. Many people have burned their arms bringing the Christmas turkey out of the oven—the vegetarians  among us might not have that problem—but some of the issues are far more serious. We do not want to read about house fires and deaths. If the Parliament can do something constructive, we would be proud of it. I look forward to hearing the minister's response.

Will the minister give way?

Parents may choose to consider schools in Springfield and Linlithgow as well. I suggest that HMI should also speak to the surrounding schools—Low Port Primary School, in Linlithgow, and Springfield Primary School—as they are also relevant. Although the council may want to suggest the schools at Winchburgh and Bridgend, parents may want a choice of the four.

I welcome the representatives from Abercorn school, particularly the children. It is their education that will be determined by what the minister decides in the  review. Only yesterday I visited the school. I should declare an interest, in that my daughter attends one of the neighbouring primary schools. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton made a pertinent point when he said that the closure of Abercorn primary would have an impact on schools in Linlithgow that are approaching capacity, particularly primary schools. When I say that I am an MSP for Lothians, people think that that means only Edinburgh—it does not. It includes West Lothian and Midlothian. I dispute Mary Mulligan's suggestion that Abercorn is not a rural school, because it is. Philpstoun community council explains the situation far better than I can. It points out that the shale mines that once existed in the area have been swept away and that farm jobs are disappearing. However, the community has survived and is flourishing because of the sense of community that that small school engenders. Lord James Douglas-Hamilton also made that point. It is interesting that the school is situated in the north-east of West Lothian. That sounds a bit tortuous, but we must remember that decision-making power is located in the south of the county. It is true that decisions are made by a democratically elected council, but most of the members who voted for the closure of Abercorn primary come from the south of the county and are members of the Labour party. SNP and Conservative members of the council voted against the closure. I agree that there were problems with the consultation process. I attended the Bridgend meeting, where the educational reasons for closing Abercorn school were not explained fully to parents. I also understand that some of the budgetary information that should have been made available was not available for the first consultation meeting, which took place at Abercorn. We should address the transport issues. Mary Mulligan seems to be arguing that it will be easy for children to get from Abercorn to Bridgend. I dispute that. I believe that financial considerations are a key factor in this case. There has been an overspend on the building of the new primary school at Bridgend, and the money that would be saved by the closure of Abercorn school could be used to offset that—that worries me. I agree with the report that Cathy Peattie made to the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, in which she stated that no rural school should be closed solely on the ground of cost. Not having facilities for PE or art is a cost issue, rather than an educational one. That is the nub of the matter. The criticisms that have been made of the school on educational grounds relate to facilities, not to the  quality of education that is received. It is a special school and it is a successful school.

I am winding up. We should remember that the children are here to see what Parliament can do. This is an important test for us. Will we stand up for successful schools? Will we stand up for rural schools? I hope that the minister will consider the important points that have been made both by the SNP and by Lord James Douglas-Hamilton.

Will Mary Mulligan give way?

One of the committees has just produced a report on drugs issues. The ministers may allocate money from the budget for drugs measures in January. How will the budgetary process go forward? Would it be an idea to establish a group whose members were drawn from the Health and Community Care Committee, the Education, Culture and Sport Committee, the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee and other relevant committees to examine how the cross-cutting budgets are determined and allocated? Does Elaine Thomson think that the Finance Committee would welcome that suggestion?

I am very pleased to speak in this debate, not least because the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, of which I am a member, took an active interest in the budget proposals, not just at stage 2 but at stage 1. Some of my remarks will be directed at issues arising from the stage 1 budget process. I refer those members who have with them a copy of the Finance Committee's stage 1 report to annex J and pages 242-43, where the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee expressed concern that certain issues had not been taken on board. We were particularly concerned about the fact that there was no baseline information, that there was insufficient narrative to explain and justify the choice of particular targets and that in-year adjustments to budget lines and the impact of previous years' underspends had not been dealt with. The last point is particularly important. I am sorry that the minister is not in the chamber, because, after the previous speeches, I have a new title for our Minister for Finance and Local Government. He should be called the "Minister for Scottish Block Allocation (with Marginal Tax-varying Powers)". That is what he is, as Alex Neil pointed out in his speech. I will concentrate on the variation in budgets. Part of what we must do, especially at stage 2, is to see if the Government has taken on board some of the issues that were raised in the stage 1 debate. I refer the chamber to the section in our report in which we examine the variation in the communities budgets. Ken Macintosh made the important point that we are not talking about the theory of budgets and the theory of what we do, but about what the Parliament decides to do with the money. It is not our money; it is the taxpayers' money. What are they getting for it? We must examine the communities budget and the new housing partnership budget. Are people getting the homes that they need in a year when there are record levels of homelessness? That makes what we discuss in Parliament relevant to the people. When the minister gave evidence to the committee, we returned to the new housing partnership budget, which had concerned us during the stage 1 discussions. The minister was asked if she could clarify why the budget for 2001-02 for new housing partnership, which is now called community ownership, had dropped from £160 million down to £100 million. That is a big drop. Where did that money go? That drop was despite an additional £44 million being allocated by Jack McConnell from NHS  capital allowances. Remember that last year he said that the Executive would use NHS money by putting it into housing. We might want to do that in certain cases, but in a year when many NHS trusts were struggling with their budgets it was a questionable decision. When we pursued that matter, it was clear that Jack McConnell was saying in October that the Executive was using NHS trust and Scottish Homes money, but that although the effect of those changes was to reduce the published figures for spending on housing, it did not reduce investment in housing. If members examine the housing investment lines in the budget, they will see that there are four areas of housing investment: new housing partnership money drops by 20 per cent; the housing revenue account stays neutral; money for Scottish Homes and the warm deal goes up, but it goes up by only £32 million from April next year for a year. I refer members to the table on page 243 of the report, which shows that there has been a reduction of £64 million in housing investment. We have lost £32 million from the housing investment budget. Was Jack McConnell wrong in October last year when he said that the money from the NHS trust was a new contribution? Was Wendy Alexander wrong when she said in correspondence to the committee that it was already allocated? Or was Jackie Baillie wrong on November 2 when she said that the NHS money had been allocated previously? We must receive explanations about mid-year adjustments. There are record levels of homelessness, yet in 2000 no public sector houses were built that were financed by the public purse and the housing investment budget was highly questionable. If the budget process is to mean something not just to theorists or economists but to the people outside, we have a duty and responsibility to take account of that. I do not expect the minister to know the ins and outs of the social justice budget, but I ask him to let us know in his summing-up, and in writing, where that money has come from. Was Jack McConnell right, or was it Jackie Baillie or Wendy Alexander? I refer the chamber to paragraph 3 of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee's report on page 243. One of our concerns was that we were told that we could not get level III figures as those would not be available until January, but that there would be interim announcements. We were told that there would be savings because of debt charges for new housing partnership—remember that that budget has gone down significantly—and that there would be interim announcements between now and Christmas. However, we do not know what those  announcements were. When I asked the minister whether that money was part of the previously announced funding for domestic abuse, she said no and told me that that money had been allocated from the comprehensive spending review. We are still waiting on at least £20 million that the minister promised to be allocated somewhere. I want to conclude by responding to some of Angus MacKay's remarks. He said that we do not have any borrowing powers; however, we should remember that much of the new housing partnership budget relies on agreements to service debt. What is the relation between Gordon Brown and his Treasury and this chamber on that issue? Furthermore, if reserves are to be funded through end-year flexibility, we have a stock transfer proposal in which the balance might not kick in until next November if not later. There is a very great danger that the new housing partnership budget—which has already been raided and is decreasing—might not get spent in the next financial year. I will not be party to a Parliament that decides not to spend money on housing because of a flawed policy decision that shoves out other decisions such as housing stock transfer. Furthermore, I will certainly not agree to a situation where the housing budget funds the reserve budget, as Jackie Baillie said. There are record levels of homelessness and no houses are being built. If we want a budget system that makes sense, we should not have this shuffling of budgets between different budget lines. If we have clarity and transparency on this issue, we will have the respect of the Scottish people.

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what allocations have been made to date of the resources for central heating installation announced on 19 September 2000. (S1O-2637)

Does the minister acknowledge that it has been a long two and a half months since the original announcement? What reassurances can she give to local authorities, manufacturers and gas contractors that the proposal will be carried out to time? Can she give reassurances about where the £350 million is coming from? Some of the concerns of the groups that I mentioned relate to the fact that only £120 million of the money has been allocated. There are concerns that the announcement was premature and has not been thought through. It is vital that it be delivered and—more important—delivered safely.

Last year, when we debated the domestic abuse work plan, there was a spirit of consensus, as there has been today. I pay tribute to the Minister for Social Justice in driving through the policy and the funding. I hope that she will join me in recognising that the power of Parliament, the pressure of speeches in this chamber and the work of the committees have been influential in pushing forward the agenda on tackling domestic abuse. We will give praise when praise is due—but, as is our duty in opposition, we will push and question. There have been some powerful contributions this afternoon. Linda Fabiani's point about the sense of powerlessness that lies behind abuse and the importance of self-esteem was well made. Phil Gallie was right to ask for accountability—what has happened to the money that was pledged during the past year? The issue of rural provision is important and Maureen Macmillan's points about educating the community and the press were also well made, as was Kay Ullrich's point about institutional attitudes and the criminal justice system. In her brief contribution, Trish Godman made a good point about legal aid, which I will come back to. Ian Jenkins wanted to have some kind of love-in with the Minister for Social Justice—which was rejected, I understand. He made a point about women's issues being addressed, but if he had  listened, the minister said that this is about human rights, not only women's issues. From his contribution, it seems he missed the point that Kay Ullrich made—alcohol is not the source of the problem, which is about power in relationships. I hope that he is suitably rebuked, but the sincerity with which he made his contribution is to be welcomed. I also pay tribute to Anne Smith and members of the Scottish partnership on domestic abuse, whose report is well thought through and well argued. It sets out the comprehensive steps that were taken in arriving at the partnership's conclusions. The report marks out the route for policy and practice with vision—and that is what is needed. If I have some slight criticisms, they concern the legal aspects, some of which the press has speculated on. Although the partnership's report indicates a need for comprehensive reform, more explicit information would have been helpful. The minister touched on that in her speech. We should consider reform of legal aid rules and practices. I have in my hand a sample of the legal aid forms that a solicitor and client must complete. If sheriff officers are to serve court orders, a client under stress must complete at least some of these forms, which puts additional stress on women who might be frightened and confused. I will be interested to see what progress is made on reform. The definitions of domestic abuse are at the core of the matter, as a number of members have said. The time scales on ownership are to be welcomed—results should be joined up. This morning, the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee took from Scottish Women's Aid evidence that showed that, although refuge funding was important, women and families must have accommodation to move to. Concerns were raised about Highland Council's requirement that all rent arrears should be cleared before others could apply for refuge places in that area. The witnesses told the story of a woman with five children who took a year to clear her rent arrears. As a result, only three other women and their children could be offered a place in that refuge that year—the woman with five children had to clear her debts before she could move on. In hospitals, bedblocking is a horrible term, but we should recognise that refuge-blocking—although equally unfortunate as a term—is very descriptive. Because of the lack of suitable and affordable rented accommodation for women and their children who are fleeing domestic abuse, women must extend their stays in refuges, taking up places that others might need. The housing aspect of the problem is important and should be  addressed in the housing bill. Points have been made about children and the psychological support that they need. We have to address the number of reserved powers—the Department of Social Security has been too slow to sort out income provisions. I have said that we would call the Executive to account and raise important issues. This afternoon I received a distressing fax from Scottish Women's Aid which, if members will bear with me, I will read. "We are in shock having been made aware that Glasgow is only being given an extra three bed spaces. Please note the following— Glasgow has four women's aid groups—not even one extra space per group. Almost 11,000 women contacted our office last year for information, refuge and support. Glasgow Women's Aid is in financial crisis and has been trying to secure core funding since the launch of the new Scottish Parliament. To date we have not received 1p!" After making a number of further points, the fax continues: "We do not provide a piecemeal service and we should not be treated in a piecemeal manner." Members should listen to the final sentence: "We feel extremely let down by our own Parliament and feel our work over almost 30 years has been negated." That is a very serious point. It might be uncomfortable for members, but we must listen to it. I would like to make a plea about funding, bearing in mind the money that is being put into an advert. Yes—adverts help to raise issues, but if there are not enough places to meet the demand that those adverts create, we will be in difficulty. Scotland can never be at ease with herself if the fabric of family life is threatened by attitudes, behaviour and actions that mean that women and children live in fear. Parliament cannot and must not be silent on the issue, while women and children live in silent suffering. I am proud that the SNP supports the Executive's motion.

Will Robert Brown give way?

I am concerned that the press release uses Convention of Scottish Local Authorities figures that were based on 1989 figures. I am therefore concerned about the basis on which the figures were presented.

Perhaps Mr Sheridan has missed the point of the debate and the proposals made in the strategy. The strategy recognises that there must be multi-agency use. People must come together to recognise such issues, particularly in relation to housing. This morning, the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee took evidence from Scottish Women's Aid about what provisions should be included in the housing bill to defend the rights of women and ensure that refuge places are available, regardless of the outcome of the ballot in Glasgow. That is the spirit in which we should debate the matter. The debate is not an opportunity to do some knocking, particularly where it is unjustified and does not merit argument.

I welcome the statement, the strategy and the funding. Will the minister clarify whether that funding is the money that she reported to the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee on 1 November was available because of the recalculation of housing debt, or is it new money? Is it correct, as I read in the press coverage of the pre-announcement, that Glasgow will get only three additional refuge places? Does the minister recognise that cities, whether Glasgow, Edinburgh, Aberdeen or Dundee, often act as a magnet for women seeking support? Will she pay special attention to the needs of cities in that respect?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I do not know if the Presiding Officer has seen the film, "Groundhog Day", but I think that I have been here before. I wish to ask about this morning's announcement by the Executive of £18 million for domestic abuse funds. I understand from a previous ruling that the  Presiding Officer is to be sensitive about the matter and will look into the issue of ministerial speeches following such pre-announcements—announcements that should be made in the chamber. I realise that a question by Helen Eadie has been published in today's business bulletin—as a planted question—to enable that to happen. If the Presiding Officer is to be true to his conviction of wanting to ensure that the chamber is the place where serious announcements are made, will he please give a judgment and guidance on how he will treat the ministerial speech that we expect?

The First Minister talked about housing in Glasgow. Is he aware of the delay to the Glasgow ballot? Is he also aware that Glasgow has lost out to the tune of more than £170 million in housing investment since new Labour came to power three years ago?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way on that point? That is misinformation.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The minister has taken no interventions and has run a minute and a half over her allocated time. As you were very strict about the times for speeches, will you please ask the minister to wind up?

The money for servicing the debt could be made available without stock transfer. It is a political decision by the Executive to tie in the servicing of Glasgow's housing debt with stock transfer. That has nothing to do with Treasury rules.

I agree with Jamie Stone's comments about regeneration. If he were to examine the record of housing associations and co-operatives in Glasgow, he would see that they have been very much part of the regeneration of the city. The problem is that those are not the associations and co-operatives that we talk about when we discuss wholesale stock transfer. The existing housing associations and co-operatives that undertook the regeneration work in Glasgow are being excluded from the wholesale stock transfer proposal.

Will the member give way?

rose—

rose—

Will the member give way?

It is.

Scotland's housing is in crisis. There has been a collapse in investment, with housing investment at a fraction of what it was; and Government housing legislation has yet to surface. Quite simply, Labour is not delivering on housing for tenants. In 1979, borrowing consents in real terms amounted to £629 million; however, in 2000-01, that figure has dropped to £180 million. Glasgow had 350 per cent more to invest in council housing in 1987 than in 2000. In 1987, the city had £178 million to invest; in 1995-96, it had £100 million; and in 1999-2000 the figure dropped dramatically to £52 million. Although we can criticise the Government for its record on investment, we also recognise that it has moved on certain issues and support its policy of dealing with council debt. Indeed, the SNP first introduced the policy of lifting the debt burden of councils that had been placed on them by Government policy and allowing them to invest tenant rents in tenants' homes. At the time, we were accused by new Labour of fantasy economics; however, it is now happy to embrace the policy. Members will recall September's debate on the extensive Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee report on housing stock transfer—a debate that, for Labour, had been conveniently organised on the Thursday of the SNP conference. The report also included my detailed and comprehensive minority commentary which covered the whole of Scotland, not just Glasgow. We are bringing this debate to the chamber today because there have been three major developments in the city of Glasgow and the Government that demand that we do our job and come back and scrutinise what Government policy is—or rather is not—doing in that city. Those developments are the change in ministerial control of housing policy; the election of the new First Minister, who wants to dump a bad policy; and the delay in the Glasgow ballot. We must remember that what happens in Glasgow is of serious concern to the whole of Scotland. Councillors, officials and tenants are waiting to find out what will happen in Glasgow as  the result will determine and influence when ballots are held in the other seven transfer areas and the future of other councils that are being forced to consider the policy. Indeed, across the UK from Birmingham to Cardiff, people are watching the situation in Glasgow. Anyone tramping the streets of the Glasgow Anniesland constituency for the by-election knows that housing stock transfer is a major issue on the doorsteps. From Drumchapel housing in desperate need of repair and renovation—or what will be left of it after demolition—to Knightswood where people live in the city's better-quality stock, tenants are wondering what exactly they will get out of the deal. The issue for them is rents and whether they will be affordable in 10 years. I want to expand on the three developments in recent months. First, the ministers who, in their various roles in the chamber and before they were elected to the Parliament, were in charge of housing policy are no longer in charge of it. Frank McAveety had had a significant role as former leader of Glasgow City Council, as had Wendy Alexander in her previous role as adviser to the housing minister, Calum MacDonald—or perhaps it was Malcolm Chisholm; I am not sure—who kicked the process off. The removal of the two ministers from office begs the question: will the new ministerial team take the opportunity to revise the policy? I suggest that it should. Secondly, a new First Minister has been elected with a demand that the Government dump its unpopular and bad policies. Our motion demands that wholesale stock transfer be dumped. The new team knows the difficulties that it faces in convincing tenants on that issue, despite the expensive, one-sided propaganda that has been issued at taxpayers' expense. As the Executive runs into the electoral sand on the timing of the ballot in relation to electoral contests at Westminster, councils and Holyrood, the pressure must be on to revise radically or abandon the policy while the going is good. Indeed, this week's edition of The Glaswegian contains an interesting article by a certain back bencher—not of this chamber, I might add—on that very subject. Talking of press coverage, I must ask what was meant by stories of the appointment—or non-election, rather—of Cathy Jamieson, who is an impressive woman, as deputy leader of new Labour in Scotland. There was speculation in the Sunday Herald that her appointment would bring concessions on stock transfer. If a rethink is afoot, we demand to know about it—concessions by whom, for whom? There is another serious question: will the policy shift from the community ownership-empowerment model pushed by Wendy Alexander and Frank McAveety, or will there be a shift back to the Glasgow-wide model  that the council originally pushed? Has the council won? Will stock owned by Glasgow City Council, failed landlord that it is, be moved in one block without onward transfer to small, local organisations?

Will the member get to the point?

It is important that tenants are aware of the—

It is important that they are aware of the political changes and developments. Those are political facts. Changes and developments have happened. We have a First Minister who is reviewing Government policy. I believe that the tenants deserve to know that there is now an opportunity for change in Government housing policy. One serious concern for many tenants in Glasgow is whether regulation will be the same for the different social landlords or whether there will be a two-tier system. The third development, and the most important, is the discovery this week that the ballot is to be delayed. The ballot was originally due to be held in November this year, but was then put back to spring 2001. I refer members to the timetable on page 16 of Scottish Parliament information centre research paper 99/13 on housing stock transfers. The ballot may now not take place until November 2001. That means that significant levels of investment in Glasgow's stock would not take place until summer 2002. A whole term of office for new Labour at Westminster would come and go with nothing done to improve the state of people's homes.

I want to move on. New Labour is not delivering. Time has been wasted on an ill-thought-out policy, with Glasgow tenants paying the price. Almost £170 million in capital investment has been lost in the past four years of Labour in Glasgow, which has led to a massive deterioration in Glasgow's housing stock. Glasgow City Council's borrowing consent was  £90 million in 1989; it is now reduced to £24 million. We are told that the delay is because Glasgow tenants want more time for consultation and to get the facts, which is perhaps the point that Cathie Craigie made, but that is because years went by in the early part of new Labour's Administrations at Westminster and Edinburgh when the tenants were frozen out of the process and staff and unions were kept out in the cold. There was general criticism of that across the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee. Do not blame the tenants for the delay. The delay has other significant ramifications. I have been pursuing the Government's central heating proposals, which are to be welcomed, but I have concerns about what the delay will mean for the people and pensioners of Glasgow. I have written to Bob Allan and Charlie Gordon, who told me that they are concerned about the timing of the proposals. I am not saying that the Glasgow pensioners would be excluded from proposals relating to central heating. I am concerned about whether the investment will come by winter 2001 or be delayed because the finance is tied up in stock transfer. That is why, more than a month ago, I lodged a series of questions asking whether each of the seven transferring authorities would get finance from the £350 million announcement and, if so, when they would get it. I believe that the reason why there is a gap between the £120 million that was earmarked in the budget for central heating and the £350 million trumpeted by the Executive is that the central heating proposal for the seven authorities is tied up in stock transfer. Will Glasgow pensioners get the same pro rata access to the fund as every other pensioner in Scotland from April 2001 in time for next winter? Where is the money coming from and how can it be accounted for? Council housing throughout Scotland and particularly in Glasgow is in appalling disrepair. Children are being brought up in cold, damp housing that is having a damaging effect on their health and on their opportunities in life. The status quo is not an option—no one is arguing that it is. The SNP wants to see a series of steps being taken. There are many ways in which to invest in public housing: public investment from the people's war chest; the release of capital receipts; borrowing from the Public Loans Board, which we can afford to do; using local housing companies; enabling small-scale transfers to existing co-operatives—

I am winding up. Public service trusts could be used to allow all landlords to access private finance pooled with stock managed by whatever landlord tenants want, including the council, but with democratic reassurances. The debt—or debt servicing—could be transferred without the need to transfer the stock. In Glasgow, that would involve £1.2 billion over 10 years. Equity release schemes could be developed and the debt could be privatised rather than the housing sold off. The tenants of Glasgow are left waiting for new Labour to deliver. The SNP will keep bringing the issue back to the chamber. We will keep on the tail of the Executive, demanding detail and scrutinising its proposals. We have heard much of progressive pragmatism from the First Minister, but what ministers will hear from the SNP on this issue is progressive scepticism. The people of Glasgow and Scotland deserve no less. I move, That the Parliament notes that the ballot for the proposed Glasgow housing stock transfer may now be delayed until late 2001; calls upon the Scottish Executive to abandon its wholesale stock transfer policy in its current review of problem policies and further calls upon the Executive to release budgets allocated for stock transfer now in order to improve housing stock in Glasgow and throughout Scotland.

Will Margaret Curran confirm that the baselines to be used in next year's annual report will be the same as those used this year? Does she recognise the serious concern that, if the baselines are shifted, such measurements will be difficult to track year on year?

I welcome much of what Donald Gorrie has said, as many of his comments are reflected in the SNP's policy on benefit reforms. He will notice that our amendment calls on the Executive "to make representations on behalf of the Scottish people to Her Majesty's Government to change those policies which prevent progress in achieving social justice." As Donald Gorrie has just listed several of those policies, does he think that it is the responsibility of the Parliament to ask the Executive to make representations on the reform of benefits?

I welcome the principle of publishing a social justice annual report in Scotland, but I am seriously concerned about the process, the practice and the politics. The debate that we are having today and the report that is in front of us are about data and statistics, but we must remind ourselves that we are actually talking about people's lives—people who live in poverty and who cannot afford to heat their homes or to eat. To go back in history, last year we had the green social justice booklet, then—in November last year—we had the blue booklet, and now we have the red booklet, which is the annual report. In the week of the troubled presidential election, I am not sure whether I should mention "Primary Colors", but all we need to do is add the yellow booklet, which of course would show the benefits of independence; however, we will not get that under devolution. A vote for the SNP would deliver that booklet. On Monday, the First Minister, surrounded by a phalanx of ministers, was stage-managed to promote the annual report as a major step forward in the fight for social justice. The fact that the First Minister chose Glasgow—a city with some of the worst health, housing and poverty issues—in which to publish that flawed document is of concern, not because he was wrong to put social justice on the agenda, but because he brought a flawed document. I will develop that point as I progress. I welcome the money in the form of the children's change fund, but the announcement rings hollow when we realise that local authorities are having to find £23 million in education cuts this year. Bearing it in mind that new Labour will spend £2.4 billion less on local authorities than was spent in the last three years of the previous Tory Government, the £70 million for the children's change fund does not even start to make up the shortfall. Many families, particularly poor ones with children, rely heavily on local authority services or on the voluntary services that used to be provided before the funding was cut. While the Labour party seeks to raid the SNP policy bank further to make up for the bad policy that it is having to ditch, I remind the minister that I  will be charging commission on the theft of the SNP children's challenge policy that was launched in spring 1999.

If the minister thinks that the target of ending child poverty over 20 years is ambitious, I feel sorry for the people of Scotland.

Let me move on. This Parliament has some history, and we are moving on. I remind the Executive that in November last year, when we debated social justice milestones and targets, the SNP moved amendment S1M-314.2, which stated that the Parliament "recognises the appalling poverty we have in Scotland and the need for immediate action to tackle this poverty; welcomes the publication by the Scottish Executive of Social Justice - a Scotland where everyone matters ; believes however that the report lacks definition, range, focus and clear achievable targets, and agrees that the Executive should re-evaluate the report brought forward by the Evaluation Framework action team and bring forward revised targets and indicators to the Parliament."

I want to develop my point. The SNP amendment today recognises that we need an annual report, but it would benefit the Parliament and future generations in Scotland if that report were independent and included indicators that had been agreed by all parties in the chamber. If the social justice report is to be meaningful, it must stand the test of time and not vary from year to year.

I would not rely on the Tories to do anything about poverty, but if we are ambitious for the Parliament we must recognise that we are laying foundations for the future with criteria such as the basis on which we judge the social action plan.

I am conscious of time, and I want to develop my point. The document is flawed. I will use some indicators from the document to show how the Executive has changed its position, even from last year, to make the percentage figures benefit the Executive and its policy initiatives. The second indicator on children is: "Reducing the proportion of our children living in low income households". The baseline figures that are used are for 1996-97. One of last year's documents—either the green one or the blue one—said that 1997-98 figures would be used. Funnily enough, when the baseline is changed in that way, the proportion of children who live in low-income households is shown to have reduced from 34 per cent to 30 per cent, instead of producing a comparison of 30 per cent to 30 per cent, or no change. I agree that change will not necessarily show up over one year, but the Minister for Social Justice should not fiddle the figures to prove her points.

Let us take the first indicator on children, which is: "Reducing the proportion of our children living in workless households". According to the report, we have managed to achieve an improvement of 3 per cent, but the Executive has changed the definition on which the statistics last year were based. If performance was measured in the way that was suggested last year, the improvement would be only 1 per cent. I make this serious point because of what was done to unemployment figures under the recent Tory Government and then under the Labour Government at Westminster. The figures were fiddled to make the situation look better. I implore the Executive not to do that with poverty statistics, which are too important for Scotland. It is important that people are treated with respect and that we have decent statistics, based on firm foundations, that will serve this country well. I am also concerned about measures that should be included in the report but are not.  Internet access is measured, but not children's free school meals. On child poverty, a report by Glasgow City Council looked at the impact of the working families tax credit. The Minister for Social Justice talked about joined-up government, but the Glasgow report found that because of the tapering on housing benefit and council tax rebates, many families on the tax credit were no better off than they were before they took up work.

I am sorry, but I have taken a number of interventions and I want to move on. Much of the report's information on young families relies on figures from the new deal. The problem is that the new deal is a revolving door, and that young people and others do not obtain permanent employment through it. The document talks about lone parents, but only a third of them end up in employment through the new deal. Gordon Brown says that he is introducing choices, but how effective are such programmes and do they offer real choices for young mothers and others in Scotland? I referred to pensioners and my concern about the source of the £350 million. Pensioners still want pensions to be linked to earnings. On housing and the trumpeted improved budget, it is not only the SNP that questions the figures. The respected Chartered Institute of Housing challenges the Government's figures; it does not think that there has been an 18 per cent increase in the housing budget and claims that the increase is more like 6 per cent. We must address the concerns of people who judge the Government on such statistics. We must consider what the annual report actually means and where the data come from. People from a social inclusion partnership in the east of Scotland told me that, as part of the form-filling that they are required to do, they had to tramp round the doors to find information on internet access; such bureaucracy prevents them from developing front-line services and tries the patience of overworked volunteers. That is of serious concern to the people who are involved. On learning disability, the Association of Directors of Social Work is concerned that the budget will be less than it is in England and Wales. We need more powers; we need fiscal, economic and social security powers. I have said before that housing benefit should be one of the first targets as an extended power of this Parliament. People who live in poverty are looking to this Parliament to treat them with understanding, respect and dignity. That means being fair and straight in the statistics that we use. I plead with the Parliament to consider having an independent  report. We live in a country of poverty amid plenty. We live in a divided world and a divided nation—divided between those who have and those who have not. It is important that we make progress with the social justice agenda, but that we do so in an informed way and with a bit of respect. I ask the minister not to use fiddled figures when she produces future social justice annual reports. I move amendment S1M-1345.3, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "affirms its commitment to creating a fairer society and to combating poverty; notes the publication by the Scottish Executive of the Social Justice Annual Report 2000 ; requests that in future the report is produced on an independent basis, with targets and measurements revised to be sustainable over future administrations and subject to all-party Parliamentary agreement, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to abandon those policies which are currently undermining progress in combating poverty and where necessary to make representations on behalf of the Scottish people to Her Majesty's Government to change those policies which prevent progress in achieving social justice."

Obviously, an increase in pensions is to be welcomed, but does the minister recognise that pensioners across Scotland are demanding that the Government should restore the link with earnings, which would give them the rights and dignity that they want? Secondly, on the £350 million for the central heating initiative, I spoke at a fuel poverty conference on Friday and people had grave concerns about where that money was coming from and where it was going. The £350 million figure has been trumpeted throughout the Executive's documents, but its budget can account for only £120 million. Will the minister take this opportunity to explain where the missing millions are for Scotland's pensioners?

I have had no answers.

One of our problems with the joined-up approach that is the union between the Scottish Parliament and Westminster is that those  Parliaments do not always act in sync. Housing benefit is a classic example: the policy is controlled in Westminster, but operated in Scotland. Furthermore, if the Tories had their way, Scottish MPs at Westminster would be unable to vote on the housing green paper for England and Wales that will include housing benefit proposals that will operate in this country. That is a classic example of joined-up government failing to work properly. If the Scottish Parliament controlled both housing policy and housing benefit, we would have a much more co-ordinated and joined-up approach.

I thank the minister for her statement, which I understand is an extension of the announcement that was made in Glasgow in June. On behalf of the Opposition, I welcome the statement and the action that the Government is taking on street homelessness. If Parliament is to do anything, we must address rough sleeping and street homelessness. That will be a measure of success—whether of Parliament, the Executive or the committees. Everybody in the chamber will have been shocked by the statistics that the minister outlined. I welcome the initiative in the report. There is also much to be welcomed in the statement, but I have some detailed questions that I would like answers to. Will the minister confirm the current number of hostel beds and the pace at which they will be phased out? Will she also confirm the number of supported tenancies that will replace those hostel places and the cost of that? What arrangements have been made with Glasgow City Council and other agencies and when will moneys be released  to those organisations? I welcome the move to common assessments in Glasgow. After lessons have been learned from that, I hope that such a move will be extended to other areas. The minister announced a further £12.5 million for Glasgow. Will that money be spent over the three years, as outlined? Will the minister confirm the source of that money? In evidence to the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, the minister talked about £20 million being reallocated from the new housing partnership budget to other headline subjects. Is the £12.5 million part of that? If not, will the minister say where that money comes from?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

Does Nora Radcliffe acknowledge that there is concern about the fact that, although the Executive issued 4,000 racial consultation documents, only 185 responses were received? Either we have consultation fatigue or people are not properly engaged at the level that she is talking about.

I welcome Jackie Baillie on what I believe is the occasion of her first speech in her capacity as Minister for Social Justice. It is worth starting by examining the context in which we find ourselves. I tried to follow what the minister was saying in her speech. I hope that she can forgive me for this, but I had some difficulty with the language that she was using. This is one of the dangers of this Parliament—we have to ensure that we use language that will be understood not just by people in the Parliament or in the offices at St Andrew's House, but by the general public. We do not have equality of opportunity in this country. Last year, the police recorded 2,242 racist incidents, an increase of 76 per cent. Women earn only 72 per cent of men's average weekly wages. Nearly a third of gay men and lesbians believe that their educational achievements were negatively affected by attitudes to their sexuality. That evidence is both anecdotal and actual. It proves that this is not a country of equal opportunity. We all know that, however. If we have any illusions about equality, we need only look back to the debate on section 28 to know that the battle for equality in this country is far from won. The need for a strategy to promote equality has never been greater and the need for cross-party consensus on that strategy has never been more important. No party in this chamber has a monopoly on commitment to equality and anti-discrimination. Many members, in their political and personal lives, have dedicated themselves to fighting discrimination, not just in this country but in other countries. The Parliament contains members who have unquestionable commitment towards fighting oppression and discrimination—let us not forget our Presiding Officer's role in the anti-apartheid movement. The Parliament contains a significant number of women because many feminists of all political opinions fought their corner in their parties, each in their own way, to ensure that women made it to this Parliament and that male domination of Scottish politics was brought to an end. Moreover,  like many colleagues, I will be on the Scottish Trades Union Congress anti-racism march on 30 November. The majority of people in the Parliament can stand together in their commitment to such issues and in solidarity. We are prepared to set aside party political differences to work towards our common goal. In fact, only this week, I was singing the praises of our Minister for Social Justice for her commitment to campaigning on domestic abuse, giving credit where credit is due and going beyond party political interests in recognition of the fact that some issues are too important for us to start scoring points. In this debate, however, I believe that the Parliament is in danger of allowing the Executive to slip into the realms of self-affirmation. It is too easy to make the speech that I have just made. It is too easy to slap one another on the back and praise one another's commitment. I do not detract from a word that I have said—I have great admiration for many colleagues—but it is easy to end it there. Today, if we do not watch out, could end up as an exercise in going through the motions—the political equivalent of a group hug. It is easy to fall back in the contented knowledge that we all agree. We can denounce the evils that exist in our society and make fine speeches but still leave the central question—what will we do about it?—unasked. If the Executive comes here seeking affirmation, I suggest respectfully that it goes elsewhere to find it, because the second, the minute, the hour that we were elected to become representatives of the people, our duty became to act, not simply to talk. I mentioned section 28 as an example of the inequality that still exists in our society. It is a good example of what happens without a strategy and when, without thinking and in an effort to gain credentials with key sectors, a minister announces a measure as an add-on to an unrelated piece of legislation and then reaps the whirlwind of that decision. Instead of being on the front foot, promoting equality and anti-discrimination, we all end up on the back foot, defending the rights of lesbians and gay men to have legal status. That is what happens when there is no equality strategy, because equality strategies are about not just processes and structures but political leadership. For the benefit of those who choose to hide behind non-partisanship and accuse others of playing politics with issues, let me take an argument head on. It should not have been left to Glasgow Women's Aid to take on the promoters of the Mike Tyson fight; it should not have been left to a small voluntary organisation to risk bankruptcy. The Parliament should have demonstrated its commitment to equality and should have challenged the decision of the Home  Secretary. The Parliament should have stood in solidarity with battered and abused women and told Mike Tyson that he was not welcome in Scotland. That would have been the substance of a real equality strategy, based on action, not just warm words. On the subject of warm words, the document that we have before us, however well intentioned, is self-congratulatory, navel-gazing mince, which will mean heehaw to the general public and, worse still, heehaw to the people who are being discriminated against. The document is not a strategy.

Would the member like to have the power to amend the Disability Discrimination Act 1995? Would he like to have powers over employment legislation? Yes, he would.

I will not enter into a dialogue on this. Businesses do not look to this Parliament to examine employment strategies for people with disabilities; they look to Westminster, because we have no powers. Here is a positive suggestion: let us examine the exceptions listed in section L2 of schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998, which mean that the Parliament could, through the Executive, ask health boards and quangos how they are implementing their powers under that section.

As the minister is conversant with section L2, I sincerely hope that she will consider supporting the SNP's amendment, which asks the Executive to use the section. It is well and good if it has been used once, but it should be used time and again, because it represents all the powers that the Executive has. The Parliament was founded on equal opportunities but was not given the accompanying legislative competence. That is not fitting. The Executive cannot have credible equal opportunities policies when the Parliament does not have the relevant powers.

I am sorry, Johann. I would like to move on. Before I was elected as an MSP, I spent my years in business, so I am fully conversant with management-speak. I know that strategy is about the hows—how do people achieve their aims and how do they achieve their objectives? The equality strategy document is not an analysis of how we achieve our aims and objectives. It reads like an internal working document and simply represents a method of responding to other people's aspirations, intentions and aims. The document is light and woolly and reads like an internal progress report on administrative function, not like a strategy document for a Parliament that was founded with equality at its core. I am trying not to be too provocative. I do not know what internal discussions took place between the coalition parties. I do not know whether the Liberal Democrats argued for and lost the case for a beefed-up strategy that had real teeth and pushed the envelope of the Parliament's powers. I know that the Liberal Democrats voted for the Parliament to have powers in relation to equal opportunities when what was the Scotland Bill was progressing through Westminster.

I will be interested to hear whether Bill Aitken wants to embrace the Labour party in its self-affirmation and self-congratulation. Mike Rumbles makes a valid point: the powers are reserved to Westminster. However, there is no reason why the Parliament cannot have an opinion on them. Part of the SNP amendment concerns those powers and the powers that are available under exceptions in schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998. The Parliament's valuable time should not be taken up with debates about internal thought pieces and vague intentions. The issues that are involved are real: prejudice, hatred, bigotry, racism and institutional discrimination. If the Parliament is to be strong on equality, we should debate those matters. Today's debate of two and a half hours would probably be better used in hearing the findings and analysis of the reporters of the Equal Opportunities Committee.  The SNP amendment "regrets that currently the legislative competence for equal opportunities remains" with Westminster. We need to give the Parliament real teeth and real powers if we are to be taken seriously on the issue. The Parliament was founded on a guiding principle of equality of opportunity, yet with little real power. I understand that the Executive has used the little power that can be exercised under section L2 of schedule 5 only once. I hope that that will be used more. I have some sympathy with Bill Aitken's amendment, although I would part company with him if he considers that rethinking Executive policies is the only way to achieve equality. However, he makes a valuable point. People out there are looking not only at the processes and structures but at the practical issues and where the leadership lies.

I am sorry, but I would like to continue. It is important that the Executive, as an employer, uses good practice, but it should remember that senior civil servants are under the control of Whitehall. What numbers is the Executive talking about when it is says that it is considering the promotion of women and other groups? We will welcome the housing bill when it finally arrives—let us see how effective it is. That is what we should be debating: not vague intentions, but what is actually achieved. Fiona McLeod made a valid point when she described what happened in the Transport and the Environment Committee this morning on disabled badge holders. While we are on the subject of people with disabilities, why is it that the learning disabilities budget in Scotland will be less than that for England and Wales? The Executive can look at mainstreaming but we should remember that, just like other policy objectives, learning disability has to be funded. The fact that we addressed the discriminatory aspects of the Act of Settlement is a practical example of political leadership by this Parliament, of which there is little in the Executive's thinking. Where is the action plan for elder abuse? We have addressed domestic abuse, but what about elder abuse, age discrimination and power relationships with older people? Moreover, where is the progress on the Macpherson report? Is it too slow? Is it satisfactory? Another subject on which I feel strongly is the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. If we are to ensure that we live in a country of equal  opportunity, we must address the issues affecting asylum seekers in our country and the discrimination that they experience. Why should they have to live on 70 per cent of income support? No one else would be expected to, so why should they be subject to that discrimination just because they are immigrants seeking asylum? I want a Scotland with equality of opportunity. The best political leadership that this Parliament can give on equality of opportunity is to keep the well-intentioned internal documents internal, bring to this chamber and the people of Scotland real policies that will make a difference and ensure that we have real power regarding section L2 of schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998 to back up any of our strategies. Those things can be done. I want a Scotland with equality of opportunity, but that does not come about just by wishing for it and aspiring to it. We do people a disservice if that is what we concentrate our time and effort on. We will be judged on what we do, not the number of glossy documents and consultation exercises that we produce. The strategy is well intentioned, but we must come back when the job is done, not when it is half-baked. I move amendment S1M-1320.2, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes the publication of the Scottish Executive's strategy set out in Working Together for Equality , regrets that currently the legislative competence for equal opportunities remains with the Westminster Parliament, and therefore calls on the Scottish Executive within its limited powers to implement all the exceptions listed under section L2 of Schedule 5 to the Scotland Act 1998 in meeting their objectives to attain equality of opportunity for all."

I appreciate that Dr Simpson has a constituency interest, but surely this Parliament has the responsibility of addressing the core of today's motion on business rates. We should not use our time on an issue that could be pursued elsewhere.

No.

The Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee recently visited the national drugs strategy team in Dublin, which is about to pilot a drugs court. It, too, is concerned that, although we must support the principle of drugs courts—and the things that can be done through them—they will work only with public support and if the Government gives rehabilitation and treatment to non-offenders to such an extent that there is no resentment about offenders receiving that support.

On a point of order. I am concerned that—yet again—we seem to be reading about Government announcements in the press rather than hearing them in the chamber. Will you please give members guidance on how you intend to address the issue to ensure that the chamber and Parliament hear any such announcements first?

Will the minister give way?

To ask the First Minister what the sources are of the £220 million public funding recently announced by the Minister for Communities for the installation of central heating systems. (S1F-569)

I thank the First Minister for his answer, but I think that he may be confusing private and public funding. Will the source of the funding affect entitlement to the scheme? Will the First Minister say whether all our pensioners will be entitled to central heating? Will pensioners in the seven local authorities that are considering whole stock transfers, including pensioners in Glasgow and Galloway, be entitled to central heating, or will that be conditional on stock transfer? Are all pensioners entitled to apply to the scheme, as the press release implies, or will tens of thousands of Scottish pensioners remain in fuel poverty and be excluded because of their postcode and their landlord?

So it is new housing partnership money?

An important part of today's debate has been about how to deal with debt. Recommendation 12 of the majority report says: "Where alternatives represent both a means to social inclusion and community regeneration, and also good value for public money, the Executive should consider assistance with relief of housing debt." I take it that Robert Brown accepts that fundamental point. Will he acknowledge that debt and treatment of debt in situations other than wholesale stock transfer should be on the table?

Will Robert Brown give way?

On the next Holyrood elections in May 2003, is not it the case that the timetable for the Glasgow ballot is such that there will be little opportunity for the minister's grand scheme to bear fruit before members face the ballot? The problem is that we will have had about four years of Labour Government rule at Westminster and another four years under the minister's rule, and little housing investment will have hit the streets of Glasgow. Members will be up for re-election and the minister will not have delivered.

Will the member give way?

The crux of the matter is the powers of the Government to deal with the servicing of the debt. Under the Executive's powers, it can decide under partial transfers—which I understand it has done—that it can deal with debt, but only for five years. After five years, in Fife and in Dundee, council tax payers will have to pick up the debt. That was one of the main issues of difference between the minority and majority reports. Under partial transfers, will the minister guarantee that she will continue to service debt after five years?

Does Lord James agree that debt is crucial to the debate, and that it is within the power of this Parliament, under devolution, to service the debt or to transfer the debt of Glasgow City Council or of any other council? Stock transfer is purely and simply a Government policy; it does not have to exist in fact.

David Mundell will be pleased to hear that I was in Castle Douglas on Sunday, discussing stock transfer with Dumfries and Galloway councillors who are part of the coalition administration. They pursue consistently the issue of what the tenants can get from the stock transfer. They want to ensure that the tenants' views are heard and that they will be on the scrutiny committee that will examine the proposals. The councillors admit that transfer is the only game in town; that is the point I made in the previous debate. What do members expect those councillors to do? Should they stand back and not participate, or should they ensure that they get the best deal for the tenants? That is the issue. When I was in Castle Douglas on Sunday, I was ensuring that the councillors in Dumfries and Galloway are operating the same policy that we operate nationally.

On a point of order. Is it not appropriate for a member to declare any registerable interest at the start of their speech?

I am conscious that Mike Watson is a Glasgow MSP and that the debate has been focused very much on Glasgow. However, take the example of Dumfries and Galloway Council, which also faces wholesale stock transfer. Consider the rural dimension of wholesale stock transfer. In some villages and towns, a transfer means that no municipal housing will be provided. No municipal housing will be available to allow young people who want to stay and work in their own communities to do so.

First, I welcome the many tenants and housing professionals who are in the gallery today. There is justifiably much interest in this controversial issue and it was right and proper at this time for the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee to take on the task of examining the matter in detail. The committee inquiry was a most interesting experience in more ways than one, but I stress that I intend to concentrate my remarks on the core political and financial issues. The inquiry was interesting particularly because of the range of organisations involved—from tenants groups to the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors—whose evidence reflected all aspects and angles of interest in this subject matter. I, too, thank the clerks and our housing adviser for their hard work. In particular, I thank all those who gave evidence, especially the representatives of tenants organisations who in many cases had to pay their way—including the costs of photocopying their written evidence—from limited resources. I am pleased that the Parliament is addressing the issue of paying personal costs to committee witnesses. The committee report is the first to contain a minority commentary. However, despite being the  author of that commentary, I agreed with more than 53 of the 63 recommendations. I disagreed fundamentally with three and thought that another seven could have been much stronger. I thank my colleagues on the committee for agreeing to my production of the minority view and for not trying to influence the content, as they had the power to do. Furthermore, I thank the chamber office for allowing me to present the minority report in time. Although we must consider how the Parliament deals with minority views, the best place for doing so is in the Procedures Committee. I do not agree with some of the majority report's fundamental assertions and broad recommendations and endorsements about the concept of stock transfer. Indeed, I am especially concerned by the recommendation that stock transfer should be used as a primary method of investing in housing. I am sure that, during this debate, plenty of speakers will outline different aspects of the many recommendations on which the committee agreed. I will leave them to do so. However, I will say that many of those recommendations deal with best practice and protecting the interests of the public, staff and tenants if any council expresses an interest in stock transfer. Stock transfer is the Government flagship policy. The committee had a duty to study and make recommendations on which aspects central Government and local government should take into account, especially when local authorities are contemplating or being forced to contemplate taking this route. Currently, stock transfer is the only game in town. That is because the Government chooses to make it the only game in town. That is the nub of the argument. I intend to outline the case and witness evidence as presented in the minority commentary.

I refer Cathie Craigie to volume 2 of the committee's report, in particular the evidence that was given by Councillor Charlie Gordon on that point. The reason for the minority report is the fundamental failure of the majority report to address the issue of public investment in housing, particularly what the problem is and what the solution might be. The real problem in housing is  the collapse in public investment. It is true to say that the status quo is not an option; everyone agrees on that. What separates the sides of the debate is the choice of how to move forward. The real issue is the fact that the Treasury rules fail to acknowledge that councils should be able to borrow on the strength of their rental income without having it treated as public expenditure, because it is not central Government borrowing. The real issue is that the Scottish Government does not want to fall out with Big Brother in London and demand commonsense accountancy for housing. The real issue is that wholesale stock transfer is a long route for a short cut. It is too risky, potentially too expensive to tenants and the public purse, and too long-winded and complicated to be worth the candle. We can secure investment in housing to create jobs, tackle dampness and improve stock if the Government acknowledges that the constraint is its fixation with getting public housing off the public expenditure book.

I was pleased that the SNP put housing at the core of its manifesto for election to the Scottish Parliament. We would have generated an additional £170 million; that could have generated private finance and kept public housing in public control. I refer the chamber to the Official Report of 2 February. I asked David Comley of Glasgow City Council's housing department the following question: "Would relaxation of borrowing consents with the same rental income stream allow you to achieve the same level of investment in the same time scale? I understand that Unison argues that, if borrowing consents were relaxed and debts transferred, the same level of investment could be achieved over the same period." I think that that is the same point that Tommy Sheridan just made. David Comley replied: "By the relaxation of borrowing consents do you mean that there would be no control over the council's borrowing and that it could borrow whatever it felt was appropriate?" I replied: "I mean that it could borrow what it could sustain." I ask members to listen carefully to his answer. He said: "That is fair comment. If the current debt were removed  and the council were able to borrow a sum that rental incomes could sustain, yes, we could achieve investment on a faster time scale."—[ Official Report , Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee , 2 February 2000; c 572-73.] The ideologues in this debate are the members of the Government, who insist that tenure must be changed; they make tenure the issue rather than examining the many and varied ways in which we could invest in housing, putting the tenants first and leaving arguments about tenure second. In 1979, borrowing consents in real terms were £629 million. When asked what will happen if the tenants vote no, the minister says that councils will be faced with the same level of borrowing consent that they would have had otherwise. However, I understand that, in 2000-01, the borrowing consent will be £180 million. That is a collapse in public investment. Total housing investment, which ran at more than £1 billion a year in the dark days of the Tory Government, has been halved under the Labour Government. Those figures represent a voluntary public policy that is intended to squeeze investment in the Government's early years so that it can appear as lady bountiful—disguised as Jack McConnell—to give the people back their money in public spending announcements.

My colleagues on West Lothian Council believe that council tax payers are paying more and getting less. It is important that we put public housing back at the top of the agenda.

Please let me continue. I have only a few minutes left.

There is no such thing. Only points of order can be raised with the Presiding Officer. Debt is indeed the problem for councils, but only because they have had to divert rents to make their payments as public sector housing has withered away.

Let me move on. The majority report completely takes on board the Government spin, which says that debt alone is the problem.  We have differences in principle, most of which are about investment and public policy. This is about recognising that, in housing policy, we are constrained by self-imposed London Treasury hoops. It is about what will happen to public housing policy, not just under the current Administration, but in the future. It is about the scale and risk involved. The Minister for Communities may be happy to risk her own career on this venture, but I am not sure that the future of Scottish housing needs to be put on the line when it does not have to be. Ambition and innovation are indeed required, but we had our sufficiency of big-bang solutions for Glasgow and other places in the 20 th century. The same mistakes should not be made this century and our children should not be made to pay for this in 15 years' time, when the stock needs repairs and there is not enough money. I understand that, under the current proposals, in Glasgow the period of 13 to 30 years for loans means that there will not be that—

I would like to move on, please. We are concerned that we are putting all our eggs in one basket. We need a portfolio of solutions. That might indeed include stock transfer, but not wholesale stock transfer. We want not a one-size-fits-all policy, but alternatives to stock transfers. It is irresponsible and anti-democratic not to offer that.

All right.

We have five conditions on Glasgow: area-by-area ballots; the involvement of staff in real consultation; the real involvement of tenants; ensuring that there is investment, should the tenants say no; and ensuring that the debt is serviced now, rather than waiting until after the ballot. Those are five things that could be done in Glasgow now.

I would like to continue. If community involvement and empowerment are to be genuine, they should have happened in the process before now. I welcome the fact that guidance was produced—in August, I think—after the publication of the initial report. I remember that, in the 1980s, the Labour party of old campaigned to allow tenants in new towns who were transferring between landlords to have councils as an option on the ballot. What has changed since then? Perhaps the Conservatives might be able to answer for their new colleagues. Under the proposed housing bill, should not the tenants know before going to the ballot box what new tenancy they will get? That was suggested in the minority report and I hope that the minister will take it on board. I am also concerned that, welcome though it is, the single social tenancy may give eviction rights to private lenders, which would send shivers up tenants' spines. Wholesale stock transfer is likely to be one of the biggest financial commitments that this Parliament will make in its first session. It could mortgage us and future Administrations for 30 years. It could destroy council housing for good and leave any residual council housing as ghetto welfare housing. In considering stock transfer, we keep coming back to the question of what counts and what does not count for public expenditure. That leads the minority group in the committee to suggest that that is the real issue to be addressed. We need housing policy that puts tenants first, that respects tenants and that is made in Scotland for Scottish tenants. We do not need hand-me-down London solutions.

Does the member agree that the most serious and worrying aspect of the exercise is what happens if the tenants vote no? Does she agree that we have yet to receive an adequate answer about what happens when tenants vote no? Does she also agree that the key issue must be the availability of public investment in public housing, regardless of whether tenants choose to go for wholesale stock transfer? There is no answer on plan B. Last week, Jim Wallace could not answer the question. Is the member satisfied with that?

Will Mr Wallace give way?

rose—

Will the member give way?

The people of Glasgow and the rest of Scotland would have more respect for the Government if it listened to what they said and acted accordingly. The minister should answer Tommy Sheridan's question: what additional investment will the people of Glasgow receive if they vote no?

I do not underestimate Margaret Curran's concern about conditions in Glasgow, but does she appreciate that the problems are caused by the agenda of the housing stock transfer proposals, and that the starvation diet of investment in Glasgow over the past few years has added to the burden of poor conditions that she is describing?

I welcome the announcement that there will be a housing bill this year. I welcome it in the same way as I welcomed it when it was announced in June, September and December 1999 and in June 2000. Yet again, we have received the latest in a series of promises on the bill. If there is a serious drafting problem with the bill, it is important that the chamber be told. It is important to remember that, while legislation can and will help Scotland's housing situation, it cannot do it in isolation. Significantly, we have seen no real progress on housing investment. The Government could have been forgiven for late legislation—it might even have had a better reception for what we suspect will be an inadequate bill when it appears—if it had delivered on its housing pledges and if it had delivered desperately needed investment in Scotland's homes and housing that will deal with the record levels of homelessness that it presides over, but it has not. It is clear that NHP stands not for new housing partnership but for no housing progress. The Minister for Communities recently boasted in a written answer to a question I lodged that housing investment over two years in Scotland will be more than £1 billion. She is clearly proud of that figure, but even in the darkest days of Tory rule £1 billion was spent each year—not over two years—between 1989 and 1996. The reality is that this Government, which claims to view housing as a priority, has presided over a catastrophic fall in housing investment. The First Minister presides over record levels of  homelessness, record numbers of families living in damp and cold homes, an acceleration in levels of children with asthma and the daily tragedy of young families being forced out of their communities because of a lack of available accommodation. A bill will not tackle that on its own. Investment is needed. Outside the claustrophobia of Victoria Quay is the real world and the reality of housing policy. I am not alone in thinking so. In The Herald today, Councillor Madge O'Neil, a Drumchapel councillor from the heart of the First Minister's constituency, described the stock transfer proposal in the most unflattering terms. Is the Minister for Communities aware that we might not have a Glasgow stock transfer ballot before the end of 2001? Is she comfortable with such a deadline? Is she aware that, if the ballot keeps slipping, there is the potential for an underspend of £80 million in Glasgow, which has to be spent by March 2002? It is time for the minister to admit that, as far as Glasgow is concerned, the game is up.

The SNP's policy has been to oppose wholesale stock transfer, and that has been its position since we debated the matter at our conference last year. The potential underspend of £80 million would build 2,000 new homes, completely renovate 4,000, re-roof 8,000 or centrally heat and double glaze 16,000. That is money in the budget of the Minister for Communities which she is in danger of losing because of her problems with the Glasgow housing stock transfer. We expected the housing bill to be a national housing bill for all Scotland. Instead, it is likely to turn out to be a more limited social housing bill. The housing bill will bring some welcome measures, but I remind members of what we expected to see, of what was in the green paper "Investing in Modernisation: An Agenda For Scotland's Housing". It included provisions for housing design, additional planning measures, a review of the level of tolerable standards, improving energy efficiency, additional powers for local authorities to tackle substandard housing, flexible tenure systems and seller surveys. None of those is in the consultation document "Better Housing for Scotland's Communities: the Executive's Proposals for the Housing Bill". The housing bill offers a golden opportunity to introduce much-needed measures that can affect  hundreds of thousands of people. Parliament must reclaim the housing bill to ensure that it lives up to the expectations of Scotland. The Government must remember that it is not just about legislation, but about investment in Scotland's housing needs.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Malcolm Chisholm has raised an important point about fuel poverty. If this Parliament is to do anything, it must tackle fuel poverty. Does he share the deep disappointment that many of us felt when we saw the consultation document, which did not mention tackling fuel poverty? It is essential that, if the Government does not include anything about fuel poverty in that bill, we ensure that the Parliament takes ownership of it and makes fuel poverty a key element of the bill.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

As the Liberal Democrat spokesperson, does Robert Brown share the concern that I felt when the Minister for Communities said in her local government statement in June that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities had decided that it would much prefer a housing bill in next year's proposals to a local government electoral reform bill? Does he agree that it would be helpful if local government electoral reform were pushed forward and that we should not use the excuse of the housing bill to delay electoral reform for local government?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it intends to publish its draft housing bill. (S1O-2240)

The minister will remember that she first promised the bill in the first six months of 2000. I ask her to comment on her June statement on local government, when she said: "we expect to publish draft sections of the bill in the next three weeks. We will use the draftsmen's time over the summer to write further sections, with a view to publishing the bill at the beginning of September."— [ Official Report , 8 June 2000; Vol 7, c 165.]  Where is the bill? Why is it not ready? Is it because of the minister's interference in the right to buy? Why has she taken the ambitious proposals from the green paper and turned them into a flawed consultation document? Can the minister explain—

The minister might be aware that three members from three different parties have tried to address mortgage repossession. Does he think it is appropriate that a member's bill will be used to plug a gap in Executive provisions, especially bearing it in mind that there will not be a housing bill before Parliament until November? Will not he provide Executive time and resources to examine the issue, especially experiences relating to section 40 of the Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act 1985? Why is the Executive backing Cathie Craigie's bill rather than Robert Brown's bill, which was the first to be published?

As Karen Whitefield is especially concerned about Lanarkshire, she will know that there are concerns about coronary heart disease in the mining communities of West Lothian, which borders on Lanarkshire. Does she agree with me, and with many members, that the Arbuthnott report desperately needs to be re-examined so that the rates of cancer and coronary heart disease that she is talking about in Lanarkshire can be addressed in other deprived areas such as West Lothian? The problem is that they are not being addressed, and the Executive's initial proposals on the Arbuthnott report are consequently failing Scotland.

I too welcome the minister's statement and the resources. There had been serious concern at one stage that there would not be a distinctive Scottish approach, so we welcome that. I wish to take up the point about active communities being not only about volunteering and to ask what steps the minister will take to ensure that the strategy expands into more active communities. That point has been made to me by  volunteers in the community working on social inclusion partnerships. The problem, especially in the network, is that volunteers who get together to exchange information have a limited budget to allow them to do the vital work they need to do, for example to take part in SIPs. I wish to ask about the TimeBank campaign. It is run by the Home Office, with a lot of co-operation from Scottish organisations, but there is concern that people who registered in February still do not have places allocated to them. Finally, will the minister ask the forum to consider the perceived problem that people on benefits have difficulty volunteering because they have concerns about the impact volunteering would have on their benefits? What representations and monitoring will she undertake to ensure that everybody can volunteer and that we do not have selective volunteering?

I praise the work of the Finance Committee. I am sure that the chamber agrees that the scrutinising of that area of work of the Government is a Herculean task, and that deciphering Government spending plans is a full-time job. We can see that from the report before us. When the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, of which I am a member, examined the budget report, we had specific criticisms both of the presentation of the report and of the general lack of transparency and accountability within the whole budgeting process. We found, however, that the Minister for Communities was very willing to share information when she came to give evidence. That criticism of a lack of transparency is apparent in subsequent reporting of the Finance Committee's report. We need openness, honesty and financial transparency. Under the current regime, ministers are able to pull financial rabbits out of hats, by using the twin strategy of recycling and reallocation. I could give Donald Gorrie 16 examples of such recycling here and now. I will now address some cases relating to the committee's evidence, and I will comment on some of the points that the minister made. Let us consider the example of Glasgow. On day one of the Parliament's stay there, the Minister for Communities reannounced £12.5 million that had been allocated by her predecessor to Glasgow City Council. When she was found out, she tried to say that the matter had been all blown out of proportion. However, all the journalists who were covering the story were under the impression that it was new money.  The second example concerns reallocation. On the last day of the Parliament's stay in Glasgow, the Minister for Communities announced a further £12.5 million for homelessness and rough sleeping projects. However, although the announcement of new money was technically correct, it was reallocated from existing budgets. It was left to the Opposition to find out from the Executive where that money had been allocated from. That information was not presented to us, and the minister's comments today still do not clarify details of the underspend, such as where it came from and why it appeared, or where it will appear now and in future. The Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee made specific reference to that practice in its report on "Investing in You", when it recommended that budgets should differentiate clearly between allocated and non-allocated resources. That recommendation was somewhat prescient, as it came a week before the Minister for Communities made her reallocation announcement. The Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee report also recommended current baselines against targets. Although we have heard comments about a review, end-year flexibility and a continuous process, we also need to track change, which is a strong criticism. Either we have announcements that are open and allocations that are transparent or we do not. If the Government wishes to come before the chamber to say that, after objectively examining comparative models of government, it has decided that the Westminster model is best, let it say so. The minister mentioned strategic allocations, and I want to talk about one specific strategic allocation—capital expenditure. There are larger issues than recycling and reallocation. Huge private finance initiative projects are being undertaken in the areas of health and education. Scotland is the UK guinea pig for new PFI projects: next year, 43 per cent of all PFI projects will be in Scotland, and 34 per cent of all capital spending in Scotland will be privately financed. Over the past year, I have tried wherever possible to suggest to the Minister for Finance and his colleagues that there might be a better way. I have outlined several proposals such as resource accounting and budgeting, arm's-length companies and relaxing certain borrowing requirements. Each time I have had the same response: TINA, or "There is no alternative." The Minister for Finance tells us that we must abide by certain rules; however, he has not told us how much he is prepared to argue for a change to the rules. Will he tell us now how much he will change the rules and challenge the system, to ensure that we can do things differently in Scotland compared  to Westminster? Is he prepared to acknowledge that public opinion is clearly against the PFI and to challenge the Treasury on that issue? Or will he simply tell us that it is a reserved matter? Any debate on the future of public finance must be about transparency, where the arguments are clearly expressed. However, such a debate cannot happen while the Executive and the Minister for Finance continue the TINA principle, that "There is no alternative." There are alternatives, and we must explore capital expenditure issues and other opportunities open to the Parliament. Sooner or later, the Executive will have to wake up to that. In the light of those remarks, I am happy to support the Finance Committee report.

Given that we are concerned about the closure of one folk festival, will Cathy Peattie join me in recognising that Linlithgow folk festival—which started last year and at which, I understand, she performed—is one of the success stories that should be celebrated?

I have a sense of déjà vu. Somehow I feel that I have been here before—but, then, reannouncements are the point of the debate. Let me take members back to Glasgow, to illustrate the point. On the first day that we met in Glasgow, we realised that the £12.5 million of new money was not quite new money. On our last day in Glasgow, we had the announcement of the £12 million "boost"—I remind Mr McCabe that that is a quote from the press release. It is one thing to reannounce the same money for the same policy initiative, but when the Executive starts announcing the same money for different initiatives, it is straying into different territory. The purpose of the SNP amendment is to stop that practice. When I asked the minister where that £12 million had come from, she said: "The additional funding for the rough sleepers initiative that we are announcing today will be met from underspends that are carried forward from the previous financial year. The Minister for Finance will issue a more detailed statement. Those funds are drawn from prudent  financial management across the whole of the Executive's budget".— [ Official Report , 1 June 2000; Vol 6, c 1301.]  We do not know any more than that, because we have not had that more detailed statement, but we must have it. I want to know what that money is not being spent on. Is it teachers, nurses or policemen? Where has the money come from? I welcome the fact that the money will tackle homelessness, but I want to know where it comes from. It is the duty of the Parliament to scrutinise Government. The money belongs not to the Executive, but to the people. This is not about largesse and making announcements about other people's money; we must ensure that we know where the money is coming from and where it is going. The Minister for Communities and her team are the serial offenders.

Yes, she is away. For the Scottish community investment fund, £10 million was announced on 3 November. On 13 March, £10 million was announced, again for that same fund—but, of course, that was a loan. On the domestic abuse fund—welcome as that is—£6 million was announced on 27 October, with only £3 million coming from the Executive and, on 28 March, £5 million was announced, with only £1.2 million coming from the Executive. What about the warm deal? Well, here we go: £12 million—the Executive must have a thing about that figure; the announcements always seem to be about £12 million—was first announced on 20 October 1999 by Frank McAveety. That announcement was not the first, not the second, but the third press release on that amount in six months. What about the rough sleepers initiative? In December 1998, Calum MacDonald announced £14 million. In September 1999, Wendy Alexander announced £6 million. In November, she added the two sums together to make £20 million and the Scottish Executive press release—"Alexander announces next round in fight against rough sleeping"—said: "Wendy Alexander today outlined proposals for spending a further £20 million". It is wrong to claim that such funding is "additional" and "further" to existing funding. The problem concerns policy announcements as well as funding. The licensing of houses of multiple occupancy was first announced on 4 June 1998 by Calum MacDonald, again on 30 September 1999 by Wendy Alexander and yet  again, with the identical press release, on 11 October 1999. It is interesting to find that, since the Tories lodged their motion for this debate, that press release has disappeared from the Executive website. The Executive must have realised the duplication. Keith Raffan mentioned drugs. Mr MacKay announced £1 million for drug action teams in November and December 1999, and in January and February of this year. Such announcements lull people into a false sense of security by making them think that additional moneys are being invested in one of the Parliament's most serious policy issues. The bottom line is trust in politicians. As Bill Aitken pointed out, the Executive is not just letting down the Labour party, the Government and the Parliament, but affecting people's faith in politicians. It must get its act together.

Does the minister agree that in order to have openness in the Parliament we must, when discussing budgets, distinguish between announcements of initial allocations and announcements of distribution of those initial allocations? Does he agree that, for the good of this Parliament and for the good of the Government and so that people understand what the Government is doing, he should ensure that his colleagues make it clear what are initial allocations and what are subsequent distributions?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

Does Bill Aitken agree that part of the problem is to do with attitudes? He uses language such as "allowed" and "opportunity"; perhaps we should be talking about rights. People with disabilities have the right to live in the community. That puts the responsibility on us and on the minister. We must break through that attitude problem.

Performance-related pay is one factor that was not around 30 years ago, which may lead to some differentiation, particularly for women who take time out to have children and then come back to work. The fact that pay levels are determined by performance-related pay rather than by annual negotiations through the union may discriminate against such women. What steps are being taken to monitor the civil service and the Scottish Parliament? I am conscious that there are a number of pregnant women working in the Parliament. I hope that, if they are on a performance-related pay system, they will not be discriminated against when they come back from maternity leave and will be given the full value, rather than a proportion, of any rise.

I declare two interests. I was an employee of Standard Life before I was elected to the Parliament and I am a with-profits policyholder. The issue is crystallising between the long-term and short-term positions. Do people want a quick buck and a long-term loss? As a Parliament, our responsibility is to the long term, not just of this city but of Scotland. Standard Life is a successful company and the fact that its headquarters are in Edinburgh brings great benefit to a range of local interests. A huge number of employees are dependent on that success. Why do companies demutualise? I will refer to David Forfar, a fellow of the Faculty of Actuaries and senior lecturer in actuarial mathematics at Heriot-Watt University, for an independent view. He argues that demutualisation of companies tends to take place for one of several reasons.  The first is the perceived financial weakness of the company; that is not the case with Standard Life. The second is a wish to increase capital in order to increase investment freedom for the investment funds that back with-profits policies; that is not the case with Standard Life. The third is a wish to have access to a wider market than the new owner can provide; that is not the case with Standard Life. The fourth is a judgment by the board, exercised wholly objectively, that demutualisation is in the best interests of the company; that, again, is not the case with Standard Life. Demutualisations that we have heard about in past have tended to take place on the grounds that I have just outlined. That is not the case with Standard Life and there is no strong business case for demutualisation. It comes down to a short-term raid, and the long-term damage could be substantial. I will focus on one specific danger. Because of the success of Standard Life, we must recognise that, should it demutualise, there is a strong risk of a takeover—not necessarily by European competitors, but from America and further afield. The final decision will be with the with-profits policyholders, but this Parliament has a responsibility to take an interest in the long-term future of a successful company in Scotland. The risk of takeover, to which the company may not have drawn attention and which may not have been highlighted in coverage so far, is something that we should be acutely aware of. We should recognise the success of the company and show solidarity with the staff who have presented the petition. They include constituents from across Lothian and beyond. We should send out a message of support for the principle of mutuality. I, for one, will be voting no to demutualisation when I cast my ballot tomorrow.

I have pleasure in speaking to and moving the amendment in my name. In preparing my remarks, I had cause to double-check some previous announcements by the Minister for Communities—not because of any lack of trust, but because I have found that it sometimes pays to check. On the first day of the first meeting of the Parliament in Glasgow, the minister announced her first £12 million of new money. We then found out that the money was not quite new. Today, at the last meeting of the Parliament in Glasgow, the minister returns to the chamber with another new £12 million. Or is it new? She has said that it comes from underspend, and the fact that there was underspend last year means that there are services that could have been delivered sooner but have not been. I understand that the minister had her handbag stolen. I was very sorry to hear that, but she obviously found a purse. However, the question is: whose purse is it? Is it Susan Deacon's? Does it contain money from the education budget? Where is the money coming from?

No. I want to move on. Remember November? There was an announcement of a new extra £20 million, but that money had been announced by the minister the previous month, and her predecessor, Calum Macdonald, had also announced that money some months previously. Today, we had the announcement of a £25  million "boost". We hear that £12 million is new, but it is not really new because it is last year's money. The £13 million is a postponed announcement. A question has to be asked: if we are talking about slippage expenditure, where will the continuing revenue costs come from? I do not raise those matters simply to score points with the Minister for Communities; I raise them to demonstrate that, if the SNP in opposition is occasionally called cynical in its attitude towards Government announcements, it is because we have due cause. We must question and scrutinise to separate the spin from the fiction. We must challenge the Government when it says that no one need sleep rough. That is indeed something to be aspired to, but I am concerned that, under the wording of the Executive's proposals, if enough hostel places are provided, but people are still sleeping rough, that might count as a success. I sincerely hope that that is not the case. We must also challenge the moves to make the policy on rough sleeping the complete homelessness policy. The tackling of the inappropriate use of bed-and-breakfast accommodation is welcome, but this is not necessarily about rough sleeping. Rough sleeping is the most acute form of homelessness, but we have to remember hidden homelessness. There is a difference between spin and fiction. When we are dealing with issues such as homelessness and rough sleeping and are asked to put aside party political differences, it becomes all the more important that we have a true picture.

It is to be commended that we are raising the profile. That is not the issue. We welcomed the rough sleepers initiative announcement in February; we welcomed the homelessness task force report. Our responsibility is to make sure that the Executive is using public finances in the best way. Our amendment tries to be reasonably constructive. We have removed the word "welcomes" and inserted "notes" in the opening sentence because we believe that we should welcome achievement, not ambition. We note that the commitment has been moved back from an original deadline of 2002 because there has been no satisfactory explanation from the Executive as to why it has moved away from that deadline. I understand that it wants more time for Glasgow, but that does not apply elsewhere. We inserted  the section on challenge funding because we believe, in common with many members, that it damages the ability to deliver the resources where they are most needed. We inserted the section on funding because we believe that the overall levels of funding for public and social housing in Scotland are dangerously low. We make those points not to undermine what the Executive is doing, but to raise valid issues. Bearing in mind what the minister said about the delay, I want to refer to the situation in Edinburgh, where the challenge funding element has caused difficulties. The city council has been involved in a lengthy bidding process to tackle its rough sleeping problems. In February this year, I wrote to Jackie Baillie to express serious concerns about reports that I had received from homelessness workers, that there were now fewer hostel places in Edinburgh than there were when the rough sleepers initiative was introduced and that hostel closures were causing extreme concern. I received a sympathetic reply from her, stating that she was aware of the problem and was working towards resolving the difficulties. Four months on, that saga continues. I now understand that Leith House is to be refurbished and will come on stream, but I raised the issue of Leith House in the housing debate in January. My concern about the delay is that the bids from the council for that service and other complex needs services were made in November and January, and were identified two years ago. If we want the homelessness policy and rough sleepers initiative money to respond to need, those services should have been provided already. I hope that the Executive will remove the challenge funding element from funding of services for rough sleepers. I was told in February that the problem with the new hostel was planning permission. That was not the case—the problem was funding. The City of Edinburgh Council has been unable to acquire premises and to apply for planning permission because it did not have the funding that was needed. It got it today and that is great—but it did not have it until today. I am pleased that the complex needs bid for Edinburgh has now been accepted, but it falls £100,000 short of the original bid, which will mean difficult decisions. It should be done by need, not by challenge funding. We all want to end rough sleeping and we want a cross-party consensus on that aim. However, that consensus must be based on robust analysis and on an honest appraisal of what works and what does not. The visible homeless problem of rough sleeping must be put in the context of hidden homelessness and general housing policy. We support the Conservative amendment and what the Executive is doing, but through our  amendment we want to send a clear message to the Executive that it is heading in the right direction but is a long way from achieving the objective of an end to rough sleeping. I am particularly pleased to see Glasgow's problems recognised and money released to address them, but I hope that the motivation is to address the very real problems in Glasgow and not to bail out a minister in trouble. I move amendment S1M-921.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to "recognises" and insert: "notes the commitment of the Scottish Executive to achieving its aim that no-one should have to sleep rough by the end of this session of the Parliament; notes that this commitment has been moved back from an original deadline of 2002, and believes that the challenge funding nature of the Rough Sleepers Initiative aligned with a general fall in housing resources is hindering the ability of the Executive to meet its target of ending rough sleeping; however recognises".

I welcome what the minister has said, but would like to point out that—contrary to her press release—there is not a £25 million boost for rough sleepers, but a £12 million boost. Where did that £12 million come from? Was it diverted from the Scottish Homes budget? We want to help rough sleepers, but taking money out of a budget that is meant to provide housing for families who are the hidden homeless will have a negative impact on homelessness. Can she reassure us that the money did not come from Scottish Homes?

It is of deep concern that the Government's management in the past year has meant that it has not allocated finances that could have helped housing, health or education. The announcement of the other £13 million is a delayed announcement from February. There must be concern that certain services were not delivered last year because of the underspending. People needed the money six months or a year ago. What we are getting from the Executive is delay and dither.

Will the minister change her researcher, so that she can get her facts about the SNP straight? The minister will be aware that the Scottish Executive wrote to Fife Council suggesting that it should not invest in housing now in order to provide an incentive for tenants to vote yes in its ballot on partial stock transfer. Can the minister tell us whether the same advice has been given to Glasgow City Council? Is Glasgow being starved of cash to provide tenants with an incentive to vote yes in the minister's ballot?

The minister mentioned housing associations and tenants taking control in Glasgow. In today's debate, we have not talked about the important work that housing associations have already done in regenerating Glasgow. Such organisations—for example, Partick Housing Association—are very concerned about the impact of the extension of the right to buy to housing associations. Will the minister reassure those who have worked so hard to produce regeneration programmes for housing in the city that the Executive will either abandon the policy of the extension of the right to buy or make concessions to put them at ease?

I am pleased to be debating in Glasgow. As a Lothians MSP, I acknowledge that Glasgow's problems are Scotland's problems. When I saw today's headlines announcing £12.5 million for Glasgow, I thought that it was a drop in the ocean, although it is needed and therefore welcome. However, I checked my records and discovered that on 25 February 1999, the very same £12.5 million was announced by the minister at the time, Calum Macdonald. What breathtaking arrogance it is for the minister, on the first day that the Scottish Parliament meets in Glasgow, to make an announcement that was already made last year by Calum Macdonald. The headlines in the Evening Times are an absolute scandal. I want the Minister for Communities to return to the chamber today and to admit it if that was a re-announcement.

Perhaps I might take an intervention from her deputy, who happened to be in Glasgow City Council when there was the first opportunity to announce the £12.5 million. Will Mr McAveety take the opportunity to tell me that this is not a re-announcement?

Answer the question.

There we have it—it is the same announcement. The same—

Same announcement.

The minister arrives. That was the same announcement, but it took 15 months to come up with the proposal for where the money should go. I will take the opportunity of looking at the stock transfer proposals. We are now into the fourth year of a project which, having been dreamed up by Raymond Robertson, reinvented by Malcolm Chisholm, passed on to the said Calum Macdonald and taken over by Wendy Alexander, is in danger of surviving more ministers than Fidel Castro has survived American Presidents. In the middle of all that drift and dither, there is no investment in Glasgow. In 1996-97, the last year of the Tory Administration, the city had borrowing consents of £78 million; that figure is now down to £46 million. That is more than £30 million less than what the Tories gave, and the Tories were never friends of Glasgow. By my estimate, if the Minister for Communities can create a minor miracle and manages to get to a ballot in the spring or summer of 2001, and provided that the tenants vote in that ballot, investment will start in 2002-03, six years after Labour was elected to government. That is six years of stalled investment in Glasgow and six years when the tenants have not had the benefit—

I am sorry, but I took a lengthy intervention earlier. Some tenants in Glasgow—

The minister should have been here. Some tenants— [Interruption.] I am sorry, but I have already taken an intervention. Some tenants in Glasgow will have to wait 15 years after the initial promise to renovate their homes. For those who are interested in mental arithmetic, had Glasgow City Council been allowed to maintain a borrowing consent of £78 million, it would have been able to complete a package of £1.2 billion of investment over the same period—to 2012.

I am very conscious of time, and I want to wind up.

Where was she? [Interruption.]

If the coalition is serious about empowering tenants, and if its proposals are so good, it should not shy away from giving them the choice to stay with the council. If the coalition is serious about the investment, it should start the investment programme now, not in two years' time.

I am conscious of time. I shall take an intervention from Ms Alexander, to see whether, like Frank McAveety, she says that it is the same announcement.

I think that the minister has admitted that it is the same money and that it is not new money. We want Glasgow to flourish and we want investment in Glasgow, but there are a variety of ways in which that can be done. It does not have to be in one leap, one bound, one ballot, one mass stock transfer. There are other ways to get investment into Glasgow.

I am concluding. The regeneration of Glasgow's crumbling public stock is a priority. Let us not repeat the mistakes of the past. Glasgow has many monuments to past, big-bang solutions. Before we add to that list, let us stand back and take a long, hard look at what is proposed. What we do not need is a housing minister who comes to this city with second-hand announcements and hollow promises.

I respect the sincerity of the member's argument, but does it not distress him that between new Labour coming to power in 1997 and 2002, which is the first opportunity to get investment in, Glasgow will have lost out on £150 million because the Executive, and the new Labour Government before it, has cut borrowing consent in Glasgow?

Does Robert Brown recognise that in 1990-91, City of Glasgow District Council had £162 million available to invest in housing? That is now down to £46 million, which makes today's announcement of £12.5 million a drop in the ocean of what has been lost. If the previous level of investment had been sustained for the period that is proposed under the stock transfer scheme—until 2012—we would be getting the same amount of investment that is envisaged under that scheme now, rather than in 10 years' time.

Bill Aitken mentioned his concern about council tax payers in Glasgow. Is he aware that the Government's proposal is not to transfer the debt in Glasgow, but to give money to Glasgow to service the debt? Should any future leader or Administration decide that the housing budget will be cut and the money will not be provided, Glasgow council tax payers will have to pick up the tab.

Does the minister agree that her proposals, which have not been finalised, would release £1.6 billion over a period of 10 years? Is she aware that, between 1982 and 1997, this city had £2 billion invested in it? On that basis, what makes her great, grand project any different from the failed policies of the 1980s?

To ask the Scottish Executive what estimate it has made of the proposed Glasgow housing association's VAT liability. (S1O-1694)

The minister will be aware of the Ernst & Young report, which states that the VAT liability is likely to be £200 million. Does he recognise that the UK Treasury is unlikely to allow the books to be cooked to mitigate that liability? Does he admit that, if the Glasgow scheme is done on a private basis, it could cost £200 million more than if it were done through the public purse?

On behalf of the Scottish National party, I welcome the minister's statement, particularly the tone of his language and the emphasis that he placed on prevention, treatment and care. All members of the Scottish Parliament who want the Parliament to achieve something realise that we must tackle the issue of drug misuse. Bearing in mind the number of drug-related deaths in Glasgow, I should like to hear from the minister how soon he thinks that the moneys that he is putting on the table for prevention and rehabilitation will be available. This week, I visited Brenda House, which is one of the few places in Scotland that is available to women who seek rehabilitation. There is consternation over the number of women who have suffered because of the problems in Glasgow. Having talked to people at Brenda House, I am concerned about what will happen to the current support from local authorities for places such as Brenda House. There are concerns about how quickly the money that the minister has made available will reach those in need. Following the drugs debate in January, it was announced that social inclusion partnerships would have access to money for work in that area, but the announcement on where that money would go was made only two weeks ago. I welcome what the minister said about information and finding out what is happening on the ground. The position of most of us in the Parliament was reflected in the January debate, when Richard Simpson called for a cross-party committee. The debate had a different tone from what would have been likely at Westminster. I welcome the minister's recognition of the prevention and rehabilitation issues, but when will the money that has been announced reach those who are in need now? The evidence on the ground is that it is needed now; people cannot wait for things to happen in six months, 12 months or two years. We welcome the money being made  available, but I should like to hear from the minister when the distribution will take place.

rose—

Allan Wilson has unwittingly just offended Ireland, the Netherlands, Belgium and other countries by his definition of what he considers normal within Europe. One year on, we have a Parliament, but it is a limited Parliament and not an independent Parliament—yet. We are already seeing the frustrations and contradictions that come from the constitutional settlement that we have reached so far. Just because we have a settlement does not mean that everything is settled and that we have reached our final constitutional destination. The Scottish people are ambitious for this Parliament; they want it to have more powers and to be all it can be. The SNP is ambitious for Scotland; it is ambitious for Scotland to use all the powers it can and to be all it can be. That is why we believe in independence. Remember the words of the consultative steering group, which were used when the Parliament opened: sharing of power; accessibility; equality of opportunity; accountability; and transparency in decision making. We are now one year on. What is the state of the nation? Is the Executive allowing Scotland to be all it can be? The real measure of the state of the nation is the acid test of what people experience in their lives—for their children in schools, for their parents needing health care and for the homeless needing housed. On accountability, why is it that in the NHS we have doctors working in our hospitals with equipment that is old and dilapidated? Our vision for an independent Scotland is one in which the NHS is at the cutting edge and is a state-of-the-art modern health service that would compete with the best in terms of provision; it would not be struggling to make ends meet with emergency cash handouts from Westminster. In a written answer on Tuesday, Susan Deacon admitted that in the past year alone, £40 million that could have been spent on equipment such as scanners, X-ray machines, intensive care machines, dialysis machines and incubators had been raided to pay for basic services and, in the words of the Scottish Executive, to help NHS trusts meet their financial targets. The Executive has been robbing Peter to pay Paul to keep the health service going. That is what has been happening in the first year of the Scottish Parliament.

Can Dr Simpson assure me that doctors working in hospitals are satisfied that they have the modern equipment they need? Staff are having to work with old equipment—or no equipment—to paper over the cracks in funding. Labour's conscience has finally caught up with it, so for 2000-01 it has decided that it will stop the practice of allowing capital to be shifted to revenue funding. Since new Labour came to power, £117 million has been raided. Now, money for the NHS has been prised from the people's war chest—out of the hands of Gordon Brown. Will it be new money, or will it simply replace the money that has been taken previously from capital equipment accounts? The Minister for Health and Community Care has spent the past year saying that everything is fine and that there is enough money in the health service. Why, then, does Tony Blair caw the feet fae under her by admitting that there is a problem and saying, "Fair cop, the NHS needs more"? We need transparency and we need assurances.

No, I want to move on. To use a medical analogy, the Government cut back on life support services for the NHS in its early years by embracing Tory spending. It is now trying, a year before an election, to resuscitate the patient with cash handouts and expects to be congratulated on bringing it back to life. If we want public services, we must pay for them. How many schools are planned to close? Why were only 108 houses built in 1998? We want real powers for a real Parliament so that we can decide how much we want to borrow and how much we want to spend—so that we can decide on our priorities, from our finances, for our needs. That is what independence is all about. This Executive is not even making proper use of the powers that it has, whether it be to issue public bonds or to relax 75 per cent clawback. No wonder the Parliament wants more powers. No wonder 62 per cent of the people want more powers.

I am winding up. We can tinker at the edges and make minor improvements, but we need full independence. Independence for Scotland is right, it is just and it is needed now. The state of this nation needs to be a state of independence.

Will Mr Wallace give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will detail the membership of the board of the proposed Glasgow housing association. (S1O-1622)

Will the minister admit that it has taken almost a year to come up with the so-called Glasgow housing association and that there is a danger that it will have an in-built Labour majority—the mirror image of Glasgow City Council—particularly if the tenants representatives come from the hand-picked council neighbourhood forums? What assurance can she give that under her proposed housing association the political hands in management will not be the same as those who have mismanaged Glasgow housing in the past?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it intends to publish the Ernst & Young report "Better Homes—Stronger Communities—a report on the Key Financial Issues" commissioned as part of the Glasgow stock transfer process. (S1O-1590)

I am grateful that, with SNP prompting, the minister has made that report available; it has been paid for by the public purse. Will the minister confirm that the first million-pound report has been consigned to the dustbin? How much did the Ernst & Young report cost? On the subject of value for money, will she confirm that the report states that her grand plan will cost an extra £200 million in VAT payments, and that what we are seeing is a bonanza for consultants and for the Westminster Treasury?

We have had a debate of some quality this morning. Listening to the minister, however, I experienced a sense of déjà vu. A number of years ago, Michael Forsyth, a Conservative minister, used the same arguments when talking about the devolution settlement. Obviously, there are more similarities between the two men than simply the Stirling connection. We have had quality speeches today, but not from everyone. Listening to speeches by members of the Executive parties, I often think that they fail to understand the nature of parliamentary democracy. They seem to expect the Opposition not to criticise or scrutinise the Executive and not to oppose wrong-headed and ill thought out policies. It is time that the Executive parties stopped girning and started respecting the SNP's role as the official Opposition. As the Opposition, we are dedicated to the success of this Parliament but are relentless in our pursuit of the best possible deal for this country. I will remind the chamber of Andrew Wilson's speech. He quoted from the Scottish Constitutional Convention document "Towards Scotland's Parliament", which said of the block grant settlement: "It would be a minimalist approach that is neither radical in concept nor conducive to accountability as it would mean that the Parliament would be more accountable to Westminster than the Scottish people and would be even less financially independent than local authorities". In yesterday's debate, it was suggested that some of the rooms in the new Parliament could be sponsored. I am sure that companies such as Coca Cola or Pepsi will not be invited to sponsor the Parliament, but I suggest that the SNP's proposals would give us a Holyrood Max, whereas the Executive's proposals will deliver not even a Holyrood Lite but, because the devolved powers are not being used properly, a Holyrood Super Lite. We should reflect on some of the comments that were made today about the European context. We should look at other countries to see what they can do that we cannot. Alex Neil talked about Scotland being a net contributor. The figures contained in the "Government Expenditure and Revenue in Scotland" report show that Scotland pays 9.3 per cent of Government revenues from a population that is 8.5 per cent of the United Kingdom's population. We do not have a structural deficit. Nicola Sturgeon talked about what we could achieve if we had the powers and freedoms that other Parliaments all over the world enjoy and take for granted. She was right to say that we are talking about raising our sights. I agree with Murray Tosh, who is no longer  present, that we should consider the Barnett formula. Robert Brown let the cat out of the bag when he said that we should have a better fiscal system. That is what we are suggesting: not to stay where we are, but to think about where we could be. It should be remembered that, according to opinion polls, 68 per cent of Scots want this Parliament to have more powers. In my speech two weeks ago, I called for local authorities to be freed from the narrow confines of Treasury borrowing consents. I said: "Where a council has a sound business plan and a proven track record, it should be allowed to borrow what it requires to get the job done. Even local authorities that did not pass that test could set up arm's-length companies to enable that within the current regime without changing the existing Treasury rules."— [ Official Report , 23 March 2000; Vol 5, c 886.]  I was pleased to be joined in that call by the Deputy Prime Minister, John Prescott, who said in the House of Commons on Tuesday: "Local authorities will be given new borrowing powers to invest in their housing and retain full ownership where they put their housing management in arms-length companies and demonstrate an excellent record of management through best-value inspection."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 4 April 2000; Vol 347, c 814.] The similarity with my speech is uncanny—I was not aware that the Deputy Prime Minister followed my speeches with such diligence. The option would be on balance sheet; it could be on balance sheet under devolution. However, with more powers, and with the ability to impose borrowing consents on local authorities, this Parliament would have much more scope. The infrastructure debate has moved on, but the agreement continues. Two weeks ago, I also said: "There is no reason why local authorities cannot borrow the money that they require, apart from the fact that the Executive is not prepared to negotiate with the Treasury or to consider new and imaginative ways in which to help local authorities meet their funding needs."— [ Official Report , 23 March 2000; Vol 5, c 887.]  On Tuesday, Mr Prescott said: "On local borrowing and my influence on the Treasury, I am accused, on the one hand, of having no influence with the Treasury and, on the other, of getting something from the Treasury that I should not have received. What I achieved for local authorities was the right to borrow."—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 4 April 2000; Vol 347, c 818.] Even under devolution, the Executive has not managed to use its powers to influence the Treasury in that way. That is what I have been calling for and what COSLA has been calling for—the right to borrow.

No. The minister will realise that there has been a net cut, after inflation, in the borrowing consents that are available for housing. Let us consider the use of expenditure powers. There should be a sensible, responsible and prudent use of public finances. We should not mortgage to the hilt our children's future, through expensive private finance initiatives, which are forming an unhealthy and disproportionate percentage of public finance. Figures show that 34 per cent of Scotland's finances are spent on PFI schemes and that, in 2001-02, 43 per cent of all the UK's PFI schemes will be in Scotland. Scotland is a PFI guinea pig. In the debate a fortnight ago, Peter Peacock described the SNP's proposals—which now, interestingly, have been adopted by John Prescott—as "unachievable, unsustainable and unprincipled". Will he now use the same language to describe the Deputy Prime Minister's announcement as "unachievable, unsustainable and unprincipled"?

If Malcolm Chisholm wants to pretend to be Peter Peacock, I am happy to take his intervention.

No. I am arguing that the expenditure could be on or off balance sheet. If it were on balance sheet, Jack McConnell would be required to negotiate with the Treasury, as John Prescott admitted to doing. I would like to move on to some of the other contributions to this debate. Robert Brown raised a point on the Holyrood project and taxation. We are not talking about not paying taxes. If we had the powers to allow us to borrow for the Holyrood project, those taxes could be recycled into health, education and housing. I agree with David Davidson that stealth taxes are harming the Scottish economy. The high value of the pound is harming the Scottish economy. Grampian Foods yesterday announced the loss of  another 99 jobs, and Murray Tosh talked about the situation in the electronics industry. We have a strong manufacturing base in Scotland, which is being harmed by the high value of the pound.

Taxation can be organised in a variety of ways, such as having a mix of taxation. The SNP believes in transparency in taxation, which we are not getting at the moment. It is important that we agree that devolution is about using devolved powers. If the Executive wants to use those powers to introduce more stealth taxes or to cut taxes, that is fine. If it wants to use what powers the Parliament has to stay put, to move forward, to move back or to change the mix of taxation, that would be the Executive's choice, which it would be able to put to the Scottish people. All we are asking is for the Scottish people to be given the choice and the flexibility that we are proposing. It was depressing to hear the arguments used by Janis Hughes, as they were the same arguments that the Tories used against the Labour party during the devolution process. Devolution is now the status quo. The choice is whether we stop at that. If we do, we will stagnate and we will never move forward. I offer the Executive parties a challenge—or an opportunity. They do not have to come the full way towards the SNP's policy of independence—I do not expect them to—but they should at least have the courage to try to expand the powers of the Parliament. The theme of today's debate is fiscal autonomy, and the debate has rightly concentrated on the many powers that this Parliament should have, but does not. However, fiscal autonomy means more than that—it means the ability to think as an independent Parliament that could act on its own priorities according to its own needs and be a Government for Scotland, not just a department of London government in Scotland.

I am tempted to ask when George Lyon expects to get the promotion for which he is obviously auditioning. Does Mr Lyon agree that because of the Barnett squeeze, health spending will be increased by 4.9 per cent in Scotland, compared with 6.1 per cent throughout the UK and 6.3 per cent in England? Is not that evidence that Scotland is not getting a fair share because of the Barnett squeeze?

Will Mr Davidson give way?

Name them.

Will Mr McConnell give way?

The Barnett squeeze has an adverse effect on public sector pay. Could the minister tell me whether the settlement for public sector workers in Scotland will be more or less than for public sector workers in England? I understand that, because of the Barnett squeeze's impact on the budget, the settlement in Scotland will be far less. Public sector workers in Scotland will be paying for the problems caused by the public sector cuts in the minister's budget.

Will the member give way?

I thank the Green party and Robin Harper for bringing the motion to Parliament today. The Scottish National party supports the motion as a first step to building a cross-party consensus on the eradication of fuel poverty. The focus of my speech will be on trying to build that consensus. The first step towards reaching that consensus is recognising the scale and severity of the problem. There is some concern about the Executive amendment's self-congratulatory tone and the absence of targets. There is a perception that the Executive is denying the scale of the problem. The Government must address the pertinent points that were made by the Scottish Warm Homes Campaign.  The fuel poor are defined as those who have to spend a disproportionate amount of their income on heating and hot water. In Scotland, 506,000 households spend 10 per cent or more of their income on heating and hot water. Excluding all other fuel costs, such as lighting, cooking and leisure, there are more than 500,000 people in Scotland who are fuel poor. Fuel poverty in an energy-rich country is a scandal. Scotland is the only country whose people have become poorer after oil was discovered. We have an opportunity today to make a collective pledge to put an end to that situation across all housing: private, public, rented and owned. I will put forward an idea that was first floated at the annual general meeting of Energy Action Scotland: a warm homes amendment to the upcoming housing bill. I challenge the Executive to build into the bill at the outset energy efficiency measures, preferably complemented by targets. A warm homes amendment would lay down in law the minimum standard that all homes would have to reach before being put on the market for sale or for rent. That minimum standard could be phased in over a number of years and would aim to lift all Scottish households out of fuel poverty within a given time frame. It is unfortunate that the Executive's commitment to end fuel poverty by 2007 has, as Robin Harper said, been removed. Currently in Scotland 340,000 homes have a national home energy rating of 2 or below—that is, approximately 70 per cent of the total. A warm homes amendment could impose a legal requirement on anyone who is renting or selling a dwelling to ensure that that dwelling has an NHER of 3 or above by, for instance, 2007. The same amendment could set a deadline of 2015 for all homes to have a minimum NHER of 6, which would involve a further 1.6 million Scottish homes. That would mean that all housing in Scotland would reach a target that is currently enjoyed by only 20 per cent of dwellings. The amendment could set a realistic NHER target that would be achievable by the end of this Parliament's second session, and a longer-term target of an NHER of 6 for the middle of the next decade. I realise that there are potential flaws in the proposal, and that we will have to debate the issue. Because of age or design faults, some properties will never reach those targets. For some properties, the level of investment would not be economic, but solutions must be found for those properties. A seven-year lead time for all properties to reach a minimum NHER of 3 is generous, and a 15-year lead time to reach an NHER of 6 is achievable with political will. That method puts the responsibility on all of us to find a way, and responsibility on the Government to ensure that the private finance that  it proposes to bring into the public sector is not spread too thinly, to look good in the context of the political numbers game. When the valuations are made as part of the stock transfer process—which will happen over the next year—we need the minister's assurance that fuel poverty and energy efficiency issues will be considered from the outset. Home owners should be made responsible, and must be motivated to invest in their property. I foresee the estate agent's advertisement proudly boasting the NHER of a property as an incentive to potential buyers. It is unfortunate that Frank McAveety did not talk about making that part of the legislative process for independent guaranteed surveys. Responsibility should also be imposed on the private sector rental market, to ensure that the valuable homes that it supplies are of an adequate quality. Future Governments should take responsibility for ensuring that parties such as the SNP, which seek to become the Government, include in their housing manifesto a worked-out plan of the way in which they intend to reach the legal standard. The warm homes amendment that could be promoted by this Parliament would set a national benchmark for us all to measure up to: a national ambition that is taken out of party politics and held up as an example of what the Parliament can achieve. It is a cliché in political debate to say that no one has a monopoly on truth or good ideas. However, let this Parliament monopolise the issue of fuel poverty and eradicate it. I urge members to support the Green party motion. If this Parliament can deliver warmth in this cold, damp country of ours, it will have proved its worth.

Will the minister give way?

I think that Robin Harper would take this position as well: the Scottish National party welcomes the warm deal. The issue is this: do we acknowledge that the problem with the warm deal is basically one of insulation? It is not just about tackling dampness. There is no provision, for example, to have central heating systems that would really start to tackle fuel poverty in the way that we want. Will the minister please acknowledge that this is a problem, and review the operations? We are not getting what we could out of the warm deal.

Can the minister confirm that, on 13 January, in the housing debate, she said that, if rural Scotland were to get the lion's share of the 6,000 new homes funded by the Scottish Homes development, there would be no difficulty in extending the right to buy to housing associations in rural areas? As the 1,200 homes that she has  announced is not the lion's share of 6,000, and given that she has already climbed down on the issue of right to buy in rural areas, will she consider now abandoning that whole policy?

In my introductory speech, I set out five proposals. Some of them could be done using devolved powers and some require co-operation with Westminster. Which of those five positive and constructive ideas will the minister  accept? I understand from Murray Tosh that the Conservatives are interested in at least two and a half of them. Among the Labour back benchers there are members who recognise that the ideas are positive and constructive.

On the budget, will Mike Watson agree that the moneys that have been announced are, in the main, revenue moneys? That is the nub of the problem. The SNP wants to address capital investment and the problems of infrastructure—bricks and mortar—which are the keys to rebuilding Scotland, although revenue is important.

Does Mr Henry recall that, in my concluding remarks, I gave five suggestions for practical things that could be done, the majority of which could be delivered under a devolved settlement? We are challenging the Executive to take on board those five constructive ideas. Mr Henry is right to say that this devolved Parliament is not enough for Scotland. We have to be independent. Which of our five ideas does he support and which does he reject?

I referred to the SNP's spending commitment of £175 million from before the election. It was to be seed money for a homes and communities public service trust that would inject the private finance the minister mentioned, but in such a way that housing and the responsibility for access to housing remained a public responsibility and was not hived off as a private arrangement. That is a practical example of how public service trusts can deliver the affordable homes mentioned in the motion. Perhaps the member could comment on that.

It could be done with devolution.

When the SNP first suggested that one of the ways of dealing with housing debt in Scotland was to transfer the debt to the national Government, the suggestion was described as fantasy economics. Now the Executive has adopted it. Will the minister admit that she has adopted that principle and that the way in which she will fund transfer of debt will apply to this Parliament, the next, and the next? It will be funded from the proposals that are being put forward now. It is the same money and the same proposals. Does the minister agree?

The SNP's position is absolutely clear: there is a role for private finance in housing. Lenders who have discussed the Glasgow situation with us have told us that the loans might be so large that they would have to issue bonds. Can the Government not inject private capital and still make sure that the ownership of assets remains in the public sector? People want public assets that are owned by the public sector. I admit that housing needs private finance, but the Government has to think differently and creatively about generating such investment.

This debate is about rebuilding Scotland. It is about the investment in Scotland's infrastructure that this week's budget failed to address. The purpose of today's debate is to put into a proper context the question of how best to fund Scotland's public service infrastructure. The objective of the Scottish National party in lodging the motion is to show that, far from delivering the optimum level of public service within the devolved settlement, the Lib-Lab coalition is selling the people of Scotland short. Devolution was meant to be about home rule, but this Government is not even operating the home rules well, in Scotland's interest, and the away rules of Westminster place intolerable restrictions on our abilities as a nation. Scotland needs to be rebuilt—we need houses, schools and roads, which must be built well, making good use of public money. I will speak about the area in which I work most—housing. Since 1997, new Labour has spent £116 million on new housing partnerships. In the first two years, only 695 units were completed—either modernised or new build. If that same amount had been spent by local authorities, based on an average of 20 units of new-build housing per million spent, a total of 2,320 units would have been completed in the same period, or 7,500 units would have been fully modernised, or 23,000 homes would have had new windows and new central heating. Council house building has almost ground to a halt. In 1998, the last year for which figures are available, there were only 86 new-build council houses in Scotland.  According to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the 75 per cent clawback rule for local authority capital receipts has meant that 30,000 houses have not been modernised; 5,500 window replacements have been cancelled; and 9,500 central heating systems have not been installed. The 75 per cent clawback rule was brought in by Michael Forsyth, continued by the Labour party and carried on by the Lib-Lab Administration. Those figures are by no means unique if one examines the spending records of the governing coalition. We are told in press release after press release about its spending plans—money is announced, reannounced and announced again. Cuts are trumpeted as increases and standstill budgets are heralded as breakthroughs. It is the policy of spin over substance and the politics of massage and finesse. When members debated the local government finance settlement recently, the discomfort on both Labour and Liberal Democrat back benches was palpable. Labour and Liberal Democrat members knew that the SNP's accusation was accurate. They knew that the settlement was not a real-terms increase, but a real-terms cut. They knew that the accusation was true because they saw the reality in their own constituencies. If any one of them was unaware of the situation, the humiliating defeat of the coalition parities in the Ayr by-election would have brought even the most obstinate believer in Lib-Lab spin to their senses. The accusation that is often levelled by members of the Lib-Lab coalition against me and other SNP members during these debates is that we refuse to say how things would be paid for or that we make rash spending promises. We are either damned as profligates or condemned as cowards. Nothing could be further from the truth. I am tempted to use the intemperate language of the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning in the post offices debate to describe the accusations levelled at the SNP. I fear that, if I were to do so, I would fall foul of the Presiding Officer. Before I enter the substance of the debate, I wish to challenge some of the allegations, so that those who peddled them can take the opportunity to retract what they have said and to put the record straight. I refer first to Mr Raffan. On 16 January, he listed a series of promises that the SNP had allegedly made. He said that I had committed the SNP to an extra £175 million on housing. He failed to mention that the £175 million was part of our spending commitments and had been costed at the most recent election. He added that figure to an alleged list of SNP commitments in the full knowledge that the commitment was merely a reflection of a manifesto pledge.  We should examine closely what is being said. Both the Minister for Finance and the Minister for Communities have said in the chamber that the SNP would write off the estimated £920 million of Glasgow City Council's housing debt. We have long presented a case that, under independence, we would transfer the local authority debt. Under devolution—

I will continue. Under devolution, we have said that if we were to use the same funding mechanism as the Executive to relieve that debt—not a penny more, not a penny less—it would free up to the city council an extra £104 million in revenue every year. That revenue figure, along with the existing £20 million that Glasgow currently spends on capital from revenue released from earlier debt packages, would give an annual capital spend for the city of £124 million. That would bring in more than £1.2 billion of investment over 10 years, without stock transfer and at no greater cost than the current Executive proposal.

I am glad that the member has identified that the SNP will be the Administration. I am more than happy to go through the spending commitments that I have made—[MEMBERS: "Answer the question."] We are offering real, constructive opposition, real alternatives and real suggestions. That is the theme which I wish to carry forward today. I would like to carry out a critique of the current Administration. This week, the Minister for Communities announced what she described as great news for Scotland's tenants. That great news was that local authorities would be allowed to borrow the princely sum of £155 million. Not only was that borrowing consent announced as if it was extra money from the Government, but it was announced as if it was an increase. In real terms, it was a cut on the previous financial year. That announcement was made as if it was the best deal in ages when, in reality, at today's prices, investment in Scotland's public sector stock has fallen from £687 million in 1989-90 to £320 million in 2000-01. Even that £320 million includes £110 million from councils' own revenue. Put bluntly, councils are having to divert money away from repairs and maintenance to subsidise a collapsing capital programme. Add to that the 75  per cent clawback rule and local authorities next year will lose a further £165 million in capital receipts. Scottish local authorities are suffering an effective double whammy. Their income from capital receipts is falling dramatically, and the Government has cut the amount that councils can borrow to pay for their capital programme. Instead of being great news for Scottish tenants, the announcement is grim news for Scottish tenants. In my speech in the housing debate on 13 January, I called for increased flexibility in the way in which local authorities are given permission to borrow, in relation to the housing revenue account. I was mocked by Tavish Scott of the Liberal Democrats—that was unfortunate. However, I was heartened to receive support from an unexpected source: the Labour-oriented Institute of Public Policy Research. In the IPPR report on the private finance initiative, published last week, John Hawksworth, who is head of macro-economics at PricewaterhouseCoopers, argued for greater fiscal autonomy for local authorities, and that the example of the financial freedom of the Post Office could be applied to councils. He said that "it seems perfectly possible that this discretionary granting of additional financial freedoms could be extended on a case by case basis to other public sector bodies such as beacon councils and other high performing public sector organisations." Beacon councils do not exist in Scotland, but the principle is the same. Indeed, it is very much in line with the benchmark standards that the SNP has argued would help direct housing policy. Where a council has a sound business plan and a proven track record, it should be allowed to borrow what it requires to get the job done. Even local authorities that did not pass that test could set up arm's-length companies to enable that within the current regime without changing the existing Treasury rules. Again according to Mr Hawksworth, "Immediate candidates for such treatment would include local authority activities (for example housing and local transport) that can be transferred into arms-length companies".

That is an important point. If we consider what we are capable of delivering within the Maastricht criteria, we will still be able to allow the public sector authorities to use the money that we have. What is important is using the money that we already have.

I can tell members that 60 per cent is the rule on Maastricht criteria. We are currently well below that and there is room for manoeuvre. Currently, we can provide local authorities with enough resources—using existing resources—for the investment.

No, I want to carry on. It is important that the arm's-length public companies are able to borrow under the same commercial freedom rules under which the wholly owned Post Office is allowed to borrow. The income streams of such companies would not come from taxation, so they should not be subject to crude Treasury caps. It is clear from Mr Hawksworth's comments—and he is not necessarily a supporter of mine—that existing Treasury rules would allow that to happen. There is no reason why local authorities cannot borrow the money that they require, apart from the fact that the Executive is not prepared to negotiate with the Treasury or to consider new and imaginative ways in which to help local authorities to meet their funding needs. I would like to move to the arguments put by COSLA for the abolition of section 94 of the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973 consents for local authority borrowing. Those are the consents that local authorities get from the Scottish Executive for borrowing for public works. Those borrowing consents count twice: first, when the money is borrowed and, secondly, when it is repaid. That is clearly an anomaly and one that could be easily remedied by the Executive. COSLA estimates that ending that practice would release an additional £360 million to be spent on our schools and roads. That change would be directly in line with the Treasury's moves towards resource accounting and budgeting. Under that new regime, the concept of accruals accounting would be introduced; major capital expenditure would be accounted for over the lifetime of the expenditure. Put simply, if one borrowed £30 million to fund an asset with a lifetime of 30 years, it would be accounted for over the 30 years, rather than at the time of transaction, which is what currently happens. The Executive could move to that system if it chose to do so. All that would be required would be for the Executive to think creatively—to think outside the box. Quite apart from creative thinking, the Lib-Lab coalition is failing in a fundamental way. It is not fighting Scotland's corner in discussions with the  Treasury. To meet the Maastricht criteria, the ratio of net debt to gross domestic product cannot exceed 60 per cent. The Chancellor of the Exchequer has introduced a self-imposed cap of 40 per cent on that ratio, arguing that he needs the flexibility of an extra 20 per cent in case of rough times ahead. According to the IPPR, the gap between the current debt to GDP ratio and the chancellor's self-imposed cap is £75 billion. That is an estimated £15 billion per annum across the UK for the next five years. The IPPR report says that we would have had the scope "for all the PFI investment and more to be financed 'on balance sheet' had the government wished to do so". That is on a UK basis.

Well done. Allan Wilson has identified the issue. We have a war chest of £60 billion or more that could finance this. If the Scottish Parliament was a real parliament, with real powers— [Interruption.] That is the point of the debate. Let us consider the scope and powers that we have. Even within the context of devolution, the SNP is suggesting practical examples of things that could be done.

No, I want to push on. I have already taken several interventions. I understand that the chancellor might be saving all this money for a rainy day. However, as far as Scotland's public services are concerned, it is pouring outside—and in many schools it is pouring inside. That is the charge that I level at the Executive. There is more than ample room for manoeuvre in the fiscal armoury—all the Executive has offered us are the blunt ideological weapons of stock transfer and PFI. I suggest to the chamber that that is a set of circumstances that would not be allowed to develop under an SNP Administration. I would like to refer now to the chancellor's budget. If ever there was a missed opportunity, it was that budget. Not only could the chancellor have relaxed the fiscal tightening that I have detailed, but he could—as was called for by the Deputy First Minister—have opened that war chest of nearly £60 billion over the next five years. He could have announced a huge investment in public infrastructure to repair the damage of the past 20 years, but he failed to do so.  Over the next five years, the London Treasury will collect £20 billion in Scottish oil revenues—one third of Gordon Brown's war chest.

Those are Treasury estimates. That war chest is not Gordon Brown's war chest: it is the people's money, not the chancellor's. Despite that, the extra spending in Scotland will be less than £400 million. He has left the economy stuck in a sterling straitjacket, in which the pound has appreciated against the euro by a massive 35 per cent since 1996, crippling manufacturing and exports.

That is very interesting. The same kind of expenditure that would be happening under the private finance initiative is happening under the public-private partnerships. Both have an inflationary impact. All that is happening is the replacement of one way of funding public investment with another. Increases in revenue spending on education have been announced, but we have yet to hear the Scottish version. I am not sure whether we will have an emergency statement on education. From what we can gather, any increases will be swallowed up by cuts that Labour has imposed at local authority level. For example, on education, the increase in spending in Scotland should be around £90 million—but when compared to local authority funding in the last year under the Tories, there will be a cut of £540 million in local authority funding for next year. On transport, the Scottish share should be around £25 million—that is barely a quarter of the more than £100 million that has been cut from next year's Scottish transport budget when compared to the budget in the last year under the Tories. That figure of £25 million is a fraction of the estimated cost of the strategic roads review. There may be those who are locked in the oncoming headlights of the chancellor's spin. However, we should expect the Scottish Executive to stand up and fight for Scotland's infrastructure so that we can build a better Scotland. Let me give the Executive a five-point demand from the SNP. First, open the £60 billion war chest to support public services. Secondly, increase the freedom of local authorities to borrow the money that they need—all of which would be within the  Maastricht criteria and is money that is available now. Thirdly, relax the 75 per cent clawback rule to free a further £165 million for public housing. Fourthly, abolish section 94 consents. Fifthly, set up feasibility studies into public service trusts to replace discredited PFI schemes. Ken Livingstone says that he will use a bond system to pay for investment in the London underground. Is this coalition admitting that it does not have the courage to do here what the London Assembly naturally expects to be done in London? Ken can do it, but the Executive cannot. We want this Parliament to be a normal Parliament, with real powers. That means powers to use public money sensibly for public works to rebuild Scotland. Our Scotland, crumbling under this Administration, can be rebuilt—but not under this Government. I move, That the Parliament recognises that, to enable Scotland to become a dynamic, prosperous country prepared for the 21 st century, priority must be given to the provision of quality affordable homes, a high standard learning environment for children, and modern high quality communication links; notes the difficulties facing Scotland's public services and infrastructure, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to consider ways to increase the scope and powers of the Scottish Executive and the Parliament to provide necessary funding.

Following yesterday's budget, we have not had an emergency statement on how the minister wants to spend additional policing resources, but the budget surely offers him an opportunity to recognise the need for special provision in Edinburgh, as a capital. I understand what he is saying about the GAE review, but Lord James Douglas-Hamilton made the valid point that our emergency is here and now. Bristow Muldoon and others argued, rightly, that the issue in Edinburgh is not the people who live here but those who visit. We cannot wait until 2002. I look forward to an early statement on the distribution from the budget allocation.

Will the minister give way?

It is quite shameful that the minister treats the seriousness of this debate with such frivolity. Is the minister aware of the Communication Workers Union's report that, within his own constituency of East Lothian, 13 out of the 28 post offices rely on benefit payments? The minister talks about choice. Yes, we want to move to an automated system, but not one that is compulsory and not before the Post Office is ready to deliver it.

Is Mr Robson reassured by what the Government has been saying, or does he agree with us that these points are facts and certainly not lies?

rose—

Will the member give way?

The minister refers to the letters and posters that have been distributed to post offices. I will quote again from the letter from the National Federation of Sub-Postmasters: "The Government says customers can still collect their benefits in cash at post offices if they are 'unable or unwilling to use a bank account', but cannot tell us how this will happen or how they are going to guarantee the future for the thousands of post offices under threat." People may be allowed to collect their money from post offices if they protest very hard that they do not want it to be paid elsewhere, but they will still be directed to bank accounts, whether those accounts are based inside or outside post offices. I know about marketing—I worked in financial services. Either way, there is no real choice. The sub-postmistresses and sub-postmasters know that and it is about time the Government woke up and listened to their concerns; they have not been assured by what the Government says.

I would like to welcome the sub-postmasters and sub-postmistresses from across Scotland who are here for the debate. As they are a group of people who are famed for their lack of spare time, it is a measure of their concern that they have taken time to attend the Parliament. I would also like to thank people for the messages that I have received in the past few days; from postmasters and postmistresses from Hawick to Armadale to Tynecastle in Edinburgh. To all those people, I give a solemn pledge that the SNP shares their concerns and fears about the future of their livelihoods and of the vital services that they provide. We are committed to supporting them however we can. In recent months, I have spoken to many of the dedicated men and women who run our sub-post office network. They do it for the narrowest of margins. They take a wage from their business; for the hours they put in, many of them would be lucky if it exceeded the national minimum wage. Talking to those men and women, I was struck by their concerns not only about their own future, but about the future of their customers. They know many of their customers on a first name basis; the lives of those people are the subject of everyday conversation while business is sorted out—the birth of a child or grandchild, good news and bad. Often, for older people living alone, the visit to cash the pension is one of the social focal points of the week. The worries of the sub-postmasters and sub-postmistresses about how their customers would cope if the trip to the post office was replaced by a visit to the nearest hole-in-the-wall cash point were evident. There are worries about practical issues relating to how the new system would work. Do we really expect home helps who cash pensions to be given the personal identification numbers of their clients? Would we want that? What happens to the pensioner who lives in a community where the post office has closed and the cash point issues money in a minimum denomination of £10? What is that person to do with a £66 pension payment— will they miss out on £6? What about the million dollar question—or rather that of the people who do not have a million dollars—of people who are in overdraft? Do they have to set up an additional account, with additional charges? Those are real concerns that have been expressed to me by people on the front line of the proposed change. However, the people to whom I spoke expressed another emotion—that of disappointment. Those people, who serve our community, are disappointed that a Government with a much vaunted commitment to social inclusion is allowing such a valuable resource to go to the wall. Every postmaster to whom I spoke is alive to the potential for social inclusion that the post office network offers. They are all disappointed that the opportunity that they offer is being spurned by a Westminster Government that is committed to false economies. We have a Labour Treasury that can read a balance sheet but cannot understand the value of community. There is real concern that by the time the Government wakes up to the potential offered by the post office network it will be too late. A letter from Dr Tom Begg, chairman of the Post Office Users Council for Scotland says: "What would be wrong is for the community to blunder into losing the comprehensive national network because the government had not fully considered the implications of altering benefits policy." The fear is that, through false economy and misdirected policy, the Westminster Government is blundering into a situation where the existence of hundreds of sub-post offices is put in jeopardy. After the disappearance of the post office network from much of the landscape of Scotland, the shops and businesses that depend on the network to draw in business will follow. A pound that is cashed locally is spent locally. Instead of encouraging social inclusion, the Government's policy will lead to greater exclusion; boarded-up village shops and empty shopping parades will be the hallmark of Westminster's commitment to social justice. It makes a mockery of the millions of pounds that the Government in Scotland is spending on social inclusion partnerships if the Government in London is ripping the heart out of communities that are already under severe strain. Many Labour members have put their faith in the decision to postpone a move to automated credit transfer until 2003. They believe that that decision, combined with the commitment to retain the Horizon programme, means that the bleak scenario that I have described has been averted. They are wrong. The threat to the network is as real as it ever was. I say that for two reasons. First, Horizon is far  from being online. So far, only 2,000 post offices have been automated and a further 17,000 are on the waiting list. There is every chance that it could be 2004 or 2005 before the job is complete—even then, it might not link the whole network. Secondly, even if Horizon is up and running, the shift away from post offices will be enough to sink many hundreds of sub-post offices. The ones that remain will find the battle to survive tougher every day. As we have already seen in the Highlands and in the Borders, more and more people will simply walk away from their franchises, cutting their losses before the situation worsens, and no one will be prepared or able to take their place. Let us be clear: any move towards banks through compulsory ACT will mean that post offices will be lost. Westminster's failure to make sufficient commitments to the Post Office for implementing Horizon and the rapid move towards ACT mean that post offices will not have the time to adapt, nor will they be able to find alternative markets to fill the gap left by the loss of business through benefit payments. I will quote the report on the matter published by the Westminster Trade and Industry Committee, published last September: "The Post Office is in effect being obliged to use its resources to pay half the price of the automation necessary for preservation of the national network of sub post offices, with a real risk that it may find it difficult to recover the costs by generating new business. The Government must recognise that in setting the annual minimum dividend, particularly in the years 2003-2005." Far from recognising that concern, there is something two-faced about announcing commitment to the network at the same time as announcing that, from 2003, Benefits Agency transactions will be cut from 12p per transaction to 1p. That will further undermine Post Office income and will hasten closures across Scotland. According to research conducted by the Communication Workers Union, there are 888 post offices in Scotland whose businesses are more than 40 per cent dependent on Benefits Agency work. The transaction charge decision alone will already have put some post offices over the brink. Unless Westminster acts, hundreds more will follow. A transparent and unequivocal commitment from the Government, which means detail, not just platitudes, must be made to the post office network. We need an unequivocal commitment, spelling out precisely how the Government is prepared to support the network. Unless that is forthcoming, the transaction charges must be restored to the current level and compulsory ACT must be postponed until, at the very least, all post offices are fully automated with Horizon and the public have been given a settling-in period to  adapt to the new regime. Over and above all those arguments, the opinion of the customer should count most. New Labour at Westminster likes to talk a good game about modernisation. In business, where I worked in financial services, the modern approach is to put the customer at the centre of plans. That is diametrically opposite to what the Government and the Benefits Agency propose: they want to put their convenience first and let the customer hang. In yesterday's Edinburgh Evening News , Phyllis Herriot, chairwoman of the Scottish Pensioners Forum, said: "A lot of pensioners don't have bank accounts. They are quite happy going down to the Post Office with their pension books. I know the Government is going to save money, but surely it's what suits the pensioner that should be the issue." Phyllis is quite right: the opinions and rights of the users of the system are imperative.

When I visited post offices in Armadale, that very point was made. The social fabric of Scotland is at risk. The Post Office is reserved to Westminster, but we have every right to discuss matters that affect the economic and social fabric of Scotland. The quietness among members opposite is quite shameful. Perhaps they feel ashamed about what is happening; perhaps they are concerned to protect their position at Westminster.

But the problem is that the Westminster Government is bent on destroying that. I quote from a letter from the National Federation of Sub-Postmasters. It says: "Last Friday's announcement did nothing more than dress up the Government's previous empty reassurances in a different way." Platitudes are not the same as real detail and commitment. Phyllis Herriot is right: the opinions of the customers and the users of the system are imperative. The rights that the Government proposes to trample over include: the right of pensioners to have their money paid to them in a  form that they find convenient; the right of young mums to have family allowance paid directly in cash so that they can feed their children before feeding their overdraft; and the right of those who are unable to open or manage bank accounts to have the human dignity of managing their own cash. Those people's views are being ignored. People on the streets and in the post offices definitely feel that the Government is ignoring them. I spoke to one such woman in Monkton in Ayrshire yesterday.

No. I am concluding. I will close with a quotation of a member of the other Parliament, who put the argument in a nutshell when he responded to a constituent's concerns on the subject: "The Government's plans as they stand are unacceptable. People should not be forced into having their pensions paid through ACT if they do not want to do so. We will continue to campaign for a choice for pensioners in this matter." That MP was Gordon Brown, writing in 1993, when the Tories first tried to introduce the measure. He was right then and he is wrong now. I urge members to support the motion. I move, That the Parliament notes the important role played by post offices and sub-post offices in the economic and social fabric of many of our communities and notes with concern proposals from Her Majesty's Government to change the method of benefit payments (Automated Credit Transfer Scheme to banks) which could result in the closure of sub-post offices and the impact this could have on the social inclusion targets of the Scottish Executive; further notes that recent announcements to allow some cash payments to continue to be paid from post offices will be too little too late to alleviate this serious situation, and therefore calls upon the Scottish Executive to make urgent representations on this issue to Her Majesty's Government in order to defend the interests of our urban and rural communities and urges it to be proactive in making representations to other relevant agencies to ensure the continuance and development of post offices in Scotland and the improvement of the availability of financial services in poorer communities in Scotland.

Does the First Minister agree that the best way in which this Parliament could recognise women in Scotland would be to pursue policies that benefit them? Many women rely heavily on local services and, while they may not want the moon and the stars, they want basic facilities, such as decent schools and local services. Does he believe that the inadequate Local Government Finance (Scotland) Order 2000, which was debated yesterday—

Is the minister aware that since she became involved in the Glasgow situation, there has been delay and dither? Is she aware that the £13 million allocated almost a year ago has not been accessed, because the steering group has not met regularly and has not made a recommendation? Will she commit the Parliament to involve tenants and unions, and to ensure that the people of Glasgow and of Scotland get best use of the £13 million that could be housing the homeless?

I, too, welcome this debate. This issue is of major public concern in West Lothian and, indeed, in west Edinburgh, and it has generated considerable heat. I think that we are having this debate because of the sense of ownership of St John's that the people of West Lothian have, as patients, visitors or members of staff. As Bristow Muldoon says, we place great importance in the unitary authority in West Lothian, and we should emphasise that all parties will work to champion that concept in the future. We should recognise the role of St John's in the local community. I suffered because of the transport problems in West Lothian when I had to get to antenatal classes before the birth of my son at St John's, so I recognise those public transport difficulties. I pay tribute to the staff at St John's. In particular, the burns unit receives national acclaim. I know of many people who have to travel to visit people in the burns unit and are obviously there for a long time. We do not want to put a price on care. I am concerned that the proposals on car park charges will cause difficulties. I also pay tribute to the campaign that has been mounted locally, in particular by the SNP, but also by Unison. We cannot have low-paid workers paying for the privilege of work. I hope that the minister will address that major issue. Although there are some points on which we will reach a consensus, I think that there are two issues on which Bristow Muldoon and I disagree. The first relates to underfunding. We should recognise that the trust board has admitted that its proposals were made on the basis of cost. In a letter that was sent to me on 2 February, the trust board said: "The question of car parking was discussed by the Trust on two counts (a) to address the traffic flow and indiscriminate parking which is taking place and (b) to generate a revenue stream which will help address a budget deficit in the next financial year." The other issue on which Bristow Muldoon and I disagree is the role of the Executive. I know that in recent days the Executive has sent out a letter saying that car parking charges should not be used as a revenue stream for hospital care. It might be helpful if the minister explained the status of that letter and instruction. We should recognise that the trust would not have to seek that revenue stream if there were not problems over funding. It is expected that the trust's deficit will rise from £300,000 this year to £3 million next year. We care about the NHS, about our workers in the NHS and about patients, who require the best treatment. Visits contribute to recovery. We should consider alternative proposals. I hope that the Deputy Minister for Health and  Community Care will intervene to get everybody round the table. It is possible that for £60,000 an additional 50 parking places could be found at St John's. There is off-site parking 10 minutes away at Livingston football stadium. The point that Bristow made about consultation is absolutely right. We should recognise the cross-party agreement on this issue. An amendment proposed at the trust board by the SNP council group leader, Peter Johnston, was seconded by the Labour council leader. There is strong feeling about the issue, as I hope the Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care will recognise. The issue is not peculiar to West Lothian, although people there feel particularly strongly about it. We must not put a price on care or on working in the NHS; we must not have car park charges at St John's.

Does Mr Aitken agree that, today, we are focusing not on the process of dealing with asylum seekers but on what happens to people when they arrive in Scotland, in terms of education, social work and housing? We are trying to address how the Scottish Parliament can help people whom we have a duty and a responsibility to help.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it considers that the Scottish allocation from the Coalfields Regeneration Trust is sufficient. (S1O-1062)

Is the minister aware that the UK Treasury profits by some £250 million a year from the miners pension fund? Does she think that £4.5 million, which represents £2.50 per head per year, is sufficient to regenerate the mining communities, which lost so many jobs under the Tories? Will she admit that the Labour party is following the Tories in betraying the mining communities of West Lothian, Ayrshire, Fife and Lanarkshire by using the miners pension fund to feed the fat cats of Whitehall rather than to pay compensation to miners or to regenerate those communities?

Will Donald Gorrie give way?

Will the member give way?

I should declare an interest, as I worked in financial services and, unlike the Government, know the difference between an endowment and a mortgage: an endowment is a gift and a mortgage is a debt. The Executive proposes a debt to pay for university education, so this package does not deliver free education; it just delays when the debt accrues so that, instead of accruing during the period of study, it becomes liable at the end. It is a fee system that produces a millstone mortgage debt or, worse, regressive taxation. We have back-door instead of up-front fees. I want to take up Robin Harper's point about fairness. Let us consider the threshold for repayment of this debt. Yesterday, Henry McLeish said: "We think that the £10,000 level is imaginative, as it removes the need for another administrative burden. It is important that we spell out that message throughout Scotland."— [ Official Report , 26 January 2000; Vol 4, c 428.]  It is important not that the level should be fair, but that it should be convenient to the Government. Presumably, the minister thinks that the level is fair and that graduates can afford repayments.

No. The Lib-Lab coalition is keen to gloss over the fact that £10,000 is less than the figure for male median earnings. We all know that in the current job market many graduates' first jobs are low paid. Under the Executive's proposals, a person earning as little as £4.80 an hour will have to pay back tuition fees. An adviser in a call centre or a charge-hand in a fast food restaurant is deemed by this Government to have earned sufficient premium from their education to warrant the repayment of their debt to the state. The principle of deferred fees that Cubie outlined relies on an education premium. Cubie's proposals recognise that the possession of a degree gives a premium, but that it is not always immediate or inevitable. The important issue is when the education premium should kick in. Page 128 of the Cubie report states: "A high threshold for repayments provides an in-built mechanism to ensure that no student or potential student need be dis-inclined to study for a degree. They are 'insured' against the risk of not earning a graduate salary  premium, in that they will not be expected to contribute to the Endowment unless they are earning a salary significantly higher than annual average income."

To spell it out, we would not have tuition fees, so we would not have to find solutions to the coalition's problem of fee repayment.

I would like to move on. The minister assures us that fewer people will repay the graduate contribution than pay tuition fees. That is the nub of the problem. In straight language, the proposals mean that whereas only 30 per cent of students paid the old full tuition fees, 50 per cent will have to pay the new tuition fees. That is double-speak. It is quite clear that if 50 per cent of students are liable, more people will pay the new tuition fees than pay the old tuition fees. That is Orwellian in the extreme—and that is with only seven spin-doctors. Many people who are thinking about going into higher education will be deterred. Steve Durrant, president of the University of St Andrews students association, was quoted in The Scotsman yesterday as saying: "We are particularly unimpressed with the idea of repaying tuition fees once a graduate is earning £10,000." The Scottish Low Pay Unit recognises that £10,000 is a poverty wage. This Parliament condemns the Executive, because the Lib-Lab coalition insists that recent graduates—people who may want to set up home and have families—must pay tuition fees. It is feeble to try to shift the burden of the old tuition fees from middle-aged parents to young families starting out in life. Where once the Labour party sought to lift people out of poverty it now condemns them to return again to poverty. This is a face-saving exercise for the Lib-Lab coalition and a slap in the face for the young people of Scotland. The new tuition fees are a form of regressive taxation. There is much talk from the Executive about social inclusion, but people can see through that sham. The Scottish people are sharper than the Executive thinks. They know that the Liberal Democrats have sold out. With a £10,000 annual threshold, they also know that the Labour party has sold them short.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

I welcome this debate. It is interesting that we are having to address what we mean when we talk about the drugs problem, because numerous issues have been raised, such as anger at dealers, the desperation of parents who have lost their children and the victims of drug-related crime. There are many problems, many issues and many solutions, and there is no quick fix. None of the problems can be tackled until the objectives and strategies are known. On that point I agree with Donald Gorrie. Of course, there are different drugs. In mentioning substance abuse in our amendment, we include alcohol abuse. If we include alcohol in that category, we will get more respect and attention from young people who so frequently accuse older generations of hypocrisy. That is the approach that other countries, for example, Australia, have taken in tackling their drugs problem. There are big differences between different areas, for example, between Edinburgh and Glasgow. Types of behaviours with regard to drugs change, and they change quickly. Even in West Lothian, as well as in Edinburgh, we are seeing increased heroin use and availability of cocaine, which has infiltrated the dance culture there. Interestingly, the West Lothian DAT has recognised the importance of alcohol issues as part of the progression of those drugs. Yesterday, I spoke to senior drugs officers in Lothian and Borders police, who told me of the pace and change of drug use. For example, dealers are manufacturing new drugs that escape current statute definitions. This issue is one of economics. We must tackle supply and demand. We must deal harshly with dealers, but we also know that the economics of the system means that, like the heads of a hydra,  if one dealer is dealt with, another will spring up in their place. We should identify the drugs economy in our schemes and communities as one of the problems to be resolved. We have to provide alternatives.

I think that Margo MacDonald pre-empted some of my comments. A lot of money that is circulating in communities is drug related. The Scottish Drugs Forum's shared agenda for the Scottish Parliament recommends that there should be substantial investment in legitimate economic activity to counter and undermine the illicit drugs economy that is currently gripping the multi-deprived communities in Scotland. We must provide ways out of drug abuse. The average age of people seeking assistance in Glasgow is 25, with an average of seven years of drug use—seven years without any intervention. We must address that issue. We have to use joined-up thinking. We need to think about what we are doing in our prisons. In Glasgow, many of those who died because of drugs in the last year had come out of prison less than two weeks before they died. That demonstrates the need for a holistic approach. I know that the Executive wants to do that, but it is important that we have a body that can hold the Executive to account and ask what is happening in our prisons, what is being done to provide alternatives to drugs in our communities and what is being done to address the economic problems of the communities that are badly affected by drugs. We need to consider the role of the Executive and Parliament. We need to look at the pace of change. We have lost some momentum since the 1994 ministerial task force. I believe that the Executive wants to move quickly, but issues change quickly and need to be continually monitored. A parliamentary committee would allow us to do that. What would the committee do to ensure accountability? We could examine the drug action teams and the audit that is being done. We could find out about the international experience. The Parliament must take ownership of the drugs debate because it is about partnership—partnership within the Parliament and partnership  between the Executive and Parliament. What is missing is the accountability that a parliamentary committee on substance abuse could provide.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

I have two specific questions. First, what impact will the extension to right to buy have on the empty homes initiative? I have been told that many councils will no longer be able to pursue that initiative because of Government policy. Secondly, the minister's comments seemed to imply that the Executive wants to take away the protection for charitable status for some housing associations. Given the options offered by the review of charity law, will he, at the earliest opportunity, extend the right to buy to charitable housing associations?

Malcolm Chisholm is right to identify that a key issue is whether right to buy and stock transfer will address homelessness and the need for housing provision. Does he agree that a problem is that the proposals on extending the right to buy in the context of stock transfer will mean that lenders face larger risk because of the right to buy, so they will increase rents and that will put the stock transfer proposals in jeopardy? Right to buy and stock transfer must be considered together.

Glasgow tenants are concerned by the news freeze on what is happening with the proposal and by the fact that there is no tenant representative on the steering group. There is not even a tenant representative on the national steering group for the new housing partnership. We have all said that community ownership is a good thing because it involves people, but if there is no tenant involvement now, how do we know that there will be tenant involvement when the stock transfer proposal has been implemented?

Robert Brown makes some important points about housing legislation. Does he agree that it is disappointing that the Executive did not take the opportunity to introduce a housing bill in the first year of the Scottish Parliament? The minister's proposals may be a mixed bag, but Mr Brown outlined a number of points that were included in the SNP manifesto and that, although not included in the Labour manifesto, have belatedly become Executive policy. Does he agree that, because there is consensus on the legislative elements of the proposed bill, we could be moving much more quickly to create the right legislative framework?

The Minister for Communities closed with the comment that we need humanity in housing. I remind her that there are women and families in Scotland who want to pay a fair rent but are denied the possibility of doing so because of record levels of homelessness under this Government and the prospect of policies that could make the situation worse. I sympathise and agree with her that we must ensure that people have fair rents and fair homes, but that is not what is being promised or has been delivered by the Executive. Listening to her this morning reminds me of one of the reasons why the Parliament has powers to provide checks and balances and to hold the Executive to account. The greatest check the Executive requires is a reality check. What we see from the Lib-Lab coalition is a mess in housing policy: record levels of homelessness that they cannot deny; a crisis in housing investment that they have acknowledged; faltering stock transfer proposals with serious concerns raised by lenders; and a misguided, wrong-headed flagship policy on the extension of right to buy. Even on simple issues where cross-party agreement exists, such as the reform of mortgage repossession law, we are left hanging for months. Today the Minister for Communities told us about the new proposals in the housing bill. Although we welcome the prospect of a housing bill, we are deeply disappointed that it will not be published until the second year of the Administration with the act not approved until the third year. The hustle and bustle of activity and announcement by the minister has more to do with being seen to do something than with delivering on housing. The Minister for Communities acknowledged that she inherited a green paper with most of the work and thinking done. There has been cross-party agreement on issues such as the single secure tenancy, the single regulatory framework, the abolition of the quango board of Scottish Homes, and, according to the last announcement, the establishment of a community fund to help with common repairs. The fault line exists on the issue of housing policy—on the big issues of  homelessness, stock transfer and housing finance—where the disagreement is fundamental. The Minister for Communities tells us that the Executive has a radical housing policy. If a discredited Tory agenda is a radical policy, the minister is welcome to it.

The SNP has made its position quite clear: the right to buy should be preserved. We are not talking about taking rights away from people. A single social tenancy can have variations. The minister has already said that she wants to exempt charities and special housing. She acknowledges that different systems for the right to buy can exist within a single social tenancy. She knows that, I know that, and people outside know that. On consulting the voluntary sector on the right to buy, the Executive is reneging on the compact agreement with the voluntary sector. What consultation took place with the tenants who volunteered in housing association movements? I do not think that any did. I think that the Executive has reneged on the compact with the voluntary sector. Like the Tories, the current Administration is obsessed with the idea that home ownership is best at any cost. Although the SNP supports people who want to own their homes, that right should not be granted at the expense of those who want to rent. The Administration's housing policy is shot through with the notion that renting is second class, and that affordable rented accommodation in this country should be further reduced. The key difference between the SNP and Labour is that we believe that, in a single social tenancy environment, the right to rent is imperative, not just for existing tenants but for those of the future. We have a responsibility to provide quality affordable housing for everyone. We need vision and policy, but we also need to deliver investment to address the real housing agenda, which concerns quality and standards. The minister says that the Executive will divert to rural areas the proposed 18,000 houses to receive development funding from Scottish Homes. If the Executive does that, what will happen to the urban areas? There will be no new development money for sheltered accommodation, for wheelchair users or for a community care environment. The Executive's target is 18,000 new houses—6,000 a year. In West Lothian alone, there are 9,500  people on a waiting list. Do we believe that 6,000 houses a year is ambitious?

If the minister will allow me, I shall address that point later. The SNP supports community ownership, and where stock transfer proposals are small and community led there is no problem. The problem lies with the finances and accountability of the Executive's proposed wholesale stock transfer. The Executive cannot escape from the fact that public housing is unattractive in this country for the same reason that homelessness is on the increase: a lack of investment and vision represent two sides of the same coin. We must not be duped into thinking that the housing bill will be a panacea for Scotland's housing crisis. It will move the legislative framework on, but the key issues of homelessness and the appalling condition of housing in Scotland will be dealt with only following changes in investment strategy and policy. The continuation of wrong-headed policies such as wholesale stock transfer, coupled with the continuing starvation of public support for council housing, will not relieve homelessness: it will increase it.

I will make the position in Dumfries and Galloway clear. SNP councillors have agreed to propose a feasibility study; they have not agreed to support a wholesale stock transfer. The problem that councils face is that they are being forced to consider stock transfer proposals because there is no other game in town. There can be small-scale stock transfers, but there are other means and mechanisms. Scottish Homes gave evidence to the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee to the effect that there are other ways to get the private finance that Wendy Alexander wants into public sector housing.

I would like to move on to  homelessness, if Frank does not mind. If ever there was concrete evidence that new Labour and its Liberal partners are failing, it is the record—and rising—level of homelessness. A key test of the success of a nation's housing policy is the level of homelessness. This Government has failed, and continues to fail that test. We can also see that the key policies that the Government has announced have started to make the situation worse. When the minister implies that homelessness is not necessarily a housing issue and tries to redefine the homelessness problem, she betrays the analysis of an Executive that thinks that it can solve the problem by redefining it. While the SNP welcomes the setting up of the homelessness task force, we are disappointed by the experiences of those who work with the homeless and the homeless themselves.

I must move on. The Executive's rhetoric meets what is happening on the ground with a sharp and uncompromising bump.

I will take Jackie Baillie's intervention.

Why was a Young Women's Christian Association hostel in Edinburgh converted into self-contained flats? That hostel provided support for people with alcohol, mental health and drugs problems. The people who used that hostel do not now have the accommodation they need. The hostel nearest to the minister's plush offices at Victoria Quay—Beth-Haven hostel on Parliament Street, which was managed by the haven housing association and the Bethany Christian mission—was closed just before Christmas because the trust could not get a written guarantee that future funding would be forthcoming. That means that there has been a loss to the homeless of direct access provision. In Glasgow the Young Men's Christian  Association's Downtown project does invaluable work but it faces closure. Its initial funding is complete but there is no sign of new money. Some agencies are changing their remits in order to meet rough sleepers initiative funding requirements. Bid and challenge funding for RSI is causing problems. People are facing difficulties that the Government is not addressing. I will move on to what the SNP would do.

I must move on. My time is limited. We must address the situation that results from 18 years of Tory decline. We must acknowledge that the homelessness task force will bring forward good proposals to tackle homelessness, but the proposals must be backed up by legislation and the minister will shortly, no doubt, make a statement about that to the chamber. Proposals must also be backed up by the abandonment of wrong-headed and divisive policies such as stock transfer. The current investment strategy must be reversed and new resources must be released to replenish public housing. At the moment city hostels need to apply for RSI money because councils are cutting their grants and the councils are doing that because the Executive is cutting funding to them. To tackle homelessness there must be quality affordable housing and achieving that requires investment, but public investment is in very bad shape following 18 years of Tory decline followed by three years of Labour and now Labour and Liberal Democrat dithering.

If Bristow does not mind, I would like to move on. As Bristow well knows, the collapse in income from capital receipts and ever-tightening borrowing consent have left local authorities with a housing investment crisis, the like of which has not been seen in modern times. Squeezed by clawback on one side and by an ever-tightening fiscal regime on the other, it is no wonder that councils are being forced to give up the ghost and to examine wholesale stock transfer. There has been a 60 per cent drop in the housing capital programme that is matched by a 59 per cent increase in homeless figures in the 1990s. I do not think that that is a coincidence. We now face the consequences of chronic under-investment that stretches over decades—talk about chickens coming home to roost. While Rome burns, new Labour fiddles. Millions of pounds of taxpayers' money is being spent on expensive consultants' reports so that the Executive can get the answers that it wants to  hear. That money should be used to build homes for the homeless, but it is being spent on laptops and flip charts. Not one brick will be bought, not one builder put to work, not one roof erected, with the £26 million being spent on feasibility studies and endless financial projections and scenarios. Even in a best-case scenario, the Scottish Executive will make no substantial investment in housing until after the stock transfers have taken place. On an optimistic timetable, as the minister said in answer to a parliamentary question, that will not happen for another 24 months. If tenants reject the new landlord in the ballot, what then? On the promise of jam tomorrow, Scotland's public sector will have faced four years of new Labour neglect in addition to the 18 years of decline administered by the Tories.

Cherry-picking is different from the Labour Executive's one-size-fits-all policy. I think that the minister will acknowledge that we must have local solutions to local problems. We must make financial options available, but this Executive is not doing that. To return to housing finance, I do not deny that, using the minister's figures, the Executive is investing more money in housing. However, the difficulty is that, in its first three years, the Labour Government carried out the cuts begun by the Tories and therefore started from a low base in the first place. That is why we have seen a 60 per cent cut in housing investment during the 1990s. The status quo is unacceptable. I will move on to what the SNP would do, as I believe that we must have a constructive role to play. Today—not in two years or four years—we would ask Scotland's local authorities to propose revised business plans and to identify the capital resources required to bring their stock up to date. There would be no blank cheques or meaningless spending commitments. We would say to local authorities, "Make a case for investment, prove that you can bring your stock up to standard and you will be allowed to borrow the money you need, based on a sound business plan." The capacity exists within the system to allow an increase in borrowing. New Labour may say, "But the Treasury won't let us." Let me quote from a speech made by the  leader of the Labour party, Tony Blair, at the 1999 Labour party conference. There's a thing—Fiona Hyslop quoting Tony Blair. "If there are Treasury rules or antiquated concepts of public borrowing that hold us back, change them. That is what intelligent Government is for." Well, Tony, you were right on that point. That is what we would do in an independent Scotland—an independent, intelligent Government would change the rules to allow local authorities to borrow the resources that they need. We are confident that they would be able to do so.

I thank Robert Brown for his intervention. He is on cue. Without independence, without changing the public spending borrowing requirement rules—even under the present rules—Gordon Brown could allow councils to borrow what they require without breaching the Maastricht criteria. Has the minister asked him to consider borrowing consent for local authorities? I am not sure that she has. What about the debt? We could use exactly the same mechanisms that the minister proposes to manage the worst cases of debt, except that we would not force stock transfer on the authorities concerned. For example, Glasgow spends almost the same amount in debt charges that the new landlord would have to spend on refurbishment. Take the debt away and allow the council to use its own resources, without extra borrowing, to solve its own problems. To answer Robert Brown's point about devolution, what if the Treasury will not allow that? We could use the homes and communities public service trust to bring in private finance. We could consider the other options proposed by Scottish Homes.

I want to get on with my speech. Where would we get the money to help with the seed-corn finance? The SNP would commit an extra £175 million on top of the money being provided by the Executive to help to generate investment and to ensure that we could crank up the public service trust to get the £1 billion that is needed in housing, which could be achieved without wholesale stock transfer. Scotland is a rich nation and, under independence, we would have greater resources. Under devolution, the SNP has already said that it would reject the Chancellor's penny tax bribe. Unlike new Labour, we do not promise jam tomorrow. However, we would like to act now to  turn around the oil tanker of neglect. Unlike new Labour, we do not have a policy of one size fits all. We are a Scottish Parliament that should take into account all parts of this nation. When people such as the deputation last night come to us from the Highlands and Islands, we must be struck by what they say and take that into account. We want a Scottish national housing policy, not a housing policy just for Glasgow and just for the minister's career. We do not promise that everything can be done straight away; it will take time to repair the neglect. However, it would happen and it could start today. We have shown how we can take things forward.

Is it not about time that the Labour party faced up to its responsibilities in Glasgow and acknowledged that it has failed and failed again?

Sorry, I will not take an intervention from the person who was the biggest slum landlord in western Europe. [Interruption.]

Okay, I will give way to Frank McAveety.

In May we said that a public  service trust, invested with £175 million, could generate the same type of investments that Labour is proposing in Glasgow. It is absolutely true that we need to address the Glasgow housing situation, but let us not do that at the expense of other areas. Let us do it so that it happens now and let us ensure that the tenants are involved. That is why the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee of this Parliament is considering the Glasgow stock transfer proposals and others. We do not promise that the problems of housing in Scotland can be dealt with straight away—it will take some time to repair the neglect. However, the SNP could do it. This Executive could also do it, if it put its mind to it, and could start today. What we need is intelligent government, drive and political will. However, under new Labour we are stuck with reviews, feasibility studies and management consultants' dream city. There are families living in cold, damp homes. There are homeless people desperate for a home of their own and looking for leadership and intelligent government. Everyone knows that Scotland's housing crisis has to be a main priority, but we are stuck with drift, dither and desperate measures. The Scottish people deserve and expect more from this Government when it comes to improving Scotland's housing. Unfortunately, they are unlikely to get it from the Executive's proposals.

I move amendment S1M-408.2, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "notes the Executive's proposals to achieve this through a range of measures, including the introduction of a single social tenancy, the development of a single regulatory framework for social housing, the promotion of a stronger strategic role in housing for local authorities, and a new role and status for Scottish Homes, but believes that these measures alone will not improve the position of Scotland's 80000 homeless people and that the Executive must give greater priority to dealing with chronic under investment in Scotland's public and voluntary housing including the reversal of their policy of wholesale stock transfer."

The minister may be aware that there is a great deal of concern about the future of the warm deal; I have lodged a motion on the subject. Following comments yesterday evening by Frank McAveety, when he implied that the insulation company that was referred to was a one-off, I must tell the minister that I received an e-mail this morning from another installer saying that six Scottish installers are about to go bust or pull out of the warm deal because they cannot find the work. Does the minister agree that we need an urgent review of the warm deal and its operation, however much we support the need for increased investment in insulation?

There is a problem with the warm deal and the new deal. The flagship new deal policy was not just about giving people six months' job experience; it was about placing people in employment afterwards. Many members went to people's homes during warm homes week. I met new deal trainees who were enjoying the experience, but were grossly disappointed that they were not getting employment at the end of it. It is an expensive mistake. We must direct the new deal more efficiently and we must not confuse the two issues.

It is the minister's problem.

Is the minister aware of the SNP's position? I will put it on the record. We acknowledge that private finance is needed in housing, but we believe that there must be public finance to back it up. Our proposed public service trust would allow us to do that. There are mechanisms that the Government could use to invest now. It is the minister's policies that will take four or five years to secure investment in housing in Glasgow, Edinburgh and the rural areas of Scotland. Her policies are delaying investment in housing.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether poverty is increasing. (S1O-865)

That is interesting. Not only do we get 20-year promises, we get 20-year answers. I want to ask about the past two years. There have been five major surveys in recent weeks showing a north-south divide and an east-west divide. Will the minister address the situation in Glasgow, where the take-up of free school meals has increased in the past two years from 37 per cent to 43 per cent, and where the real level of unemployment as measured by labour force statistics has gone up from 27 per cent to 31 per cent? Does the minister agree that poverty among plenty is being perpetuated by the Labour Government and its Lib-Lab coalition? Does she agree that 20-year promises mean nothing when you have no job, no home and, for a record number of people, no hope?

It is fitting that the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Bill is one of the first bills to be presented to the Parliament. I want to focus on a specific proposal that has been identified as a problem by all parties, but which the bill could deal with. I refer to a phrase in the long title, "to make new provisions as respects conveyancing", and to the proposal in the bill to amend the Conveyancing and Feudal Reform (Scotland) Act 1970. I remind members that this is part of the "Your sofa is safer than your home" saga. In June 1999, the Minister for Communities rejected the idea of bringing the law in Scotland in line with the law in England to protect home owners against unjust repossession. Following a dramatic U-turn, the minister has been jumping through hoops to create a legislative solution to that unjust anomaly. First she said that she would look at it in the context of responses to the housing green paper and bring forward legislation in the housing bill. That route was abandoned when it was pointed out to her that the green paper had not invited comments on repossession. My understanding is that she then moved to plan B, with her deputy suggesting that the issue could be resolved through Robert Brown's member's bill on the prevention of homelessness, provided that Mr Brown was prepared to dump all the other measures that he was proposing. Understandably, he was unwilling to do that. Plan C was the proposition that, at some point, Cathie Craigie would introduce a member's bill to address the Executive's concerns. It is a dubious practice for the Executive to hand-pick back benchers to help to plug holes in its legislative programme. I think that Cathie Craigie is sincere in what she is trying to bring about, but members' bills should be non-party political and the process should not be abused. I believe that the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Bill is a better vehicle for the necessary changes that we have identified across the parties. The same committees will have to address the issue of unjust repossession, whether in a member's bill or as part of this bill—the same consultation process will be involved. In the interests of efficiency, would it not be better to use Executive time to address the issue, rather than using up members' time? How can we introduce suspended repossession orders, which would give sheriffs the right to take into account a home owner's circumstances  before granting a repossession order against them? Four months have passed since I asked the Minister for Communities whether she would introduce legislation—I have yet to receive an answer. In England, the Administration of Justice Acts 1970 and 1973 allow for the suspension of mortgage repossession orders by permitting the court to use its judgment as to whether a reasonable time has been given to allow someone to pay back the arrears that are part and parcel of their problems. I want to propose an amendment that is not dissimilar to the provision in Robert Brown's bill—we both received help from Govan law centre with drafting. The proposed amendment would amend the Conveyancing and Feudal Reform (Scotland) Act 1970 to give Scottish home owners the same rights as their English counterparts. The Executive may argue that such an amendment is beyond the scope of the bill, but I would be grateful if, when the minister sums up, he would address the following points. The long title of the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Bill includes the phrase "to make new provisions as respects conveyancing". Mortgages are covered by conveyancing statute. Section 67 seeks to amend the law on heritable securities by modifying the application of sections 14 to 30 of the Conveyancing and Feudal Reform (Scotland) Act 1970. To introduce suspended repossession orders, we would seek to amend those same sections. Accordingly, this bill already seeks to modify the same area of law that we propose to amend in addressing the problems of repossession orders. I will write to Roseanna Cunningham, the convener of the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, to ask her to consider these matters. We should challenge Scotland to be more creative and innovative but, in doing so, why do we not provide leadership? If we want to prove that we are a can-do Parliament that uses a bit of common sense for the common good, why do we not end the misery of thousands of people who face repossession by supporting practical proposals for change?

I have finished my speech.

Yes.

Mr Raffan mentioned £12 million for the healthy homes initiative. Is not he confusing that with the warm deal proposals? Will he explain exactly where that £12 million will be spent or does he agree that it does not actually exist?

I welcome the bill and much of its content. I congratulate my colleague Roseanna Cunningham, the Justice and Home Affairs Committee and the Health and Community Care Committee on the immense amount of work that has obviously been put into the scrutiny of the bill. They have demonstrated clearly the true value of the committee structure in this Parliament, and they deserve the congratulations of all members. They set an example to us all. I agree with the point that was made by Gordon Jackson about the front-loading part of the consultation process. This legislation is the first evidence that that will work, and is a good example of how we can open up areas of concern at an early stage, to achieve consensus in resolving them. I will confine my comments to the subject of the nearest relative. The section of the bill that defines the nearest relative is of great importance to the entire bill, as it defines who may or may not be regarded as the person who is most appropriate to look after the affairs of the person who is unable to make their own decisions. A priority list is provided in the bill, which details who should be regarded as the nearest relative—child, father, mother, brother, sister and so on. The definition is crucial. The issue is whether this Parliament will recognise the rights and, importantly, the role that should be  played by partners who are not genetically, genealogically or technically legally linked to the patients. That key area must be addressed, as it concerns the way in which the bill will deal with the issue of same-sex partners. I welcome the fact that the minister is seeking to extend the definition of nearest relative to same-sex partners. I want to raise a point of procedure, although I am not sure whether there is such a thing. It might be helpful, in future debates, if notice is given—even during the debate—of any amendments that have been lodged by the Executive. A list of those amendments could be given to members. I understand that, in the Executive's response to the Justice and Home Affairs Committee, some of the amendments that are being proposed might not have been put forward. I raise that point in a spirit of co-operation. In the scrutiny of future legislation, a listing of Executive amendments might be considered. It is of some concern that same-sex relations have been left out of the original draft of the bill. The idea that a person who may have lived with their partner for decades could have their guardianship over that partner overruled by the next nearest relative, who may not have been around for the past 20 years, is untenable. The potential grief and upset that could be caused is incalculable. In our age, not to acknowledge that men and women live in long-term single-sex relationships—particularly when we are considering who is best placed to act as proxy—is unacceptable. Further consideration of that issue is necessary, and I am pleased that the Executive wants to do that. We should not imply to the lesbian and gay community in Scotland that their relationships are second-class, or that, on important issues that affect their human rights, they cannot rely on the Parliament to act in a just and fair way. I do not think that the bill will become a totem of gay rights. We should focus on the right of the patient to have the person who is closest to them helping to protect and support them and their decisions. I believe that—in a spirit of equality—there is consensus on the issue. We should address the needs of patients in times of crisis and distress. Few in the chamber would disagree with that. Human rights are universal. They apply to us all—patients and loved ones. I hope that we are all loved ones because, as Jamie Stone said, the bill potentially affects all of us. It is a credit to the Parliament that it is being introduced, and the manner in which that has been achieved is credit to the committees and to the Executive.

I thank the minister for her statement and for the prospect of a  full debate in the new year. The abolition of the board of Scottish Homes was in the Scottish National party's manifesto—interestingly, it was not in the Labour party's manifesto. Yet again, the minister plagiarises SNP policy. So much for the bonfire of the quangos—only Scottish Homes is affected. After two and a half years, I am pleased to note that the Minister for Communities has held to Labour's pre-election commitments, but does she agree that it is a pity that her colleagues have forgotten those commitments? It is a bit like having Guy Fawkes night in December. The minister said that abolishing Scottish Homes as a quango "is not . . . a broadside at quangos in general". Does that mean that the bonfire has fizzled out? On the other details in the minister's statement, does she agree that the single regulatory framework was in the SNP manifesto and not in the Labour party's? Does she further agree that the same performance standards on cross-tenure were in the SNP manifesto and not in the Labour party's? I am glad to see that she is coming round to the SNP's way of thinking. On a more constructive note on the right to buy, the minister did not specify how the proposals will affect smaller housing associations or what her plans are for compensating them. Can she confirm that there is no new money and that the 18,000 houses that she mentioned will come from a redirection of existing funds, so that there will be losers in some areas where planned houses will not be built? Members may know that the price of property that is bought under the right to buy can often be less than half the cost of building the same property. That could have a devastating impact on housing associations' investment programmes. Does the minister agree that, if she granted rights to one section of the community at the expense of another, she would be defeating what she is trying to achieve? Finally, is the minister aware that the finances in the feasibility study for the Glasgow transfer were calculated on diminishing the right to buy rather than extending it? What action is she taking to ensure that her prize stock transfer proposals will not collapse around her ears as lenders get cold feet because of her proposals?

Will Ms Alexander give way?

Parliament must be getting used to its regular fix of motherhood and apple pie from the Executive, particularly from this combination of ministers. Yes, the issues being introduced by the Minister for Communities and her team are important, but their motions are so bland and self-congratulatory that it is questionable whether debating them is a good use of the Parliament's time. We could, for example, be discussing real issues about racism and inequality in society. The packed benches are evidence of that. The fact that the Executive treats issues of race or gender as social issues gives us a flavour of its approach; it sees them as issues to be managed and social services to be delivered. SNP members are clear: race and gender are issues of rights—basic human rights—and justice. Basic human rights are central to this country of ours and to our newborn democracy and are a prerequisite for what we do—or should do. What do we get from the Executive? General, meaningless words about phased and participative approaches and about service design and delivery. What is all that about? It sounds like a description of the Edinburgh Ikea showroom and catalogue launch—phased, participative, service design and delivery. On human rights, how can the Executive prove its commitment to equality of opportunity when we have yet to hear a statement from it about how it will stand up for refugees and asylum seekers in Scotland now that the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 has been passed at Westminster? The act most certainly has an impact on equal opportunities yet, again, in key areas, the Executive is powerless without the ability to legislate on equal opportunities. How can we confirm that the Executive is  committed to equal opportunity when we have yet to have a chance to debate a Scottish response to an act that will have a significant impact on how this country deals with immigration and asylum issues, that will arouse sensitivities and that has the potential to cause racial tension? I remind members that in the 1970s and 1980s, Vietnamese and Chilean refugees were housed in difficult-to-let areas of Glasgow. They suffered from a lack of support and racial harassment. During the Gulf war, stranded Iraqi students were housed in high-rise flats, which they were forced to leave because of continuous harassment. The council reported that the experience had been a disaster. How can the Executive say that it believes in human rights, social justice and equality when it is complicit in helping through the odious Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 at Westminster? The act removes the human rights of asylum seekers and reduces them to the status of bonded servants, using tokens at the company store to meet their most basic needs. The act removes the right of Scottish local authorities to come to the aid of asylum seekers through the use of emergency grants; it denies Scottish local authorities the right to aid asylum seekers suffering from mental health difficulties; it removes Scottish local authorities' ability to help to house asylum seekers; it removes Scottish local authorities' ability to provide services to aid the children of asylum seekers. The act is rooted in inequality and amends four separate Scottish acts. It is an act on which, with the complicity of the Executive, this chamber was denied any discussion. If the Executive thinks that the effect of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 on equal opportunities in Scotland will be negligible, it should stand up and say so. All we have from the Executive are bland assurances, in response to written questions, that consultation is taking place. There is no explanation of what that consultation is. We know what consultation means: it is a one-way street, with Westminster doing all the telling and Holyrood reduced to a listening post. Does the Executive think that its support for the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 would pass the equality checklist for MSPs launched by the First Minister last night? Does the Scottish Executive believe that changes to Scottish legislation will mainstream equality? Does it believe that full information has been given and analysis made of the impact on equality groups? Have the full range of options and those options' differential impacts on equality groups been presented? Have the direct and indirect effects of proposals been taken into account? I think the answer to that checklist for MSPs on equality is no.  I think that the Executive knows that the Immigration and Asylum Act—as it affects four pieces of Scottish legislation—would fail its own equality test. I want a Scotland of equal opportunity, in which we combat racism, whether it is personal or institutional. We will be judged not on our fine words, however, but on what we do. On this key test, the Executive has failed in the past few months. It is clear that, on this issue, the Executive is quite happy to be an administrative assembly for Westminster rather than a powerhouse Parliament leading the people of Scotland.

Will Robert Brown give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made in its programme of tackling dampness in Scotland's housing stock. (S1O-715)

Will the minister confirm that the healthy homes initiative was one of the few things that the Liberal Democrats brought to the partnership agreement? Will he confirm what the Minister for Communities said in the written evidence that she gave the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee? She said that the warm deal money was to tackle dampness, but he has said that it is available only for insulation. His minister is close to the Liberal Democrats, but will he confirm that the healthy homes initiative does not actually exist and that he has sold them a pig in a poke?

rose  —

Will the minister give way?

I am grateful that the minister has finally given way. Although we recognise that producing targets is the right thing to do, we are concerned that the Executive's targets are vague and meaningless. Some 800,000 people in Scotland live at or below income support level. How many of them will have been brought out of poverty after the first session of the Parliament?

At long last, we are having a debate in the chamber on poverty and the social justice targets. I welcome it and am pleased to note that the Minister for Communities  has come round to the SNP way of thinking, using the term social justice as opposed to social inclusion. I have often thought that social inclusion is an inadequate way to describe a campaign against poverty and inequality. As shadow social justice minister, I am glad that the Minister for Communities has changed her use of language. Unfortunately, she has not yet changed her policies. I want to mention at this point the pensioners who have come to hear this debate, in particular those from the Strathclyde Elderly Forum. The timing of the debate sits uncomfortably with the announcement that the improvement in pensions will be only 75p a week. How does that square with one of the minister's commitments to "Make sure older people are financially secure", which is one of the targets in "Social Justice"? We should listen closely to the people who have come to speak to us about the plight of pensioners in Scotland. I want to make a strong objection on behalf of my party—and, I think, other members—about how the Executive has approached this debate. It is an indication of contempt that this issue, which the First Minister has said is at the heart of his Government, merits only a 70 minute debate this afternoon. I am sure that I am not the only person who thinks that Monday's media circus was objectionable. People would have expected a reasonable amount of time to question ministers on the range of areas they addressed in their announcement. It is a measure of how seriously the Executive treats the subject that it crams a debate on poverty and land reform into one afternoon, whereas a debate on the millennium bug, on which there is unanimity in the chamber, merits a three-hour debate. The Executive was elected on an expectation that it would start to deal with the backlog of poverty and despair that was built up by Conservative members in this chamber and left to fester by their former Scottish Office ministerial colleagues. When those ministers commissioned an action team to examine how poverty was evaluated, it must have been with some trepidation. There must have been a lingering fear, a recognition of the size of the task and a realisation that they lacked the required will and resources. When the incoming Minister for Communities read that action team's report, those fears must have been realised. The evaluation framework team was lead by Scottish Executive officials, incorporating a wide range of experience from Government departments, the voluntary sector and trade unions. They came up with a set of 50 indicators to evaluate poverty in Scotland. Their  draft progress report was issued to the social inclusion network, which the Minister for Communities chairs, and thereafter it disappeared from sight. A final report has yet to be published. What we see now is a watered down, weaker, less vigorous, vaguer, more selective approach to the social justice targets launched by the Executive on Monday. In fact, of the 50 indicators that the action team recommended, 22 were ignored and the remainder have been weakened considerably. Where the action team laid down specific measurements, the Executive uses broad statements. The purpose of the action team report was to develop "a robust evaluation framework to monitor success in promoting a more inclusive society". The minister is waving the blue document at me—I have read the document on milestones and definitions too. The purpose of the "Social Justice" report seems to be to announce easily achievable targets, vague commitments, wish lists and promises to care more. The tone of the document is set from the beginning by the failure to adopt the European definition of poverty, which would allow international comparisons. The headline figure that should be used is the percentage of total Scottish population living on an income below 50 per cent of median Scottish income. The Executive has shied away from that. There is nothing robust about the task that the Executive has set itself. It has concocted a series of indicators designed to suit Executive and UK Government policy initiatives rather than to measure poverty in Scotland. The action team recommended that the measurements of child poverty should include the measurements of workless households and income levels. It also recommended that the Executive publish its success or failure in the other areas that give a true indication of poverty—free school meals and overcrowded housing. Those indicators have been dumped because they make for uncomfortable reading for ministers—today, next year and the year after that; not just in five, 10 or 20 years' time. At least 400,000 children live in poverty in Scotland. If, as the minister says, she aims to lift 60,000 children out of poverty in the next three years, what does she intend to do with the remaining 340,000? Will she simply ignore them? Twenty-year wish lists mean nothing if under the minister's proposals, today's three-year-old toddler would bring up her children in poverty. Where is the hope and vision in that? Where is the joined-up thinking and real  evidence? The targets aim at "Increasing the proportion of people with learning disabilities able to live at home or in a 'homely' environment". Only last week, the general manager of Lothian Health told MSPs that the Arbuthnott formula means that the board faces a 22 per cent cut, which could mean people being returned to institutions in order to cut costs. Perhaps the greatest omission in the "Social Justice" report is housing. It is interesting that the minister's own responsibilities may be the easiest to meet. We must ask whether that is a coincidence. While the action team recommended that we measure, assess and publish levels of homelessness, overcrowding, severe dampness and people experiencing fuel poverty, the Executive has put forward the blandest of statements. Instead of a robust approach, we are left with a target of "Increasing the quality and variety of homes in our most disadvantaged communities". Instead of being assessed on eradicating dampness, ending overcrowding, acting on homelessness and ending fuel poverty, the Executive is assessing itself on having increased the "quality and variety of homes in the most disadvantaged areas". That is a target so vague as to be meaningless. The Executive plans to award itself brownie points on its regular annual report. There are concerns. This morning, in the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, we heard from tenants about their concerns about modern-day urban clearances for the millennium. We must address that issue. I would like to conclude by mentioning fuel poverty. This is Warm Homes Week. If there is one measure that should have been at the heart of the "Social Justice" report, it is the target to end fuel poverty. If the minister is so confident in the measures that she has announced, surely she should have included that target. The Executive has come a long way, by recognising the issue and setting targets. It has proposed something that is welcome—we say that in our amendment—but what it proposes is not robust enough. We regard the "Social Justice" report as a betrayal of the Executive's promises to the poor and we will not allow that to be forgotten. The Executive is in danger of overloading on managerial, new Britain-speak, of mission statements and milestones without substance. Harold Wilson once said that the Labour party "is a moral crusade or it is nothing."  On the strength of the report, Labour is betraying its heritage by providing people in poverty in Scotland with nothing at all. I move amendment S1M-314.2, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: "recognises the appalling poverty we have in Scotland and the need for immediate action to tackle this poverty; welcomes the publication by the Scottish Executive of the report Social Justice ...a Scotland where everyone matters; believes however that the report lacks definition, range, focus and clear achievable targets and agrees that the Executive should re-evaluate the report brought forward by the Evaluation Framework action team and bring forward revised targets and indicators to the Parliament."

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The Executive launched its social justice targets on Monday and trailed the news on Sunday. On Thursday 4 November, you said that it is up to "the Executive which statements are of sufficient policy significance to be made in Parliament."— [ Official Report , 4 November 1999; Vol 3, c 356.]  Do you agree that a launch with so many ministers and with such a turnout today shows that, in such a matter, we must ensure that the Executive does not treat the Parliament with disrespect? What can you do to restore people's confidence that measures will be announced in this Parliament and to this chamber?

The First Minister talked about "active and current prejudice". Does the minister agree that racial harassment is one of the worst forms of anti-social behaviour? Within her remit, does she plan to extend the monitoring of the operation of anti-social behaviour orders to such harassment?

Will the member give way?

The subject of free education is topical at the moment, given the issue of tuition fees. Does the Conservative education spokesperson believe in free education for three and four-year-olds?

I thank the minister for her statement. I am sure that she agrees that 11,000 rough sleepers are Scotland's scandal. The minister confirmed that the £20 million is a re-release of announcements that have been made previously. Does she agree that she is in danger of recycling cash announcements? Furthermore, is she not in danger of recycling homeless people back on to the streets unless money is put into housing? Only this morning, the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee was told by housing professionals that the real problem of homelessness is found in the lack of affordable, accessible housing. The rough sleepers initiative advisory group—the minister's own group—said that "the Rough Sleepers Initiative will quickly silt up if supported move on accommodation is not made available." Can the minister offer concrete assurances that those who are taken off the streets are not simply recycled back on to the streets later through a lack of resources at the next phase? Does the minister agree that councils need cash for housing, otherwise we will have not only recycled announcements but will be in danger of recycling our young people back on to the streets?

On a point of order. Following the point of order last week about Executive ministers pre-announcing statements that are coming to the chamber, the Minister for Communities announced a £20 million package for homelessness on the radio this morning. Will you give an opinion on whether that was appropriate?

I welcome this important debate, but I do not think that the Lothians count scandal is necessarily the talk of the steamie. It does, however, go to the heart and soul of this place, because it concerns the democracy of the Parliament, and the Scottish Parliament does matter to the people of Scotland. If we expect people to come out and vote, and if we want to encourage people—particularly young people—to use their vote, we have to ensure that every vote counts. That is the strong message: these votes must be counted regardless. I was in a strange position. There was not just the one Lothians count at Meadowbank: there were two. I was perhaps the only member at the Bathgate count, where the same number of ballot papers was counted. Theirs was an exemplary count, which is an important point as there were different factors behind the problems that arose. When I left Bathgate at around 3 or 4 in the morning, every vote had been counted. I arrived to find an utter shambles at Meadowbank. It is significant that, in the same region, there were two quite different experiences. There are lessons to be learnt from the experience. An accident was waiting to happen at Meadowbank. When Alistair Darling was elected in 1997, the declaration took place at 4.30 am, which shows that there were problems then. Important practical suggestions must be made. No one has mentioned our electronic voting system. A strong case could be made to review the form in which the election took place. I suggest that electronic voting should be considered. When elections are held is important. I call for separate local government and Scottish Parliament elections—separate elections and counts are essential. The key to the debate is the role of the secretary of state. Mr Aitchison knew that there was a problem on 12 May; Scottish Office officers were informed on 23 June. Then there was silence. Elections are at the heart and soul of this Parliament and of democracy. It is essential that we find out from the secretary of state his role, what he knew and how he behaved. If we have to ask the First Minister to do that, we will do so. I congratulate Lord James on securing this debate. We must learn exactly what happened and what the role and responsibility of the secretary of state was. I am not satisfied that everything that could have been done was done to ensure that we were aware of the problem.

To ask the  Scottish Executive whether it will outline the role, remit and objectives of the new steering group set up to oversee the next phases of work on stock transfer of Glasgow council housing. (S1O-547)

Now that the minister has taken personal charge of the Glasgow stock transfer proposal, does she see a conflict of interest in her role as the person who is chairing the implementation of the stock transfer while she is chairing the allocation of the bidding process? Will she explain how she will deal with that conflict of interest, and is such busybody behaviour to become the norm in her pursuit of public policy?

This is not the first time that the Conservative party has been out on a limb in Scotland. Comments made during this debate have reflected that. This is the Parliament's third debate on the  voluntary sector, following the general debate on the subject and Andrew Wilson's debate on Scottish Criminal Record Office checks. It is clear, therefore, that the Parliament has a commitment to the voluntary sector and to debating the issues that affect many hundreds of thousands of volunteers and many organisations. The fact that this is our third such debate may also reflect the fact that, until May, the majority of people in the chamber pursued their political activities, technically, in a voluntary capacity. We know the saying that one volunteer is better than 10 pressed men. I am not suggesting that we should have conscription of MSPs, unless of course the minister expects to extend her citizens juries to a national level. Political volunteering may be an odd example, but I hope it will give us some understanding of the time and effort that many people put into voluntary activities and shoring up the fabric of our society. Most people would reflect that those people's contributions are far more constructive than being involved in politics. In applauding the voluntary sector, I will take this opportunity to congratulate the Maggie's Centre appeal in Edinburgh, which provides security of funding to a magnificent service and centre near the Western general hospital. The centre provides a supportive, comfortable, non-clinical environment to which cancer sufferers can go for support and advice. The centre has no statutory funding and running costs of £200,000 a year, and the people of Edinburgh have worked together to raise £100,000 in less than two months. I also pay tribute to the role of the Edinburgh Evening News in promoting the appeal, and to the staff and volunteers who provide the service. Maggie's Centre is one of our success stories. However, in the past month, I met a woman who was involved in a Parkinson's support group in West Lothian. I met her at the West Lothian volunteer exchange annual general meeting. That organisation goes by the name of LOVE, so we get a bit of passion in the voluntary sector. She told me about the difficulties that her organisation experienced with the local hospital, in trying to ensure that people who were diagnosed with Parkinson's were made aware of the local support group. Her group was also losing its treasurer and she was not sure for how much longer she could continue. Both examples are from the health service and from a relatively close area, but they show a difference in experience and in ways of working between voluntary organisations and local hospitals. We must emphasise that the voluntary sector is not just one sector; it is diverse. I agree with Linda Fabiani that the command and control aspects of the compact will be detrimental. Bill Aitken should be aware that Big Sister is not  watching him. I deliberately used health examples because, although 48 per cent of voluntary organisations operate in social care, 52 per cent do not. We have to recognise those organisations that operate in health, culture, economic and social development, law, advocacy, education and the environment. There is a danger that in the laudable drive to recognise the key role of voluntary organisations in delivering social provision we obscure the experiences of the wider voluntary sector. However, I think that people who provide social care need stable statutory funding. Many organisations face the problem of getting stable funding. Tensions arise because, increasingly, voluntary organisations are asked to deliver the Scottish Executive's agenda in the form of social inclusion programmes. Increasingly, organisations have to compete with other providers, which sometimes creates a bidding war in which voluntary organisations that would otherwise be first-class partners are pitched against each other. There is an urgent need for strategic co-ordinated community planning to allow us to stop the fat-cat consultants feeding off the poverty industry and replace it with partnership and co-operation between organisations that do not feel threatened by one another. We cannot pretend that everything is rosy in the social policy garden. Suspicions abound between different bodies in the public and social sector. Turf territory disputes arising from a lack of secure funding do nothing to help good social policy in this country. In particular, non-departmental public bodies have suspicions about voluntary organisations. Although the compact exists, until the guidelines are in full operation, we may have good cause to be sceptical about its uptake. Although the Executive can commit the civil servants at Victoria Quay to the principles in the compact, what about local enterprise companies, health boards and other organisations? I hope that when committees meet representatives of LECs and health authorities, members will ask them what they are doing to implement the compact. Too many pilot funding projects are set up that cannot continue because there is an ever-increasing emphasis on new initiatives. Let us have continued funding. Alex Neil made some valuable points. On the corporate sector, not everything has to come in in cash. Many organisations provide good resources in staff time and experience. Sandra White made a very valuable point. We are talking about the role of social inclusion and teachers, but if voluntary organisations cannot have access, the amount of resources and support  that they can provide will be diminished. I welcome the independent commission to review charity law. I will consider some of the issues that have been raised in the amendments. The Conservatives have to be reminded that there is more to the voluntary sector than charity. Bill Aitken's comments were perhaps complacent. On our amendment, the remarks of Cathy Peattie and Richard Simpson were interesting. The compact document states that the Government undertakes to "establish a framework to monitor and evaluate its operations". There needs to be an independent body. I agree that the committees of this Parliament should address this issue, but, as I think Cathy Peattie said, if the voluntary sector wants it, there should be a framework. There is a difference between a quango and a tango. A tango is a totally autonomous non-governmental public body. The independent body should be a tango. The jury is out on the compact. Our amendment is meant, constructively, to provide a mechanism whereby there can be continuing dialogue and development—perhaps to such a stage that non-signatories feel comfortable enough to sign up—and a positive relationship. There are concerns about how we work; for example, about the advertising of this debate. Many organisations would have liked to be here, but were not told about the debate. It is important that those organisations are involved whenever the Parliament discusses the voluntary sector. That is a test of how we go forward. The jury is still out. The clear message from the contributions today is that we must respect the independence of the third sector and ensure that it does not become part 1a—just part of the first sector.

I, too, welcome the debate, the partnership work plan, and the announcement of the much-needed and long-awaited funding. We are in danger of being overcome with consensus. I seem regularly to find myself counting the number of SNP manifesto commitments that pop up as Executive announcements, but I am glad that the doubling of women's refuge places is one of them. As someone who has in this chamber raised the question of refuge places, and who walked with Women's Aid in the march along Princes Street, I am pleased to hear that announcement. This afternoon, we are feeling the power and the breadth of what this Parliament can do to influence the Executive. I am certain that the attendance at, participation in and passion of previous debates in this chamber persuaded those who hold the purse-strings to release the money that was announced today. I want to talk about the amendment and the need to emphasise the Parliament's national role, as this is our first opportunity to vote on this issue. By adopting the amendment, the Parliament can acknowledge its national responsibility and role, and can acknowledge that the partnership, which was set up before the opening of the Parliament, has done some excellent work. We will always need to push this debate further, however great the personal commitment of the ministers. I have some serious concerns about the announcement. The amount of new money that was declared was £8 million. If £2 million of that will come from Scottish Homes in capital funding and £3 million from the Executive, the £3 million match funding must be new money, otherwise the total of £8 million does not add up. The minister should give us an assurance about that. The Scottish Homes money for refuges is capital expenditure; I am concerned about where the staffing resource will come from. In Glasgow, 80 per cent of the funding for refuges comes from housing benefit. Will the minister make representations on Scotland's needs in the current reform of housing benefit? That issue puts into perspective the Parliament's role in the national strategy and debate. In public education and prevention, the word that must be used is respect. Johann Lamont was right to talk about power and relationships between men and women. As parents, men and women have a responsibility—as the mother of a young  son, I am very conscious of how he is brought up to think about relationships. The point about women with disabilities was extremely well made by George Reid, as was the point Roseanna Cunningham made about probation schemes. We talk about shelter and support services; I remind the Parliament that there is a shortage of council housing. One of the problems that we will face is how we ensure that refuges are not filled with women who cannot go anywhere else because there is no decent council housing in an area where they have family support. One of the tensions in the debate has been about the role of law enforcement. I congratulate the Justice and Home Affairs Committee on making progress on that and I hope that the Parliament will find the time and space to allow the measure that the committee is considering to come before it. As Maureen Macmillan said, we have to recognise the role of teachers. Their social inclusion role is a hot, topical debate. We talk about 100,000 children and young people living with domestic violence, but if we want the front-line workers to be able to support those children, they have to be properly resourced and supported. The reaction to today's announcement should not be celebratory, as that could risk giving rise to complacency. We should say thank you for the resources, but we cannot be complacent in the face of such a problem. Resources will never be enough until we know that the social changes that are needed nationally match the support that is given locally. That is why we are moving the amendment; we must do everything to create a national social climate in which there is no excuse for domestic abuse.

To follow Andy Kerr, I would say that housing investment is at an all-time low. There is some good news on housing, in that under current plans there will be an increase in expenditure from £464 million in 1997-98 to £640 million in 2001-02. I welcome the £50 million of recycled money going into the housing budget. I would ask Liberal Democrat members if they have examined where their healthy homes initiative, which was put into the partnership agreement, appears in the minister's statement. I do not think that it does. The bad news is that, over the past decade, housing's share of the Scottish Office budget has declined from 7.2 per cent to 3.1 per cent. That is the context of public service investment that we are addressing. When we examine the figures, there has been a fall in gross public sector investment from £1,195 million in 1992-93 to £604 million in 1997-98. That shows the scale of the problem. Housing association investment fell by 41 per cent from 1995-96 to 1997-98. Local authority investment declined by 45 per cent. That is not a gap in public spending; it is a gaping chasm.  We need strong public services and the political will to support strong public services. Why do we need that? It is not just about pounds, shillings and pence; it is about people and their needs. Overcrowding causes family tensions. Families who want to live near each other are scattered to the four winds, because there is no affordable housing locally. Young people are forced to leave their homes in rural areas. Poor public investment leads to the breakdown in the social need to keep communities together. The Government and the Executive talk about social inclusion—good housing is part of that. One in four people live in damp houses and there are 2,500 excess deaths. In this land of plenty energy, we allow old people to die because we do not invest in healthy homes. It is all in the name of prudence. Remember that prudence can come in many shapes and forms, and at this time Prudence is an old lady who stalks Scotland, lives in a cold house and may end up in hospital because of cold-related illness. When she is assessed for community care, she will be waiting eight months hence to get a place, because the council coffers cannot afford a community care place for her as the public purse prudence does not recognise her namesake. Labour would rather keep the war chest closed than address real need. The Executive proposals fail Scotland because a disproportionate amount of its budget is spent on its obsession with wholesale stock transfer proposals. The policy of transferring 25 per cent of Scotland's housing stock could cost as much as £4.8 billion over the next 40 years. Is that a legacy that we should leave our children? On investment, I will quote the submission of the Glasgow and west of Scotland forum of housing associations to the housing green paper. It put it better than I could: "Affordable good quality social housing requires significant amounts of public subsidy. Extending the role of the private sector without increasing public expenditure input is a recipe for either spiralling rents or inadequate maintenance or both." The investment strategy proposed in the financial proposals of the Scottish Executive will deliver precisely that. Then there is Barnett. Remember the Barnett squeeze as it will have significant effects on housing budgets. The Scottish Executive, tied to the UK tax-cutting obsession, restricts borrowing consents of local authorities that retain their housing stock. The consequence will be increased rent, which will damage social inclusion strategies and increase benefit dependency. In conclusion, the Executive must realise that that if it is to deliver its stated aims, adequate levels of public subsidy must be retained, as must  realistic levels of public investment. On its own, private finance will never meet public need adequately. Labour's Tory policy is delivering poorer public services and higher finances as a result of private finance. What Scotland needs is a Government that is prepared to tell the truth about tax and that is prepared to stand up for Scotland's interests. I am sorry to say that what I have heard from the Minister for Finance does not do either.

Is that the sort of statement that Brian Monteith would make about a male member of this chamber?

The key phrase in the Executive's motion is "a vibrant manufacturing sector", but some of today's speeches raise questions as to whether we really have a vibrant manufacturing sector. John McAllion referred to a tyre manufacturer and a jeans maker, and members from West Lothian will be aware that those are the two industries that we have lost or are likely to lose because of closure. That leads me to ask whether we have a vibrant manufacturing sector. In business, the saying goes that the only certainty is change, but to have change we must have flexibility. That means flexibility of thought rather than just flexibility of action, and that means the move to the knowledge economy. Education is key to the knowledge economy and anything that acts as a disincentive to young people going into further and higher education is a matter to which we must give attention. Saying that in business the only certainty is change is rather an obvious statement, but so is the motion. Stating the obvious does not in itself supply the solution to problems in the manufacturing sector or tell us how we can promote the knowledge economy. I want to mention interest rates and the pound, because they are crucial to the debate. In the Lothians, Continental Tyres, a traditional manufacturer, had problems not only with exporting, but with investment. Many companies consider locating in Scotland, but the cost of investment can be a disincentive. I spoke to people from a high-tech company that is one of the major employers in West Lothian. That state-of-the-art high-tech company represents the other  side of the spectrum, but its representatives said that, although they wanted to make the step to the next generation of thinking in the knowledge economy, they had a problem with investment caused by the strength of the pound. We should consider some of the practical proposals. The minister mentioned improvements to labour market intelligence, but there has to be company intelligence and that is a matter of attitude and approach. We should not be talking about them and us in discussing business and employment issues; we should have an on-going interactive dialogue, rather than rapid responses to crises. Rather than a rapid response review, I would prefer proactive planning units, so that there can be constant interaction. On a practical note, we must ensure that training money can be allocated now, so that men in their 50s who are losing their jobs in traditional manufacturing are not left behind. In moving to a knowledge economy, we must all move together. By moving together, we can have a confident economy. Yes, let us move to a knowledge economy, but let us be realistic about whether we have a vibrant manufacturing base.

I, too, welcome the support for the voluntary sector that the Executive has shown and the tributes that have been paid by members from all parties to Scotland's many volunteers, most of whom probably do not think of themselves as volunteers. I understand that Wendy Alexander has volunteered—rather than been press-ganged—to come to the SNP conference tomorrow for a fringe meeting debate. I am sure that she will receive a courteous reception. This could be a key and defining debate for the Parliament. It is a signal of intent of how we think we will develop and what our relationship with the voluntary sector will be. George Reid made an important point: we have to see how far the Parliament is prepared to go to take on board the consultative steering group's recommendations. The real test will be this debate's follow-through. Hugh Henry should be aware that the Parliament has not decided its relationship with local government yet. General competency has yet to be agreed, although I appreciate the points that he made. In this debate, we should look at strategy, the operational aspect and the cultural attitude. The compact has to have analysis and I understand that there will be a debate on that at some point. The issue of the civic forum must be raised again. We should explore policy-making issues. We are talking about involving professionals from the voluntary sector in the consultation process. However, on Friday, other Lothian MSPs and I were involved in a question-and-answer session with 40 organisations from the voluntary sector. They told us to think about involving the users of the voluntary sector in the consultation process. They pointed out that the Scottish Office had involved professionals in its consultation on HIV policy, but not the sufferers. I hope that progress can be made in that area.  Operationally, we have to address funding. We should recognise that the reason why local authorities are cutting back on voluntary sector funding is cuts in their own funding. In 1996-97, funding dropped from £134 million to £110 million. That is a 20 per cent drop. I would also like the minister to address the point that was made about police checks. Angus MacKay acknowledged that criminal records checking has to be self-funding. Will the Executive give a commitment that it will meet that expense for the voluntary sector, particularly for children's organisations?

I agree with that. A motion that deals with that has been lodged and I hope that Dr Simpson will support it. Cathy Jamieson touched on the point that if we want front-line services to be met, we cannot have our voluntary sector organisations being tied up with bureaucracy and red tape. As someone who has come from the private sector, I say to members that, sometimes, best value does not come from competitive tendering but comes from the quality of relationships that have been built up between suppliers of services. Many people who are involved in the sector do not want to speak out because they do not want to bite the hand that feeds them. If providers of core services are in despair because they cannot provide the level of service that they want to because of a lack of funds, we are in a serious situation. We need to look at the social economy—what Des McNulty said on that was important. The attitude of the debate should be one of respect: health boards should provide rooms for voluntary sector organisations, for example, and the voluntary sector should be represented on the task forces and inquiries that are being set up. It has been suggested that the Government treats the voluntary sector with the same respect as it treats the Confederation of British Industry, but how many members of the Cabinet have included someone from the voluntary sector in their reviews? That is the real test. We want action in this area and we want it delivered with hard cash and by a positive attitude that can promote creative and innovative thinking. That will happen only in a sector that is confident and at ease with itself. The present climate of public sector funding is in danger of stifling that. We welcome the sentiment of the motion and we recognise the signal of intent but we are impatient for support and action.

Does Mr McNulty agree, however, that although the intention exists and people are proposing policy practice notes or whatever, the reality is—as Cathy Jamieson so eloquently said—that most voluntary organisations have to cope with one-year funding? That causes great administrative problems and anxiety, and increases costs.

Does Robert Brown agree that the introduction of suspended repossession orders could easily be done as part of the feudal bill, as presented by the Executive, to amend the Conveyancing and Feudal Reform (Scotland) Act 1970, and that we do not need a member's bill, which takes up this Parliament's time, when the Executive can achieve the same thing in its own time?

I welcome the minister's statement, as new resources in this area are always welcome. The Scottish National party is pleased to note that the Executive occasionally listens to the Opposition and that, to some small degree, the minister has listened to our call for an increase in public spending on housing. We are also happy to support the announcement made on Tuesday, which echoes the key manifesto pledges that we made in May, in particular on a rural rent deposit scheme that was mentioned. In all sincerity, however, announcements such as the one made by the minister would be better made in this chamber at debates such as this. As a member of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, I have yet to receive a paper detailing where the extra money will be spent. Bearing in mind that the Scottish Executive's website has crashed, we cannot be expected to get information about such announcements there. The Minister for Communities has identified her main priorities. Our amendment seeks to do two key things: to put the homelessness issue into the proper context and to ask members for their support in bringing forward the Executive's  timetable for housing legislation. I will deal with each in turn. The SNP is concerned that the debate on homelessness has centred around solely the issue of rooflessness. It is with some concern that we hear the minister talking about moving homelessness away from housing. Yes, we recognise that there is a social dimension to homelessness. However, we should be warned about the distinctive move that the Executive seems to be making on this issue; it is a move that we must view with deep concern. The Scottish Executive's announcement of key schemes, such as the rent deposit scheme, is a small step on the way to recognising that there is more to homelessness than sleeping rough. The SNP is also pleased that the Executive is listening to the experts in the field and realising that more needs to be done on the causes of homelessness. According to the Chartered Institute of Housing, evictions and exclusions from housing need are among the main causes of social exclusion. Yet the Scottish Executive does not keep any central record of exclusions for rent arrears or for anti-social behaviour. In England, Shelter estimates that local authorities are excluding around 200,000 people from council waiting lists and allocations, largely due to rent arrears. The result is that we have no real statistical base from which to calculate the position or to identify where rises in homelessness occur. We have no way of tracking when large jumps in homelessness take place, or of finding out the causes of those jumps. For example, we know that from 1986 to 1987 in the Highlands 619 households applied to local authorities as homeless households. In the last 10 years, there has been a jump of 130 per cent. There is no statistical evidence by which we can measure whether, during that time, housing authorities in the Highlands and Islands had increased eviction levels. There are no centrally held statistics on the number of people who were excluded from applying to a particular authority in the Highlands and Islands. I am aware that the Executive plans to publish statistics on evictions from April 2000 and I welcome those plans. However, we require information on what has happened over the past 10 years. Apart from the lack of information, there are further aspects of homelessness that we must consider. We have yet to have a comprehensive policy on homelessness that deals with issues of hidden homelessness. I understand that there is a review, but we will not receive the report of that review until spring next year. We must move swiftly on this issue. I recognise the points that the minister made earlier, but we must acknowledge that there is more to homelessness than the issue  of rough sleeping. We must examine the backlog of house adaptations for people with disabilities. There are people who live with family or friends, and who are unable to move into their own home because of a lack of suitable accommodation. Such circumstances are part of recognising that housing is very much a part of homelessness. Hidden homelessness includes the thousands of older people who cannot move out of NHS hospitals, as there is no suitable accommodation for them. We heard earlier today that there is no commitment to look at resources for women who flee domestic violence, which is one of the most acute forms of housing need. We must address that issue. Every year, 24,000 children are made homeless in Scotland. On the point about joined-up Government, we need housing legislation, but we need it sooner rather than later. It was with great disappointment that the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee heard about the Executive's commitment to introduce a bill in mid-2000, rather than in early 2000. That is not good enough. We need a housing bill during this millennium, not during the next millennium. We must ensure that, if the Executive is to move on stock transfer, we protect the rights of tenants. Contracts are all very well, but we need statutory instruments.

I thank Margaret. I recognise that, as the committee's convener, she ensures that we hold collective discussions on this issue. I am sure that she would echo my earlier point, which she made very well during the committee meeting, that announcements such as the one that was made on Tuesday should be made first to the committee. On housing legislation, we must examine seriously the Executive's radical changes, such as the decision to conduct a mass sell-off of council houses without offering people the protection that is required in law for the homeless. Local councils are best placed to deal with the social aspects that the minister mentioned. They are in the lead position to look after our housing interests. The Scottish Executive, and the Minister for Communities in particular, should require the homeless review to be completed by Christmas, and the Executive should introduce legislation in the next three months, rather than in the next nine months. Let the draft bill be published for  consideration within that time scale. Let us have a firm commitment. I seek support for this amendment for two reasons. First, we must recognise that homelessness is not just about rough sleeping, regardless of what the Executive says, although rough sleeping is an important problem that must be addressed and the resources are welcome. Secondly, we need housing legislation. If there is one issue on which the people who elected us to this place want us to take action, it is housing. It is a disgrace that we will have to wait until the next millennium for legislation. I move, as an amendment to motion S1M-154, in the name of Ms Wendy Alexander, to leave out from "the Scottish" to end and insert "tackling homelessness is one of the major challenges facing it, that it supports the Rough Sleepers Initiative and welcomes the Scottish Executive's continuing support for it, and that it recognises that rough sleeping is only one aspect of homelessness and that any initiative designed to tackle it can only deal with the reality of rough sleeping not the causes behind it; calls upon the Scottish Executive to make the newly established Homelessness Taskforce a priority and to bring forward early measures to deal with the causes of homelessness, new regulations to help homeless people and new legislative proposals to bring homelessness legislation up to date; believes that Executive time is required for early legislation to deal with homelessness and housing in general, and calls upon the Scottish Executive to bring forward the proposed publishing date of a draft housing bill to the end of 1999."

I welcome the additional funding. As a member of the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee, I am still waiting to see a copy of the announcement that was made on Tuesday. That point needs to be raised. There is concern that access to finance for rough sleepers initiatives across the country is through challenge funding. Bidding for funding means that there are winners and losers. Will the minister commit to ending the challenge funding aspect of the rough sleepers initiative?

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to double the number of refuge places for women and their  children fleeing domestic violence in Scotland. (S1O-310)

Is the minister aware that 8,000 women and children had to be turned away from women's refuges? In Hamilton, she will be interested to know, 300 women and children were turned away. Will she make every possible effort to negotiate with her Minister for Finance to ensure that refuge places—which were the subject of an excellent debate in the chamber last week—will be doubled?

Members will be aware that I have taken up the interests of my constituents who are workers at the Continental plant. The minister may wish that I had not, but that is our duty in this Parliament. By supporting this motion, the Parliament can stand shoulder to shoulder with the Continental workers in their fight for a fair deal from the general management. A Scottish Continental worker facing redundancy is worth no less than an Irish worker—and certainly not 40 per cent less. In a number of discussions that I have had with the work force, the management and the unions, I have been struck by their compelling case. Workers have taken a wage freeze, increased hours and productivity, and changed their shift patterns on a number of occasions to make the survival package work—and it was working. Members should be aware that, recently, high-performing machinery has been removed from the plant in the face of a slump in demand. In the past three months, 120 tyre moulds have been removed. How does that square with a market downturn? They are obviously needed somewhere. I understand that Ford is now refusing Continental tyres made in eastern Europe as those plants do not have the assurances of the International Standards Organisation that Newbridge can guarantee. As Margaret Smith said, Continental made substantial profits recently. It has invested £20 million in sponsoring the Champions League to promote its good name and reputation. That reputation is endangered by its refusal to give its Scottish workers a fair deal and the respect due for the hard work and commitment they have shown. If we are talking about champions, this Parliament must champion Scottish workers. Independent Ireland has tough labour laws; we do not have those powers but we can lend our  support. The Parliament, in calling for ministers to take this message to Dr Holzbach, can show a sense of strength and solidarity with the Continental workers. They most certainly deserve our support and I am pleased that the minister's amendment gives them that.

That was interesting. I remind Hugh Henry that his is the party of government. This document is the Executive's programme of government. Unfortunately, only a few members of the Executive are here. At one point I thought that we had just the book-ends, but I am glad that Ms Alexander has now joined us. Coffee tables from Hamilton to Hyndland will groan under the weight of this latest designer fad in the relaunch, this ministerial montage. The black and white shades flatter the ministers and certainly do justice to the finance minister's crisp, white shirt. The document flatters to deceive. It deceives the Scottish public by adding dates to the programme for government from June, to give the impression that we now have an Executive that means business. If it means business, many obvious things should be in that document that it could and should be doing. Promises will not address poverty when the Executive is cutting back on services for families and children. Families and children in Scotland are suffering because of Labour—and Tory—spending cuts in public services. In the first three years of the Labour Government there have been cuts of £176 billion—it is spending even less than the Tories spent. It is not just the coffee tables that are groaning; the coffers of Gordon Brown's Treasury are groaning with cash, and we hear estimates ranging from £10 billion to £22 billion. The Scottish Executive should be Scotland's voice, ensuring that that money is spent now rather than later to tackle poor, damp housing. So much of what the Executive does is driven from London. We acknowledge that. That is why it cannot take housing out of the public sector borrowing requirement, as happens in other European countries. That is why it cannot lift the 75 per cent clawback rule, or can it? Labour is following the Tory economic dogma. That is why it  is poor on producing a vision of how the housing debt can be dealt with in Scotland. That is why it is poor on exploring the range of financial opportunities to direct finance into rebuilding Scotland's housing, which would create real jobs and homes. Scotland's housing policy is decided for Scots by London. The promises in the document are not based on what the Executive guarantees it will do in housing; they are based on what it hopes will happen. It hopes that there will be a mass council house sell-off to inject private cash—if the tenants agree and if the figures stand up. Those are hardly reassuring promises that will stand up under the scrutiny of the Parliament. Most of the limited cash that the Executive has identified is going on feasibility studies and consultants' fees, not on bricks and mortar. Not a penny of the £125 million that is going into servicing debt and producing feasibility studies will remove a single damp spore from a child's bedroom. The rough sleepers initiative is discussed on the blood-red pages. The document states that we will tackle rough sleeping, so that nobody will sleep rough after March 2003. Remember that in February this year Calum Macdonald said that rough sleeping would be finished by 2002. That is enough to make us see blood red. We must examine what the Government could be doing. The Executive has been pushed into examining suspended repossession orders. That was in the SNP's manifesto. The Executive is finally thinking about it. The Executive acts only when it is pressured or panicked into taking action. The subject should not be tackled by a member's bill—the Executive should take action. When the Executive does something, such as suggesting on-line surveys, it does it in haste after prodding from the Opposition. On the substance of housing policy, it delays; meanwhile the children of Scotland cough, splutter and wheeze in cold, damp houses.

I appreciate the recognition that the chamber gives to the work force. As a Lothians list MSP, I know many members of the work force and they will appreciate that support. I also appreciated the briefing that Henry McLeish gave me before the closure announcement and, at that point, I warned him in a private phone call about the zero response minute.  I do not know about the 30 communications that he mentioned. I asked a number of questions to elicit exactly what communications had taken place and what support had been offered by the Executive and by the previous Government. In the answers that will be published in the next few days, there is no mention of 30 communications.  Why has the minister not given me information about those communications?  Secondly, let us look to the future. I acknowledge that there is a limit to what the Executive can do, that the plant does not have assisted area status, that the bulk of the work force live in West Lothian and that most of the rest of West Lothian is being stripped of assisted area status-

What actions has the minister taken, or will he take, to ensure that the Kirkliston area achieves assisted area status in the new proposals?

Yesterday was a day to reflect on Scotland and our sense of who we are, from the fine speech made by Donald Dewar to Sheena Wellington's excellent rendition of "A Man's a Man For a' That" and Amy Linekar's witty poem. Even last night, Shirley Manson of Garbage got into the spirit of the day when she introduced a song that reflects the Scottish psyche, aptly titled, "Only Happy When it Rains".  Another sense of Scotland that was reflected yesterday was the intimacy and accessibility of government of all levels. Scotland is a small place. I took time out from the celebrations to speak to Norman Murray, the new president of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. He left me in no doubt as to what COSLA wants: an independent review of finance.  I pay tribute to the McIntosh commission for its fine work. It should be a matter of great pride to the many hard-working members of the commission that they created the consensus that has emerged in the debate. Nowhere is the consensus greater than on finance. In all the debates before the McIntosh report was published, finance was raised time and again. I have yet to find a local authority politician, officer or user group who does not believe that it is absolutely necessary that local authority finance be subject to an independent review. I regret that McIntosh was not given a brief to examine finance-reading between the lines of the report, I think that the authors agree with me.  I regret also that the minister has chosen not to accept the recommendation for a review. If McIntosh is to have any meaning, a review will be necessary sooner rather than later. I do not think that the minister's proposal of "pressing ahead vigorously with action on a number of fronts"- however useful that might be-is an adequate response. Our fear is that we are seeing a fudge on finance. We do not want to see tinkering at the  edges; we want a full review. Donald Gorrie is right: issues relating to the initiatives are not mutually exclusive of an independent review.  We are in an extremely serious situation. Scottish local government has taken a battering in the past decade, from local government reorganisation to huge expenditure cuts. Scotland's local authorities are £968 million worse off after the first three years of the Labour Government than they were under the Tories.  We need to consider other reforms in that financial context. Local government has an uncertain financial future. We know that the projections for 2001-02 highlight a potential real-terms shortfall of £170 million in the amount that local government will need to sustain services that it is required to provide.  The Executive might be able to address some of those problems in the budget bill-when it arrives-but we still need to highlight them in today's debate.

We heard about a review of capital finance; will the minister consider the clawback rules on housing and the general services capital programme? Will the capital finance review include a review of those matters?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to provide details about the revised timetable for housing stock transfer in Glasgow City Council. (S1O-188)

One of the main concerns of the people of Glasgow and elsewhere about stock transfer and the lack of a timetable is security of tenure. Until this chamber deals with that issue and provides people with security and confidence, it would be unfair to force them to vote in a ballot without knowing what is happening, where it is happening and when legislation on security of tenure will be introduced.

As someone who represents the Lothians, I listened with great interest to what Mr McLeish said about Lloyds TSB and Scottish Widows. It would be helpful for the staff employed by those companies-many of  whom live in my constituency-if he could tell us whether there has been any guarantee of long-term employment, particularly from Lloyds TSB, which has said that it is still hungry for further takeovers.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it intends to take to assist people with disabilities living in existing public sector housing. (S1O-78)

I have a particular interest in people with learning disabilities. As the minister will know, this is Learning Disability Week. Does she agree that we have a problem in that many  people with learning disabilities, living in supported accommodation, are subject to weak housing agreements? Does she further agree that we need to change that so that the small minority of people with learning disabilities enjoy the same tenancy rights as the majority of tenants in Scotland?

In the absence of a housing bill, does the minister think it appropriate that the matter be considered as part of the incapable adults bill?

rose-

Will Mr Tosh give way?

Will Mr Tosh give way?

Does Mr McNulty agree that the reviews announced today on issues such as surplus land have been introduced only because of the SNP's sustained pressure on and criticism of Labour's PFI policy? The scandal of Edinburgh's land rip-off is a prime example of that policy.

I wish to raise a point of order about the motion in the name of Angus Mackay. There might have been some difficulty with the voting system. Would it be possible to put the question again?

Will Pauline McNeill give way?

Pauline McNeill, like many here, has the experience of having been a student leader. Is she speaking for the motion or for the amendment? I entirely agree with the content of her speech. Students are suffering, and does she not agree that we should be examining hardship, which the amendment would allow us to do? Does she agree that the fees element adds very much to hardship and contributes to the figures that she has mentioned in her speech?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it intends to propose to deal with the record and climbing levels of homelessness in Scotland. (S1O-58)

Although I welcome the homelessness review, it is no excuse for the lack of a housing bill in the legislative programme proposed by the Executive. Will the task force for the review report to the Social Inclusion, Housing and Voluntary Sector Committee and be accountable to it?

I would like to address the business of today's debate-the legislative programme and the eight bills that are mentioned in it. We have heard fine words and passion about the need to tackle poverty, injustice and discrimination. We must recognise that the people who elected us want us to address those issues through action, not fine words. That is why one of the greatest criticisms of today's statement is its lack of provision on housing, social justice, poverty and anti-discrimination.  The First Minister spoke about Scotland's solutions to Scotland's problems and the need to address pressing priorities. Scotland's housing is a pressing priority and a housing bill is a glaring omission from today's statement. It is with deep disappointment that I address that point. Only yesterday, Frank McAveety and I spoke at a conference at which the Parliament's role in housing was discussed.  There is potential for great consensus on some aspects of housing. The Executive's failure to introduce early legislation to allow that to happen is a missed opportunity. Certain issues, such as a single secure tenancy, the strategic role of local government in housing matters and better management of tenements where there is a mix of landlord and home ownership, could have offered this Parliament a great opportunity to start making a difference early on. The Executive has missed that opportunity and housing is obviously not one of its legislative priorities.  The biggest omission is any attempt to address homelessness or to consider extending statutory responsibilities across tenure and the definition of who is homeless. Members who travel from Waverley station up the News Steps every day will see some of the problems of homelessness, and there is an early failure by this Government to address those problems.  I was pleased to hear the First Minister talk about social justice, as I think that that is the terminology we should be using. The term social inclusion perhaps allows the Parliament to avoid some of the issues that should be addressed. Michael McMahon was right: we are talking about poverty and the consequent discrimination, inequalities and lack of opportunities. Those are the issues that we should be addressing.  A third of our children live in poverty. If we start talking about them as being socially excluded from birth, we are automatically distancing ourselves from them. This Parliament should make children and issues of poverty central priorities. I want us to talk in the language of social justice and poverty, not in the new Labour speak of exclusion or inclusion, depending on which side of the border  people are on.  There is a hint that the driver for change in social justice may come from the committee structure. I hope that there will be strong consultation. I for one would ensure that our party drove forward the issues of tackling poverty and social injustice. I hope that consultation will mean being prepared to listen and to accept some points, whether people like them or not.  The SNP is on record as opposing mass stock transfer, but if consultation shows that that is not what is desired, I hope that the committee structure will acknowledge that and take it on board.  We have heard much in recent months about step-by-step progress, but it is with sadness that I say that we have not seen even an attempt to crawl on these issues. We have heard fine words and passion, but there is no action and there are no bills to address the issues. I can assure members that the SNP will use its role to ensure that this Parliament marches on the issues of poverty, homelessness and injustice.

Will Mr McMahon identify the specific measures in the legislative programme that address poverty, homelessness and social justice?

I am deeply concerned about the Immigration and Asylum Bill, which is currently going through the House of Commons. The First Minister mentioned that most of the bill covers reserved matters. However,  clause 105 amends the Housing (Scotland) Act 1987 to prohibit asylum seekers from gaining housing under the act's homelessness provisions. The amendment of the Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 has been mentioned; the bill also amends the Mental Health (Scotland) Act 1984, to prevent local authorities from making arrangements for the mental health care of asylum seekers. The Children (Scotland) Act 1995 is being amended to prevent local authorities from providing support to children of asylum seekers.  The First Minister talks about the ability to repeal legislation, and expresses concern about the possible inertia of this Parliament. However, a series of acts is involved-does the First Minister agree that it would be easier to persuade Jack Straw to remove those clauses at this stage than for us to have to go back to amend several acts as a result of legislation that is currently going through the House of Commons?

I got the impression from this morning's debate that some members of the Labour party were questioning the right to challenge the list, and that this debate should somehow be a formality. The demand for Nicol Stephen's removal from the list presented to us today is certainly not made in a mean-spirited manner. In this new democracy we have a duty and a responsibility to challenge anything that calls into question the democratic will of the Scottish people who, quite clearly, are against tuition fees.  This debate is about the content of the "Partnership for Scotland" document. Rather than being for Scotland, it is a partnership for two political parties that are hungry for power. It is a partnership against students and free education and for Labour's privatisation agenda, and which has cost implications that must be challenged in debate. We need more resources for education, but since the Liberal Democrats abandoned the notion of tax-varying powers in their deal, they had better ensure that education spending is not paid for by health and housing cuts and the things that the previous speaker mentioned.  Yesterday, there was a request for proportional  prayers-a concept which I think is inappropriate, but of which I could see the logic. There is, however, something that you cannot have proportionally, and that is principle. Principle is measured in absolute terms, and on tuition fees, the Liberal Democrats do not have it.  The issue of tuition fees was a touchstone in the Scottish elections because education matters to the people of Scotland. Anyone who has studied the evolution of education in Scotland will know that it is the principle of free education that we uphold. That is why, although the Tories have seen sense on this issue, their attack is blunted. They started the cuts in grants and maintenance that are continued under new Labour. It is important that we remember that free education is not just about tuition fees; it is also about grants and about maintenance. Up to 12 per cent fewer mature students are applying for university places-that is not a very good advert for lifelong learning, Mr Stephen.  This Parliament should be about building trust, so that our young people believe that the democratic process can work for them. Mr Stephen's appointment is an action that would destroy that trust. How can we persuade young people to engage in the political process and to come out and vote when, the Scottish people having given the Parliament a clear mandate to scrap tuition fees, as soon as it sits, it turns its back on them? If we want young people to engage in political and democratic processes, they must be treated with respect.  I warn Jim Wallace not to hide behind the coat tails of the National Union of Students. Its president may not be completely impartial, having campaigned less than a fortnight ago for a minister who was approved today-Sarah Boyack. As a student leader she led me and many others at the University of Glasgow in campaigns against cuts in student grants. The Labour front bench is awash with former student leaders, who should know about student poverty, including Jack McConnell and Susan Deacon. I understand that Susan used to campaign for fair grants and against any loan schemes. It is interesting how times change.  If a week is a long time in politics, we have seen a century and a chasm in thinking from Labour since it became new and high office prevailed.  A final criticism is that the architecture of these appointments is more reflective of selfish party power dealings than the interests of democracy. The Scottish people had hoped for the creative use of Government departments and that joined-up thinking would be reflected in department structures. The split of higher education from the education brief is not to serve innovative Government, it is to serve and accommodate  power-broking deals.  Yesterday we saw a portent of things to come when Labour tried to bury the prayers debate in a review by a sub-committee. How much more will Labour try to bury away? Labour wants to bury debate and decision making in this Parliament and the Liberal Democrats have given them the shovel.