1. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with Scottish Borders Council about the council’s proposals to withdraw the garden waste collection service. (S4O-02887)

The percentage of household waste recycled by Scottish Borders Council decreased by more than 3 per cent in 2012. That shows that progress has not just slowed but is in fact going backwards. Moreover, the council has conceded that the proposal will reduce its recycling rate even further. Taken with a total lack of public consultation accompanying the move, does that not make a mockery of the Scottish Government’s zero waste plan?

16. To ask the Scottish Government what its strategy is for tackling ADHD among young people. (S4O-02852)

The minister will be aware of the high rate of use of ADHD drugs in the NHS Borders area—at 17.2 per cent, the rate there is the highest of any NHS board in Scotland. I accept that such drugs have a use and should be part of the range of treatment options that are available, but is the minister aware of the recently reissued National Institute for Health and Care Excellence guidance, which raises concerns about the use of such drugs and recommends that drugs should not be used as the first line of treatment for school-aged children and young people with moderate ADHD? The British Medical Journal has recently raised similar concerns. Does the minister accept that the rate of use of such drugs in the Borders is unusually high? Does he believe that more should be done to reduce it?

I am pleased to open the preliminary stage debate on the City of Edinburgh Council (Leith Links and Surplus Fire Fund) Bill, and to provide the Parliament with some background information on how the committee has considered the bill so far. The bill is the fourth private bill to come before the Parliament this session and is one of the less controversial. No objection to it has been received. The first thing that struck me about the bill when the committee was given the task of scrutinising it was its rather unwieldy title. It was not long before I appreciated that, although there is one bill, it deals with two different and unconnected purposes. Therefore, although it is fair to say that the bill is not controversial, it has still given the committee plenty of substance to consider. We also had to make ourselves familiar with the rather unique procedures that concern an important area of the Parliament’s work. Before I provide some background information on what led to the bill and talk about its broad principles, I will speak briefly about private bills more generally and why they are necessary. Private bills propose laws that allow individuals, groups of individuals or corporate entities to acquire powers or benefits in excess of or in conflict with the general law. Private bills for large-scale works are somewhat rarer these days, but the Parliament still sees a steady stream of governance reorganisation bills and the occasional bill that seeks to make changes to private legislation to enable construction to take place. Unusually, the bill that we are debating deals with both issues. The common denominator is the promoter: the City of Edinburgh Council. The bill’s first objective is to amend section 22 of the schedule to the City of Edinburgh District Council Order Confirmation Act 1991 so that the erection of a statue of John Rattray on Leith Links is no longer prohibited. Currently, section 22 prohibits the erection of buildings, including monuments and statues, on Leith Links. Members might ask: who is John Rattray, and why should he be commemorated in that way? John Rattray was an accomplished golfer on Leith Links in the 18th century, and was instrumental in setting down the rules for the game of golf. For that reason, the Leith Rules Golf Society wishes to erect a life-size statue of him on Leith Links. In giving evidence, the chair of the statue committee, Pat Denzler, said: “The aim was to have something iconic to represent Leith.”—[Official Report, City of Edinburgh Council (Leith Links and Surplus Fire Fund) Bill Committee, 14 November 2013; c 13.] The sculptor David Annand has been commissioned to create that statue. I am sure that members will be acquainted with his work, particularly as one of his bronze statues—that of Robert Fergusson the poet striding out at the entrance to Canongate church—resides not too far from the chamber. The committee was concerned with ensuring that the power that was sought was indeed necessary and that no unintended consequences would arise from its use. We were clear that the issues of aesthetics and the security of the statue had already been the subject of the planning process. Planning permission was granted on 18 April 2013 “on the basis that the proposals comply with the Council’s development plan and the relevant non-statutory guidelines, and would preserve the character and appearance of the conservation area and have no effect on residential amenity.” Our site visit to Leith Links on 5 November 2013 further served to reassure us. The committee is satisfied that the bill is tightly drawn to create an exception only for that particular statue and that no further development can take place on the site at Leith Links. Fundraising to erect the statue is continuing, and the Leith Rules Golf Society hopes that the Ryder cup will help to focus those efforts. The committee also heard that a proportion of the funds that are raised will be given to the promoter to pay for the statue’s on-going maintenance. The bill’s second objective concerns the revitalisation of a fund that was set up to assist those who were caught up in a series of fires in Edinburgh’s High Street in 1824. The Surplus Fire Fund is constituted under the Edinburgh Corporation Order Confirmation Act 1927, later amended by the Edinburgh Corporation Order Confirmation Act 1967 and the City of Edinburgh District Council Order Confirmation Act 1991. Esmond Hamilton, from the City of Edinburgh Council, explained that £11,000 was originally collected to assist those who were caught up in the fires, and that that had grown into the sum of £1.25 million, which generates approximately £30,000 per annum. The Surplus Fire Fund lay dormant until 2001, when the Fire Brigades Union contacted the City of Edinburgh Council, which led to the fund’s reactivation. The council’s pensions and trusts committee discussed the future management of the fund during 2011 and 2012, considering how its assets might be put to better use while having regard to the spirit of the fund’s current purposes, changes in society, the effectiveness of its present constitution and engagement with key stakeholders. On 31 January 2013, the full council agreed to promote the bill, which includes three changes to the fund. The bill proposes to transfer the assets, rights and liabilities of the Surplus Fire Fund to the Edinburgh Voluntary Organisations Trust; to amend the purposes for which the fund can be used; and to dissolve the fund as currently constituted. The committee heard from Ella Simpson, the director of the Edinburgh Voluntary Organisations Council, about EVOC’s experience of running various grant programmes and several restricted funds and about its large network of organisations, which could refer possible beneficiaries of the fund.

On the basis of the evidence that we have received, the committee is supportive of the bill’s objectives and believes that a private bill is the necessary and appropriate way to proceed. I am grateful to my fellow committee members for their hard work and to the clerks for their work in connection with the bill. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the City of Edinburgh Council (Leith Links and Surplus Fire Fund) Bill and that the bill should proceed as a private bill.

4. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met representatives of Police Scotland and what issues were discussed. (S4O-02770)

I received information from Police Scotland that reveals that in 2013-14 £9.3 million of funding for 377 police officers came from outside the Police Scotland budget, including £160,000 provided by Scottish Borders Council for four officers. The cabinet secretary will be aware that the City of Edinburgh Council has announced that it will withdraw funding for its officers. If other organisations follow suit, Police Scotland will have to find the money for 377 officers. Can the cabinet secretary reassure Parliament that funding for the 1,000 extra police officers secured by my party will be protected without the need for further cuts to policing?

I congratulate Christine Grahame on doing an admirable job in explaining very complex areas of law. Does she agree that part of the problem lies with how solicitors report to their clients? There is an obligation and need for solicitors to explain clearly to clients what responsibilities and obligations they must undertake when they buy properties.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate on the Justice Committee’s inquiry into the effectiveness of the Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003. I was a substitute member of the Justice Committee when it conducted its inquiry. The written and oral evidence that we received was informative and very useful in understanding the issues in hand. During my time as an MSP, I have been contacted by many constituents who have had concerns about the operation of property factors and in particular the mechanisms surrounding so-called land-owning maintenance companies. Those companies are given ownership of common property in new housing developments, such as parks, open spaces and play areas, with the burden attached to maintain that land in exchange for a fee. The committee found that there were issues surrounding the dismissal of land-owning maintenance companies, particularly where residents were unhappy with the level of service that was being provided. I welcome the Government’s response that it will prepare a code of practice. Perhaps during the debate the minister can outline the proposed timetable for the work to prepare the code. Although the inquiry focused on the provisions that deal with property factors, the report very much touched on issues that are relevant to local government. The committee heard that land-owning maintenance companies sometimes came about when local authorities withdrew from taking on the responsibility for the maintenance of open spaces around new developments. The report was right to note that local authorities need to look seriously at whether the maintenance of those common areas is being carried out in a fair and equitable way. The adoption and maintenance of common spaces would have resource implications for local councils, but we must be careful to avoid creating disparities in the services that are provided to council tax payers in new-build property developments and those in older developments who have their open spaces maintained for free by their local authority. I highlight to members that, in the Government’s response to the inquiry, it noted that Clackmannanshire Council has recently called for a change in the law so that the adoption and maintenance of public spaces should be treated consistently with the adoption of associated public roads, footpaths and street lighting. I welcome the Government’s indication that it will take steps to promote the use of owners association schemes to maintain common areas in the short term and work with local authorities in the long term to consider the future role of councils in the maintenance of land in new developments. The inquiry came across some interesting, if perhaps technical, points about the 2003 act. We heard that there were issues surrounding the enforceability of real burdens where a land-owning maintenance company was involved. In order to create a burden, a developer must own both the property to be benefited by that condition and the property to be burdened by the condition. Typically, developers do not transfer the common areas to land-owning maintenance companies until after all the houses in the new estate are sold, which means that they no longer own the benefited property. That was all explained to us very clearly by Professor Robert Rennie, who taught me conveyancing and commercial missives at the University of Glasgow. At times, the committee evidence session felt more like a tutorial, but the committee heard that there were issues surrounding the enforceability of real burdens. That is important, because it relates to the rights and obligations of home owners. The Government’s response to the inquiry does not appear to acknowledge the legal uncertainty over that point, which is perhaps disappointing. Although there was disagreement about the extent to which that was an issue in practice, I urge the Government to look closely at whether a change in the law is needed in that area. Professor Rennie and others also told the committee that there were issues surrounding the enforcement and application of section 53 of the act, which extends enforcement rights of real burdens where a “common scheme” is created with “related properties”. We heard that the unintended consequence of section 53 may be to create rights where none had existed before and that it went much further than what was necessary to ensure that housing associations can continue to enforce burdens against owners, which was the primary motive behind the section. I therefore welcome the Government’s response that it will invite the Scottish Law Commission to review that section. As modern housing developments become more common, issues surrounding property factors and the maintenance of shared spaces will affect more people. Some of my constituents certainly feel that there is room for improvement on the right of home owners to enforce their rights in relation to common areas and spaces in their developments. I hope that, following the inquiry, we can take steps to provide greater clarity and fairness in this area of the law.

Thanks to the approach that has been taken by the United Kingdom Government over the past few years, we have seen several positive signs that our economy is improving: improved growth forecasts; reduction in the national deficit; and faster-than-predicted increases in job creation. That finally banishes the argument that we should have diverged from our path of implementing sensible economic measures and controlling our spending. The SNP’s fabled plan MacB seems to have disappeared, as the SNP has finally come to terms with the reality that the UK Government is doing what is best for our economy. The measures announced by the chancellor in last week’s autumn statement continue that good work, while also helping people and businesses across Scotland. The fuel duty freeze will provide real help to motorists who have had to pay more and more in recent years just to keep up with the cost of running a vehicle; a reduction in green levies will help more than 2.5 million Scottish households with the cost of their electricity bills; and, with the abolition of national insurance contributions for under-21s, the UK Government will help to support the 138,000 jobs for young people that we currently have in Scotland and grow that number. However, there is one issue that I want to concentrate on that is of particular concern in my constituency in the Borders. In the autumn statement, the UK Government announced significant measures towards helping with business rates, because not only will retailers and food and drink premises south of the border get a special discount of £1,000 from their business rates, but all businesses will be protected with capped business rate increases. Those are important measures that will undoubtedly help businesses in the rest of the United Kingdom and provide a welcome boost to struggling high streets. It is therefore unfortunate that the Scottish Government has not fully replicated those measures for the benefit of Scottish businesses. The measures are the sort of help that Hawick High Street in my constituency badly needs. In a trend that has become all too familiar throughout Scotland, Hawick has seen many shops close in its town centre over the past few years. The number of empty premises is on the rise and they are scarring what I believe is one of the most beautiful town centres in Scotland. However, as much of the High Street is designated—wrongly, in my opinion—as a prime retail area, none of the premises is entitled to benefit from the bonus scheme or discounts that are currently on offer. I have been contacted by many local businesses asking for help with their rates, and in turn I have been in contact with the cabinet secretary to raise those concerns, but so far the Scottish Government has been unwilling to take action. Something can and must be done to help those businesses. The situation has become so bad that the community council has organised a special meeting to discuss the situation. I am sure that everyone in the chamber appreciates how important town centres are. Not only are they the living face of our communities, but they are vital to our towns’ economies and their social wellbeing. They influence how people experience and relate to their local area, and they remain the place in our communities where people meet and interact. We do not need any surveys or statistics to know why our high streets are so popular with our constituents. Local residents recognise the important role that town centres play, especially in our more historic market towns. The next few weeks will be a nervous time for those retailers. The Christmas rush represents the busiest time of year for many small businesses and they know that, if they do not achieve good sales this month, the rest of the year will be a struggle. With online retailers taking more and more business away from our high streets, the nature of our town centres is starting to change. The Scottish Government needs to acknowledge that change, and the onus is on us to do something to help. However, high streets such as the one in Hawick have received little help from the Scottish Government. It is now up to the Scottish Government to recognise the problems that Hawick and other town centres face and to start using the powers that are already at its disposal to provide real help to our retailers and our high streets. The businesses in my constituency cannot afford to wait any longer for action to be taken. I urge the Scottish Government to sit up and take notice of the growing concerns before it is too late.

I clarify that the area of the High Street that is designated “prime retail”—it is a large part of the High Street—does not benefit from any discount or incentive scheme. That is the part of the High Street where I identified a real problem, and it is the area where most of the empty units are.

I would be happy to meet the minister to discuss the empty shops. We could meet in my office on the High Street, at the heart of Hawick or in one of the other wonderful institutions in that wonderful town.

The First Minister is aware of the dreadful weather conditions that are affecting many parts of Scotland, including the Scottish Borders. Many schools in the Borders had to close this morning because of a loss of power. Will he assure me that the Government will do everything possible to ensure that the local council is given all the support that it needs to get schools reconnected to power supplies as quickly as possible?

Will the member take an intervention?

Few matters in politics today have evoked such emotive engagement as the issue of same-sex marriage. Engagement has taken place at all levels and indeed across all parts of Scottish society. It has taken place between constituents and their elected representatives, between those elected representatives and, of course, between the people of Scotland. Wherever that engagement has taken place, we have found passionate, profound and deeply held views on all sides of the debate. I speak today as a Church of Scotland elder as well as a Conservative. I therefore understand the anxiety that the proposals for same-sex marriage are causing churches and religious groups across Scotland, but I also understand and share the desire for religion to remain relevant in our modern, 21st century, progressive society. Religion is not, after all, afraid of change. It has responded in the past to changing conditions and standards, and the religions that many of us celebrate and enjoy in our lives today are products of the environment that they operate in. We do not even have to go back as far as Leviticus and its proclamations on footballs made of pig skin, beard trimming and bowl-shaped haircuts to prove that point. In the New Testament, Mark is seemingly unequivocal in his opposition to divorce, as is Timothy in his prohibition of the wearing of pearls and gold. Religion has moved on from those times. Indeed, it has done so repeatedly, time and time again, and when it did it was right that the state recognised and facilitated that evolution. That is a point that I would like to stress. I have heard opposition to the same-sex marriage proposals on the basis that they represent an unjustified and unwarranted interference in the affairs of religion by the Government, or by the state. That could not be further from being the case. If religions do not want to embrace this gradual tide of change, they will not be forced to do so. If anything, the bill will give religions greater freedom and greater autonomy by allowing them to pursue the agenda and the pace of change that they believe to be right when it comes to same-sex marriage. If the change is no change, that would be, in my view, a sad state of affairs. I believe that our country, our society and our religions would be worse off for that, but I recognise that it is a religious and not a political decision. Our role as politicians here today is limited to deciding whether we should enable that process of change, whatever it may be, to occur. I believe that such change is not only right but inevitable. Religion and the church do not exist in a vacuum. Indeed, they cannot if they are to remain relevant in our society and to continue to act as a credible force for good in our world. That is why I urge those who oppose the proposals that we are debating tonight to seriously and critically examine the reasons for their opposition to same-sex marriage and to ask themselves whether they want their religion, their church and their society to fail to embrace change, the time for which has surely come.

That is my point. The bill allows the religions and the churches to opt in or opt out as they require and as they want, and to develop at their own pace. It remains my view that the proposal is about consistency more than it is about equality. Marriage is permitted for one set of individuals, and there has to be a very good reason if we are to exclude another set of individuals. I believe that, in order to be consistent, and because society accepts same-sex relationships, there is no good reason to exclude them from marriage—certainly not on the basis of what sex the person whom someone falls in love with happens to be. When I travel around my constituency and visit schools or meet young constituents, the idea of opposition to the bill is met with what I can only describe as bafflement. My experience has been that the younger generation supports the proposal’s aims in overwhelming numbers. If religion does not evolve, and if the state does not allow it to evolve when it wants to do so, we risk excluding those younger voices from a tradition that is woven intrinsically into the basic fabric of our society. In his eloquent speech in the debate on same-sex marriage in the House of Lords, the Earl of Courtown warned of the danger and implored his fellow peers to “allow the next generation not to reject the traditions of yesteryear but to build the traditions of the future.”—[Official Report, House of Lords, 3 June 2013; c 1042.] His words are as true here as they were in Westminster. Our society has found itself at similar crossroads before now. In the past 20 years we have debated, passionately and often robustly, section 28, the lowering of the age of consent, gay adoptions and civil partnerships. In each case, I am proud that our progressive democratic tradition eventually prevailed. Today, we in the Scottish Parliament have the opportunity to add our voices to that tradition and the privilege of contributing to our society’s progress. I will vote for the bill. It is the right thing to do for our country, it is the right thing to do for our church, and it is the right thing to do to strengthen the wonderful institution of marriage.

I, too, welcome the opportunity to raise concerns about proposals to close police stations, particularly those in my constituency. The proposals will have a detrimental effect on the link between communities and the local police service. On this, the Scottish Government has been left wanting, but instead of defending local policing it is trying to evade and make excuses. As the motion clearly states, the proposals are part of a wider programme of cuts to police staff that can result, and is resulting, in the backfilling of staff posts by police officers. That does not make financial sense and it means that officers are distracted from tackling crime and are instead sat behind a desk. In my constituency, the Selkirk and Coldstream stations are set to close to the public, with Eyemouth moving to a category E station, meaning that it will no longer have full-time cover. Just outside my constituency, in Christine Grahame’s constituency, the nearby Lauder and Melrose stations, which I know are used by my constituents, are also set to go. In the Police Scotland consultation, which we already know used old data, no figures are provided on footfall for any of those stations, so their closure is being proposed without any knowledge of how often my constituents use them. The fact is that even if those stations are not heavily used, they provide an important local service and give residents the chance to interact with the police. The Federation of Small Businesses in Scotland has warned that town centres such as Selkirk’s could be under threat because closures will sever the link between the police and the local business community. In the face of the closure of courts and now the closure to the public of police stations, many residents in the Borders will feel that justice is being withdrawn from the area. Frankly, given the sheer extent of the proposed closures and the refusal of the Scottish Government to intervene, I am shocked by the audacity of the Government’s amendment, which claims that local policing is the “bedrock of the new service.”

All that I can say is that businesses have expressed concerns to me about closures. I also have disabled residents who are unable to use the phone service or get to other locations but who can get to the counter in the local police station. As a result of the reforms or changes—the closures—such residents will no longer be able to interact with the police in the way that they have done in the past. Mr Crawford might be happy to support the proposals, but I am not. It is worth being clear about why Police Scotland is having to make the savings: it is because the Scottish Government decided that moving to a single police force would save over £100 million a year. Where did that figure come from? It came from an outline business case, drafted in 2011, about which the financial memorandum to the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012 said that it “does not provide a plan or blueprint for the future delivery of the services and it is not intended to be used to set future budgets”. My party wanted the Scottish Government to provide a full business case for police reform so that we were all clear on the savings that would be made under the single police force; instead, the Scottish Government has plucked figures out of the air and imposed huge budget cuts on our police. There is no wriggle-room for the Scottish Government on this, because it made the decision on the policing budget and the cuts are a direct result of decisions made by the Scottish National Party Government. This is its mess and it needs to intervene to ensure that local policing is protected.

I, too, congratulate Alison Johnstone on securing the debate. I was very pleased to have been able to support her motion. The debate is absolutely not about cyclists against motorists—for the record, I am both a cyclist and a motorist—but about how the law should protect vulnerable road users and how we can best encourage cycling. Notwithstanding what we have already heard, Conservatives are actually very pro cycling. The UK Government is investing more in cycling than any previous British Government did, and London, led by Conservative mayor and cycle fanatic Boris Johnson, is very much leading the way in cycling investment in the United Kingdom. By 2015, London will spend more than four times per head on cycling what is spent in Scotland. We have already heard about the clear benefits of cycling to both cyclists and non-cyclists alike, which I will not repeat. We know that Scots want to cycle. In 2010, the Scottish household survey found that 35 per cent of Scottish households have access to a bike, and the UK has one of the highest numbers of bike sales in Europe. The numbers of people who cycle to work and school are steadily rising, but we continue to have a woeful cycling rate compared with the rest of Europe. The European Union has an average of 7.4 per cent of journeys made by bicycle; in the UK, the figure is just over 1 per cent. The main barrier to increasing cycle rates is a perception that the activity is dangerous, but that perception is not accurate. The risks of cycling are roughly comparable to those that are faced by pedestrians, and its health benefits vastly outweigh its risks. However, the perception certainly exists. Indeed, just last week, The Herald reported that 56 per cent of cyclists and non-cyclists who responded in a poll believed that the roads were unsafe for cycling. One way to change that perception would undoubtedly be to introduce a law of strict liability. There are missed conceptions about the strict liability.

I think that I am about to deal with the member’s point. Strict liability would not result in motorists becoming automatically liable; nor would it result in drivers being sent to jail. It would apply only to civil cases and would establish only a presumption that could be disproved in court, which is why I prefer to use the term presumed liability. Importantly, that would apply equally to cyclists in an accident involving them and pedestrians as the more vulnerable road user.

Presumed liability exists in the vast majority of other European countries without adverse and unintended consequences and in countries with significantly higher cycling usage and better cycling safety than Scotland. Presumed liability should be considered because there is a good argument that it is fair, it would make our roads safer and it would encourage cycling. It is fair because it acknowledges that there is a clear imbalance of road users, and those driving a vehicle that is capable of causing harm to others should exercise caution. In virtually every collision between a car and vulnerable road user, it will be the pedestrian or the cyclist who is injured. It is therefore reasonable to place a greater burden of proof on the motorist. I fail to see how anyone who accepts that cyclists have an equal right to be on our roads cannot support the introduction of legal safeguards that address the imbalance. Indeed, careful and observant motorists following the highway code have nothing to fear from the introduction of presumed liability. I agree with the motion that presumed liability is not a panacea for cycling safety; it can only be one part of a raft of measures. The best way to improve safety is to increase cyclist numbers, and we can do that through proper infrastructure investment, including in junction safety, full segregation and additional cycle parking spaces, as well as in schemes to encourage cycling to work, such as the bike to work scheme. More cyclists on our roads are good for cyclists and non-cyclists alike. That should be an aspiration of this Parliament.

I welcome the opportunity to defend the principle that has been described as the cornerstone of the Scottish criminal justice system. The abolition of corroboration should not be taken lightly. It is the view of the Scottish Conservatives that, to be blunt, Lord Carloway has got it wrong and the Scottish Government is mistaken to have accepted the recommendation to remove corroboration from our criminal justice system. Corroboration has an important place in our criminal justice system because it acts as a safeguard against miscarriages of justice and effectively balances out the intricacies of the rest of the Scottish criminal law. By defending corroboration, lawyers, rank-and-file police and organisations such as the Scottish Human Rights Commission are standing up not for the guilty but for the innocent. Corroboration protects individuals from being convicted on the basis of evidence from a single witness and, therefore, acts as an important safeguard against miscarriages of justice. Equally as important is the fact that corroboration provides a safeguard for victims and witnesses. If the corroboration rule was removed, far greater scrutiny of the quality of witness evidence would be needed before prosecutions proceeded and courts convicted. The Scottish Government argues that corroboration has acted as a barrier to justice, but the truth is that it has never been easier to prosecute. Corroboration has become a more flexible concept in Scots law, particularly in the light of the Moorov doctrine, the relaxation of the rule against double jeopardy and the introduction of statutory exemptions. I admit that the corroboration rule is complex, but while that may be a reason for reform, it is not a reason in itself for abolition. As the law has adapted, the requirement for corroboration is much less onerous than it used to be. Modern developments in evidence gathering, such as DNA identification, forensic analysis and the use of CCTV, mean that, from an available evidence perspective, there is less reason to abolish the corroboration rule than there ever has been. To put it another way, it is easier for the Crown to secure corroborated evidence than it ever has been. The primary argument for the change is that removing the corroboration requirement will increase the number of convictions, particularly for rape and sexual offences, which often lack witnesses. Poor conviction rates are extremely worrying, but abolishing the corroboration requirement is not the way to address the problem, and the removal of the corroboration rule will not lead to increased conviction rates. I have no doubt that the Scottish Government will point to the analysis that the Carloway review carried out, which concluded that, of cases marked as unable to proceed because of insufficient evidence, 80 per cent could have proceeded without the corroboration requirement, and 59 per cent would have had a reasonable prospect of conviction. However, that analysis was carried out by prosecutors who have no experience of a world without corroboration and who were asked essentially to guess how many convictions would occur if corroboration were no longer necessary, and then to second-guess juries’ conclusions.

It is more likely that juries will be more cautious about convicting people of the most serious charges without corroborated evidence. Supporters of the abolition of corroboration ignore one simple fact. Any system of justice is a human system, and no human system will ever be perfect. The major hurdle in the pursuit of justice is the reality that some people do not come to court to tell the truth and others—however well meaning—fail to tell the truth. For centuries, Scots law has accepted that, sometimes, a single witness can be reliable and that, by refusing to believe him or her, we might well let guilty people walk free. However, that is a price worth paying because, on the whole, maintaining the requirement for corroboration leads to less injustice than allowing convictions on the basis of evidence from a single witness.

I have great pleasure in supporting Margaret Mitchell’s motion.

I congratulate Christine Grahame on securing the debate on this important topic. It is my great pleasure to add my modest speech to today’s discussion. I also record my thanks to Greig Lamont, who helped to research the speech. He finishes working in the Scottish Parliament this week and I am grateful for the help that he has given me in preparing the speech. Not many occasions are remembered 500 years after they occur—I very much doubt that my speech will be—but the fact that the battle of Flodden is remembered half a millennium later illustrates its importance as a central part of Scotland’s historical journey and national story. The battle of Flodden will be remembered once again this year all over my Borders constituency during many of the Borders towns’ common ridings and civic weeks. My home town of Coldstream is no exception. The annual ride out to Flodden is seen as the zenith of the annual civic week. It was 51 years ago that the first cavalcade of horses made its way to Flodden, with more than 100 horses and riders being piped over Coldstream bridge to “Blue Bonnets” against the background of the waters of the River Tweed. Although 500 years ago we crossed the border to meet our foes, making the journey as outlaws, today we cross it as friends, neighbours and, indeed, family. Although 500 years ago we Scots rode over the border to raid, today we do so to remember an ancient rivalry, remember those on both sides who fell and celebrate the central importance of the battle of Flodden in our Scottish story. James IV’s defeat at Flodden gives him the unique claim of being the last monarch of Scotland, England or Wales to die in battle. However, although those are certainly the main facets of his memory that have been immortalised by history, they are far from being his only achievements, if that is the right word to use. His accomplishments ranged far beyond his ability to lose decisive battles. He was an experienced horseman and, despite what I have said, a talented military leader. However, he was far from being a warmongering brute. He was a steadfast patron of the arts, and his drive to improve cultural, political and scientific developments in Scotland earned him the honorary and rather becoming title of the renaissance prince. As Christine Grahame notes in her motion, 505 years ago, James IV issued the first royal licence for printing in Scotland. The first printed book in the nation was published one year later in 1508 on a printing press not far from here in the Cowgate. A copy of that volume remains to this day in the National Library of Scotland and stands as a testament to his contribution to literature, learning and enlightenment in Scotland. Not only that, but the Palace of Holyroodhouse, which stands a few hundred feet from where we debate, owes its existence and location to his vision. However, it was not only Scotland’s culture and landscape that James IV influenced; its shape as a nation was transformed as a result of his life. His marriage to Margaret Tudor and the eventual unification of the Scots and English royal households that resulted strengthened relations between Scotland and England. At the time, the poet William Dunbar hailed it as an end to the Anglo-Scottish rivalry that had raged for centuries. The influence of that marriage on the eventual act of union in 1707 is hardly insignificant. Therefore, James IV’s legacy remains pertinent to us today. Christine Grahame may not have forgiven James IV for the consequences of his choice of companion, but that debate is for another day.

For the sake of clarity, I should point out that Selkirk is in my constituency; Christine Grahame represents the neighbouring constituency.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. The Justice Committee has spent a lot of time considering the bill and gathering the views of all those who are involved in the justice system. As the committee’s convener said, we also took evidence in private from witnesses, who recounted their experiences. There is a consensus that more needs to be done for victims of crime and that more can be done to ensure that victims are put in their rightful place, which must be at the heart of the justice system. I therefore welcome the bill, which the Scottish Conservatives will support at stage 1. The bill will go a fair way towards helping those who are unlucky enough to be affected by crime. Some of the most useful measures include the introduction of a victim surcharge, which will mean that offenders contribute to supporting those who are affected by crime; the creation of a right for victims and witnesses to access certain information about their case; the widening of the application of special measures that are available to witnesses who are deemed to be vulnerable; the right to choose the gender of an interviewer in sexual offence and domestic abuse cases; and the creation of police restitution orders to help support officers who are injured in the line of duty. The Scottish Government is to be commended for introducing a bill that is dedicated to victims and witnesses; that has not happened in Scotland before. The committee considered a number of suggestions for improving the bill, which I hope that the Government will reflect on. Perhaps most significantly, we heard from a number of witnesses that, although it confers rights on victims, the bill does not define the term “victim”. That appears to be a glaring omission, and I hope that the Government can come up with a definition that will provide clarity while protecting the right to a fair trial. The bill extends the entitlement to special measures that are available to victims who are deemed vulnerable. Those are important measures that can make it easier for witnesses to give evidence. However, the bill also introduces a right for parties to object to the use of standard special measures in all cases. Lawyers welcomed that, but it was of great concern to Victim Support Scotland and the children’s commissioner, because it introduced uncertainty for vulnerable witnesses about whether the support that is offered to them will be challenged and possibly withdrawn. To seek a solution that is accepted by victims and prosecutors must be one of the priorities as the bill progresses. We heard concerns about section 3(4), which allows the police, the Scottish Court Service and the Crown to withhold information that victims request if they consider it inappropriate to release that information. The Government should consider whether that needs amending or, at the very least, provide clear guidance on what factors should be taken into account when considering the appropriateness of disclosing information. More generally, the committee heard that communication between justice bodies is poor and that that is causing problems. Astonishingly, David McKenna of Victim Support Scotland suggested that victims have to tell their story about 16 times to various agencies, which is clearly unnecessary and can add to victims’ distress. Some of the evidence that was received painted a less than enthusiastic picture of the bill. It is worth pointing out that the bill will bring Scotland up only to the minimum standards that are required by the EU directive on victims and witnesses. In some respects, it is arguable that the bill falls short of that minimum standard. For example, it does not establish a formal right to review a decision not to prosecute. Peter Morris, a campaigner for victims’ rights, expressed his disappointment with the bill in his submission. He wrote: “To say that this legislation as it stands will make any significant difference to victims’ lives is just not true. To say that this legislation is radical is not true and to say that this now puts victims at the heart of the justice system is also not true.” The Scottish Conservatives’ priority is to strengthen the bill so that it does more and goes further towards improving the lot of victims and witnesses. For example, the victim surcharge should apply to all offenders, so that we do not have a situation in which motorists must contribute but violent offenders do not do so. Ten days ago, the Sunday Post reported that sex offenders who had been placed on the register for life but who now have the right to challenge that are being taken off the register without their victims being informed. The bill will give victims of life prisoners the right to be notified when the offender is released; the same right should be granted to the victims of sex offenders who were put on the register for life but have been taken off the register. The bill can be criticised for being modest. Moreover, there is an elephant in the room. Even if the victim is better and more swiftly informed about the process, and even if they are given more support throughout and can have a more meaningful role before a conviction is secured, that is cold comfort for the victim if the sentence that is served is nothing like the sentence that was imposed. Automatic early release of prisoners, which the Scottish National Party promised in 2007 to abolish, is a scandal. It does the victim a disservice, it discredits the system and it destroys public confidence. The Scottish Government’s claim that it wants to stand up for victims would be more credible if it did not continue to allow the vast majority of offenders to be released from prison after serving only half their sentences. I accept that it was a United Kingdom Government that introduced automatic early release. However, that Government quickly realised the error of the approach and left provision for its repeal on the statute books in 1997. That was ignored by the incoming UK Labour Government, just as numerous calls from the Scottish Conservatives to end automatic early release have been ignored by the SNP Scottish Government. Where was the consideration of victims when the Scottish Government and SNP members of the Justice Committee pushed through the closure of a fifth of our sheriff courts? The closures might save the Scottish Court Service money, but they will pass on costs to victims and witnesses and create yet more delays and a clogged-up justice system.

The bill is a welcome step forward, but the Scottish Government should not forget that some of its other actions in relation to our justice system will impact on the victims of crime.

7. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body what the average number of customers using the Queensberry house lounge is on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays before 4 pm. (S4O-02229)

I thank Linda Fabiani for that answer, but I am disappointed that she is not counting the customers as they arrive and leave. My conversations with the staff in the lounge suggest that on some days only four or five transactions take place before 4 pm. Does the corporate body accept that figure? Will it consider lifting the restrictions on who can access the lounge before 4 pm?

Will the minister give way?

I, too, congratulate Sandra White on securing tonight’s important debate. Religious warfare, in whatever insidious form it takes, is one of the worst things that can happen to a society. Although we in Scotland have had, and continue to have, our fair share of religion-incited discord, when it comes to such a deeply ingrained and divisive matter as sectarianism, we would often do well to look further afield than our own back yard, if not for answers, then at least for a degree of perspective. Unfortunately, the persecution of religious populations is an all-too-common feature of our 21st-century world and, as the motion notes, the Shia Muslim population is no exception. Pakistan and Iraq in particular are two countries in which sectarian attacks against the Shia population are common, if not widespread. Human Rights Watch, in its 2012 report on Pakistan, summed up the situation in five words: “Pakistan had a disastrous year”. The report noted that Shia groups were routinely persecuted and that some supposedly banned militant groups operated with impunity, even in areas such as Punjab, where state authority is well established. Human Rights Watch’s 2013 report does not paint a more positive picture. It estimates that, last year alone, about 325 Shia Muslims were killed in targeted attacks across Pakistan. The UK Government rightly welcomed President Zardari’s speech last year, in which he recognised the problems that minorities in Pakistan have faced and the efforts of those in Government to address the situation. Of course, more needs to be done. Two months ago, I noted in the chamber the persecution that Shia Muslims have in the past faced in Iraq. Although we can all be thankful that oppression on such a widespread and repugnant scale no longer exists in that country, it is of course a matter of great regret that any form of sectarian persecution should still occur. However, I am encouraged by the words and actions of the Iraqi Government when it comes to attacks against the Shia community. Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki and President Jalal Talibani know all too well the evils of sectarianism, being victims of it themselves, and I share their determination to refuse to allow religious militant groups that are attempting to exploit political instability to exacerbate sectarian tensions in Iraq. I admire their resolve to ensure that religious insurgency “will not be able to bring back the atmosphere of the sectarian war”. It is regrettable that sectarian attacks are not limited to Shia Muslims or to the geographical areas of Iraq and Pakistan. In both those countries, other religious groups are also targeted, and sectarian attacks occur in Saudi Arabia, Syria and even in countries that have strong traditions of religious diversity and tolerance, such as Indonesia. The UK Foreign Secretary has repeatedly reaffirmed his commitment to working with Governments to end sectarian attacks against religious and ethnic minorities. The UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office has a strong voice on the world stage and it is right that that should be put to good use. Therefore, I welcome current FCO initiatives supporting interfaith dialogue and integration. The list is long, but it includes projects to encourage Pakistan’s political parties to recognise the electoral power of minority communities; campaigns by the FCO’s Jakartan embassy to raise the right to freedom of religion with the Government of Indonesia; the funding of a series of grass-roots meetings in Iraq bringing people from different faiths together to combat sectarian violence; and general ministerial engagement lobbying federal and provincial Governments to guarantee the rights of all citizens. As noted in Sandra White’s motion, the UK Government has a crucial role to play in eliminating sectarian attacks against the Shia Muslim population worldwide. Therefore, I look forward to seeing how the Scottish minister intends to support the UK Government in its critical role in ensuring that we achieve the objective for which we are all striving.

The member referred to United Kingdom figures. Does he think that the electorate were wrong to elect Mrs Thatcher on three occasions? Despite what he has just described, the voters still had great confidence in Mrs Thatcher, thought that she was doing the right thing, and re-elected her twice.

Does the member accept and recognise that Ravenscraig was shut in 1992, two years after Mrs Thatcher left office?

To paraphrase John Donne, any man or woman’s death diminishes us. It diminishes us because we are all involved in mankind. When the death is that of a woman as towering in stature as Margaret Thatcher, the loss to many, as well as to society, is all the greater. The loss to our society with the death of Margaret Thatcher is pertinent to us in the chamber today as the debate asks us to consider whether there is such a thing as society. As we have heard, Margaret Thatcher had a lot to say about society. We have already heard that she apparently declared that there was “no such thing”. However, her point was more nuanced than the soundbite would suggest. Her point was that there is such a thing as society; it is just not the same as the state. Margaret Thatcher believed in a strong society. She believed in a great Britain and she was convinced that that required strong individuals—self-reliant citizens who wanted to get on in life, who did not want the state to interfere with their projects and who did not want to have to fill out a form for Government approval to own a telephone.

I will give way later, but I want to make some progress if I may. The state was of course rightly there for those who were less fortunate, but those who could get on with their lives were expected to do just that. There was no entitlement without first an obligation. We have already heard old myths peddled and Margaret Thatcher’s society demonised by those who frankly ought to know better. What kind of society was it in reality? It was a society in which the state gave back to the people power over their own lives and livelihoods and over the decisions that mattered most to them and their family, from which school was right for their children to which doctor they wanted to look after their health. It was a society in which government was by democratically elected representatives, not by the consent of unelected trade unionists. It was a society in which our Government’s right-to-buy initiative spread the benefit of home ownership to nearly half a million Scottish families.

One of the great myths about Mrs Thatcher’s premiership is that she did not build social housing. Official Government figures show that, during her premiership, on average 5,316 new social houses were built each year. Compare that to what Labour and the Liberals achieved, which was fewer than 4,000 each year, and what the SNP has been able to achieve, which is fewer than 5,000 each year. Mrs Thatcher has a very proud record not just in giving people the right to own their own house. Margaret Thatcher’s society was one in which more people than ever before also owned a stake in the company for which they worked. The number of people who owned shares nearly quadrupled from 3 million to more than 11 million. Margaret Thatcher’s society was a more prosperous one, too. Between 1979 and 1990, the Scottish economy grew at an average rate of 2.5 per cent. GDP per capita increased by more than 150 per cent and the disposable incomes of hard-working Scots more than doubled as a result of her policies. Indeed, all levels of income in all income groups increased under her Conservative Government. It was a society in which workers got to keep more of what they earned, with the basic rate of income tax falling from 33 to 25 per cent and the personal allowance increasing by nearly £1,000. It was a more enterprising society, too. Service sector employment grew by 147,000 jobs between 1983 and 1990 and the number of companies registered in Scotland increased by 62 per cent during the 1980s. Scots not only had more freedom, more choice, more prosperity and more wealth under Margaret Thatcher’s Government; they also produced more than ever before. Far from there being a decline in manufacturing, under Margaret Thatcher’s premiership it boomed. As we have already heard from Ruth Davidson, Scotland’s manufactured exports increased by 26 per cent in real terms over that decade. By 1990, Scotland was exporting more goods than even Japan—that is a fact. When Margaret Thatcher left office in November 1990, that was the society that she left. That was the Scotland that she had created and it is a Scotland of which we can rightly be proud. Of course, the process of change was painful at times—I do not deny that—but profound and far-reaching reform is rarely accomplished without pain. Margaret Thatcher had the courage of her convictions to revolutionise our country and our society, and there was a new prosperity in Scotland as a result when she left office. Indeed, her politics have endured far beyond her premiership, and we continue to live in a society that has in many respects been shaped by her legacy. We are all the better for that. We have heard much rhetoric from other members, but surely they would not want to return to 1970s socialism and the sickness that we all had to deal with then. Margaret Thatcher was a revolutionary Prime Minister who smashed the class as well as the glass ceiling. She taught people like me who grew up under her premiership that it does not matter what they are or where they come from; life is really about who they want to become and where they are going. Margaret Thatcher changed the face of our country and the face of our politics as we knew them. She found Rome a city of bricks and left it a city of marble.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its response is to the report “Shaping Scotland’s Court Services”. (S4T-00304)

The cabinet secretary has been noticeably quiet since the publication of the Scottish Court Service’s plans. The SCS’s report describes the closure of a fifth of Scotland’s sheriff courts as “proportionate”. I wonder what the reaction would have been if a public body had proposed closing a fifth of our schools or a fifth of our hospitals. Does the cabinet secretary appreciate the value of local justice and local courts, particularly in areas such as the Borders? Does he agree with 95 per cent of those who responded to the consultation that the proposals would be deeply harmful to the quality of Scotland’s justice system?

I am a member of the Scottish Parliament and the minister is a member of the Scottish Government, so I would be grateful if he could restrict his remarks to dealing with the questions that I put to him, instead of trying to answer on behalf of the United Kingdom Government. In recent months, there have been two related consultations. The Scottish Court Service consultation, which proposed the closure of several sheriff courts, closed in December 2012, and in February 2013 the Scottish Government published a new draft Courts Reform (Scotland) Bill, which will transfer a significant number of civil cases from the Court of Session to the remaining sheriff courts. Does the cabinet secretary share my concern that the Government’s proposals will simply add to the pressures on those sheriff courts that survive his closure plans?

I too congratulate Bob Doris on securing the debate and I welcome those in the gallery who have travelled to be with us in the Scottish Parliament. I must say, however, that it is with mixed emotions that I make my speech. Reflecting on atrocities such as those systematically inflicted on the Kurdish people since the early 1980s is never something to savour. However, the debate provides us with an opportunity to remember those crimes, to learn the lessons that we can and, importantly, to celebrate the Kurdish people, their future and their contribution to Scotland. I turn first to remembering. It was 25 years and 10 days ago that the skies above Halabja rained bombs, both conventional and chemical, on its innocent inhabitants. An estimated 5,000 civilians were massacred over the two-day bombardment with a further 10,000 injured, some in the most unimaginable ways. The massacre at Halabja was just one part of the Anfal campaign during which, at the behest of Saddam Hussein, some 180,000 Kurds lost their lives between 1987 and 1989. It is right that we remember those outrageous atrocities and it is for that reason that I recently lodged a motion in the Parliament to remember the struggles of the Kurdish people and formally to recognise the genocide committed against them. I am pleased that so many members supported that motion. It is also a tribute to the Scottish Parliament, as well as an indication that we take the Kurdish population and its interests at home and abroad seriously, that the formal recognition of the Anfal genocide was also the subject of motions by both Labour and the SNP. Today is a significant and symbolic occasion on which the Kurdish genocide can receive further parliamentary recognition. Secondly, I turn to the lessons that we can learn from the events in Kurdistan over the past 25 years. As all of us here will surely agree, there are profound lessons to be learned. For my part the Kurdish experience confirmed my belief that human nature is incompatible with totalitarianism and that only when a people are liberated from tyranny can they progress, prosper and flourish. That brings me to my third point—what can we celebrate, 25 years after Halabja and the Anfal campaign? Since liberation in 1991 we have seen democracy flourish in Kurdistan. We have seen the economy prosper, civil society blossom and the regeneration of Kurdish civil rights and liberties. Kurdistan now has seven public universities bringing higher education to its citizens. It has a stable and democratically elected Parliament, with a percentage of women representatives similar to that in our own Parliament. It has progressive laws that have banned female circumcision and which protect women from domestic abuse. Violence, terrorist activity and the persecution of religious minorities are significantly lower—in some cases, non-existent—in comparison with the rest of Iraq. All that serves to underline Kurdistan’s place as a progressive beacon in the Middle East. Tonight’s debate represents an opportunity to celebrate Scotland’s links with Kurdistan, both internationally, with the relationship between our Parliaments and Governments, and nationally, with the Kurds who live and work in Scotland. We must never forget the atrocities committed against Kurds—atrocities which led the head of the Iraqi graves commission to remark that, “There is another Iraq, buried under Iraq.” Tonight’s debate allows us to remember, learn and celebrate.

I begin by saying what barely needs to be said and pledging our unwavering support for UK personnel—military and peacekeeping—who have served and continue to serve our country in Iraq and its regions. Their dedication to the United Kingdom and to the values and ideals that we hold so dear is something that not many members here would have the courage or conviction to emulate. We heard the First Minister make his arguments, it seems without irony, but I am afraid that when it comes to this matter the Scottish National Party does not rise to the level that the people of Scotland and, importantly, the people of Iraq deserve. The First Minister’s arguments might not have been flippant, but the clamour from his back benchers is surely frivolous. When coalition forces entered Iraq 10 years ago, they found a country that had been brought to its knees by tyrannical rule of a kind under which no member here knows what it feels like to live. What did it feel like to live in a country in which 180,000 citizens had been slaughtered in the Kurdish regions in the north and where at least half that number had been slain in the Shia regions in the south? What did it feel like to live in a country where owning a satellite dish meant slow torture; where opposition to the President warranted execution; where the Government was so dedicated to the rule of brutality that it established an ad hoc executions committee as part of its campaign against its own population; where women were nothing more than chattels; and where religious, ethnic and political minorities were legitimate targets and dispensable citizens? So grave and unimaginable was the Iraqi situation that as far back as 1999 the UN special rapporteur for Iraq warned that: “The prevailing regime in Iraq has effectively eliminated the civil rights to life, liberty, physical integrity, and the freedoms of thought, expression, association and assembly.”

I will give way later, but I want to make some progress. I state at the outset that 10 years on, the situation in Iraq is far from ideal. Violence levels remain too high, political unrest is too common, and the persecution of religious and political minorities continues. Only today, we hear of bombings in Baghdad claiming at least 48 lives. Mr Salmond did not mention that, but I am sure that all members here condemn it in the strongest possible terms. There is a possibility of delays to April's elections. However, Iraq has a democratic constitution now, and its people have exercised the most fundamental democratic right three times since 2005 by voting in elections. Almost $1 trillion has been spent on reconstruction, building new schools, hospitals and airports, and overseas investment in the economy increased by 40 per cent last year. We now see an Iraq where democracy is beginning to flourish, the economy is slowly prospering, civil society is beginning to blossom, and the rights and liberties of its citizens have a chance to regenerate—and all because Saddam Hussein is no longer there. However, the quietism and opposition of those such as the SNP when it came to Iraq meant that for too long tyrannical rule of the most unimaginable kind continued. For too long, international words of condemnation were unmatched—

For too long, international words of condemnation were unmatched by meaningful international action; for too long, the Iraqi people suffered under the very sanctions that were supposed to protect them.

I will give way in a minute; let me finish my point. For too long, Kurds in the north and Shias in the south continued to fight a tyrant whom we ourselves should have been fighting. I give way to the First Minister.

I did not say that. [Interruption.]

I do not dispute that the situation is far from ideal today, but it is improving and it is better than it was. If it were a choice between Saddam Hussein and freedom, the First Minister’s choice might have been Saddam Hussein, but my choice would always be freedom. It was essential that Iraq was removed from the sole ownership of Saddam Hussein and that its people were moved into a post-Saddam era. Saddam Hussein’s Government was devoid of any legitimacy and, on any measure, the state had lost its sovereignty. It had engaged in repeated aggressions against neighbouring states, on one occasion not only invading, but attempting to annex, an entire country as part of its empire. In its exhaustively documented Anfal campaign, Iraq violated the genocide convention—which, I remind the Parliament, the United Kingdom has signed. That campaign saw 180,000 innocent Kurds tortured, gassed and executed.

I give way to the minister.

I am sure that Saddam Hussein had various sources of weaponry. That does not make it right that those actions were allowed to continue for as long as they were. Iraq had been harbouring and giving aid to international terrorists, and it was a regime that paid bounties on the heads of Palestinian suicide bombers in Israel. It was a regime that had repeatedly used weapons of mass destruction on its own people as well as those in other territories; that had in the past actively attempted to conceal its weaponry; and that had repeatedly and flagrantly flouted internationally imposed sanctions on nuclear and non-nuclear proliferation. When it came to weapons of mass destruction, Iraq was a latent, if not a patent, threat, but we can now say with certainty that it is no longer a permanent one. Saddam Hussein’s Iraq was a regime that was no longer entitled to the benefit of the doubt, and it was a country whose future could not be a matter of indifference to us, as it seemed to be for some members in this chamber. Intervention was not only necessary—not only essential—but, because of Saddam Hussein’s own record and decisions, inevitable. We brought to justice one of the world’s greatest war criminals. We put him, as well as the perpetrators of the Anfal campaign, on trial, in a dock, and brought justice to the Iraqi people. Do the Scottish National Party and Alex Salmond think that that is nothing? We brought back to Iraq civil liberties, basic human rights and the entitlement to a Government that is elected by the people to serve the people. Do the SNP and Alex Salmond think that that is nothing? Most of all, those of us who supported the intervention in Iraq, got to see what Christopher Hitchens described as “what a people look like when it has been liberated” and allowed to flourish. He said: “there is no experience like that, no experience like the look on the face of a people who are no longer the property of a single party state.” Only yesterday, I heard the words of Ali Al-Rikabi, a former soldier in the Iraqi army, who said: “What took place in 2003 was a good thing ... Iraqis were crying for anyone to come and help them”. We came forward. We no longer stood back and watched. We answered the cries of people such as that former Iraqi soldier. That is something that we can be proud of. Some may not be so optimistic but, as I mentioned, what we saw in the years following the liberation of the Kurds from life at the mercy of Saddam Hussein, we are beginning to see now—slowly, but surely—in the rest of Iraq. The First Minister has made much of the blunders, the mistakes and the catastrophes that we have seen—that we have made—in Iraq since 2003, none of which I deny, and most of which Iraqi citizens know more about than we could ever dare to imagine. However, none of them impeaches the principle and the fundamental idea that this was a necessary war, that it was an inevitable war and that, most of all, that it was a just war. I move amendment S4M-05981.2, to leave out from “; notes” to end and insert: “, including 179 British armed forces personnel and MOD civilians; notes the human rights abuses exhaustively documented by the UN as well as other institutions that took place in Iraq under the rule of Saddam Hussein; notes the estimated 180,000 Kurds killed as part of the Anfal campaign, a systematic ethnic cleansing programme that took place between 1987 and 1989 under the orders of Saddam Hussein; notes the state killing of an estimated 100,000 Shia Muslims in the southern provinces during the 1991 uprising; notes the repeated violations by Saddam Hussein and his regime of numerous UN Security Council Resolutions, specifically Resolutions 678, 687 and 1441; believes that Saddam Hussein’s regime was incompatible with basic democratic or humanitarian principles, and restates Scotland’s commitment to supporting the development of a stable, prosperous and democratic future for all Iraqi people.”

The member has made much of what is happening in Iraq. I fully acknowledge that the situation is far from ideal, but he has made no mention of what happened previously under Saddam’s horrific Government. Is he really saying that, if given the choice between where we are today and where we were then, he would choose where we were then?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the opportunity to debate television services in the south of Scotland, and I congratulate Joan McAlpine on securing parliamentary time to discuss the issue. The quality, as well as the plurality, of television programming is a matter of great importance in the Borders constituency that I represent, especially when it comes to national and local news provision. The UK broadcasting map is a complicated business, with licensee boundary lines seemingly drawn more by historical accident than careful planning, with the result that licence boundaries do not directly duplicate geographical ones. Not only that, but in the south of Scotland the profile of Borders television has changed significantly since the amalgamation of ITV Borders with ITV Tyne Tees in 2009. For many, that was one merger too far, with viewers in the Borders becoming understandably upset at the loss of regionally tailored services that resulted in programming and news coverage from areas that were of little local interest or relevance. Therefore, it comes as little surprise to me that contentment levels with channel 3 have been in decline, with satisfaction in Scottish news programmes in particular decreasing by 9 per cent between 2007 and 2010. It was against that background that the UK culture secretary, Maria Miller, announced in November 2012 that channels 3 and 5 are to have their licences renewed for another 10 years in 2014. That move is to be welcomed; it gives much-needed certainty to the broadcasting industry that depends on those channels and the significant investment that they attract in their regions. The secretary of state has instructed Ofcom to begin discussions with licence holders on the cost and terms of possible renewals. I agree—and endorse—the two issues that she has highlighted as important components of any negotiations. Those issues are, first, the need for licence holders to maintain, or increase, current levels of public service requirements; and, secondly, the requirement for careful scrutiny of proposals advanced by ITV that could leave viewers in the south of Scotland with a lower level of Scottish programming than elsewhere in Scotland. On the first point, it is, of course, essential that licensees deliver quality public service programming. It is therefore pleasing to see that Ofcom’s recent report, “Licensing of Channel 3 and Channel 5”, concluded that licensees of both services exceeded their respective production and programming obligations between 2007 and 2010. However, although exceeding current obligations is to be applauded, that does not mean that we should not be pushing further. The secretary of state has secured increased commitments for UK-sourced children’s programming on channel 5 from Northern and Shell, and there is no reason against an ambitious approach to public service requirements for channel 3, for example, in local news or regional content. That brings me to my second point. Some—including members in the chamber, as we have heard tonight—have used the disquiet and the lack of regionally tailored television services in the south of Scotland as an argument in favour of a Scotland-wide service, as under the model proposed by STV. However, as Ofcom’s report noted, although viewers in the south of Scotland were less satisfied with Scottish news coverage from their channel 3 licensee than viewers elsewhere in Scotland were with the coverage from STV, they placed “considerably more importance” than other Scots on the need for a focus on their local area. On that basis, especially when it comes to news, neither the status quo nor a Scotland-wide STV service appears to be the way forward. For that reason, last June I asked the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs whether she agreed that local broadcasting in the Borders would be better served by having a more local service dedicated to the south of Scotland, which could be supplemented with coverage of national Scottish issues, than it would be by having a Scotland-wide service, as would be the case under the STV proposals. I was pleased that, in her response, the cabinet secretary agreed with me on the matter, and I hope that other members will join us in agreeing that that is the best way forward.

One way of achieving that could be through a public service requirement obligation on licensees. I urge other members to consider that approach. In that respect, I would very much welcome any proposal from ITV to enhance the news and current affairs service for southern Scotland, and to return to the traditional, smaller Border region without Tyne Tees. I believe that that would more fully reflect viewers’ wishes. I again congratulate Joan McAlpine on securing the debate, and I commend other members for their thoughtful speeches.

5. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met representatives of the Scottish Court Service. (S4O-01733)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that the Scottish Court Service has proposed the closure of Duns sheriff court and justice of the peace court in my constituency, as well as the closure of neighbouring Peebles and Haddington sheriff courts. If the closure of the Duns court goes ahead, victims and witnesses will have to travel 30 miles to Jedburgh, which is a journey of almost two hours by public transport. Does the cabinet secretary share my concern that the proposals will place great strain on existing stretched court services, which will seriously harm access to justice and cause further delay to cases?

I welcome the opportunity to speak about policing in Scotland and I commend the Scottish Labour Party for using its debating time to focus on this important issue. The debate comes less than four months before the establishment of a single police force, and the fact that fundamental governance issues remain is clearly a cause for concern. It is worth noting that the Scottish Police Authority is meeting today to discuss governance arrangements and proposed structures and staffing numbers across the service. Given the live date of 1 April 2013, time is tight and it will be a challenge to ensure that the necessary structures are set up before then. Just last week, as we heard, the Justice Committee was told that the chief constable, Stephen House, and the chair of the Scottish Police Authority, Vic Emery, disagreed over their relationship with important backroom personnel. I do not share the First Minister’s view that that amounts only to “creative tension”. Governance might not set the pulse racing, but it is an important topic. The chief constable believes that it is “essential” that he has day-to-day control over certain backroom functions if he is to have the “direction and control of the Police Service” that the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012 confers on him. However, he told the committee that he had received legal advice that the 2012 act does not allow the SPA to delegate to him control over support staff. What the First Minister describes as “creative tension”, the man who will run Scotland’s police force thinks is “a gobsmacking major problem with the legislation.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 27 November 2012; c 2119.] Where the balance of power lies is important, not because the current postholders are incapable of working together but because we do not know who will be in post in future and what decisions they will have to make. The Scottish Government must do all that it can do to ensure that the dispute is resolved as quickly as possible. More important, it must reflect on the fact that its legislation has fallen short. Disagreement remains over who will have control over finance and HR. It is significant that those are the two departments that will be most involved in staffing decisions. Let us be frank: a single police force will inevitably lead to job losses.

The cabinet secretary has perhaps articulated more clearly than was expected the difficulties that will arise when the job cuts come. We should be under no illusions: there will be significant job cuts when the single police force comes into operation. The lines of control, which are undoubtedly confused, will generate tensions. Eight separate back-office departments will be merged into one. That is how savings will be made and how we will create a more efficient police force—I do not dispute that. It is right that that will be done gradually and that voluntary redundancies will be the starting point. However, the tensions and concerns will create problems for the future.

I entirely agree with what the member says. There are two points that will not make things easy for the single police force. First, we still do not have a full business case that outlines what savings will be made. During the passage of the bill, the Scottish Government repeatedly said the single force would save £130 million a year and £1.7 billion over 15 years, but those figures were based on an outline business case that was produced in the summer of 2011 and they were never intended to inform the debate on whether the single force would produce the savings. A full business case should have been published before the bill was passed, but instead it has been left to the Police Authority to determine. Secondly, Scotland’s police forces have a combined outstanding debt of £104 million, which will transfer to the new service in April, meaning that on day 1 the single service will already owe £104 million. It has been suggested that as many as 3,000 civilian posts will be lost in order to balance the police budget. It is right that that is a decision for the single force but, as it represents nearly 50 per cent of the current total, I question whether it is a sustainable prospect. I disagree with the point in Lewis Macdonald’s motion on the use of the private sector for civilian posts. I am not opposed in principle to the police service using the private sector in certain circumstances. If the private sector can deliver the same services in a cost-effective manner, we should surely welcome that. I move amendment S4M-05087.1, to leave out from “or” to end and insert: “and ensure transparency and openness in the financial decision-making process and that such decisions must include the flexibility to establish local solutions for local issues.”

Will the member give way?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to improve the A1, A7 and the A68 roads in the Scottish Borders. (S4O-01506)

The minister will know that those roads provide vital links from the Borders to the rest of the United Kingdom. However, none of them was identified for significant investment in the Scottish Government’s infrastructure plans, which were published last year. Does the Government have any intention to change those plans? Will the minister explain why none of the routes was identified for improvements in last year’s plan?

Councillor David Parker, the leader of the Scottish National Party-led Scottish Borders Council, has indicated that he is happy to see the costs rise provided that the railway is built. Does the minister agree with that analysis?

We welcome today’s opportunity to consider the role of the media in the criminal justice system. Scotland’s criminal justice system does not exist in a vacuum and must respond to and evolve within modern-day conditions if it is to remain a credible and effective institution. Today, we have heard of a number of the difficulties that the modern world and the digital era present to the criminal justice system. Many of those challenges can be observed most starkly when considering the Contempt of Court Act 1981. In an age of citizen journalism and unfettered access to new media platforms, some have raised concern about the suitability of a strict liability offence of contempt of court. During evidence to the Justice Committee earlier this month, some witnesses observed that the majority of the public do not know and cannot be expected or presumed to know the legal implications of what they write or broadcast online regarding criminal trials. While “ignorance of the law is no excuse” and the need to ensure the fairness of criminal trials must remain fundamental tenets of our legal system, the appropriateness of a strict liability offence punishable by a custodial sentence of up to two years must, in the light of modern conditions, be seriously assessed with regard to the principles of fair labelling and proportionality. However, evidence to the Justice Committee raised the possibility of the need for a more comprehensive reform of the 1981 act. Aamer Anwar commented on the need to bring the law of contempt into the 21st century, and Steven Raeburn likened the 1981 act to “using a bow and arrow against chemical weapons”,—[Official Report, Justice Committee 2 October 2012; c 1777.] and called for a “fundamental overhaul”. The witnesses did not share one view, though, with Alistair Bonnington supporting the case-by-case discretionary approach that the 1981 act allows. It cannot be denied that today’s digital era threatens the efficacy of the 1981 act in securing its objective that jurors’ minds are free from the effects of prejudicial information that may endanger the fairness of a trial. Nevertheless, although there is evidence that jurors are discovering and actively accessing information relevant to their trial online, we have no similar evidence as to the effects that such exposure has on the decision making of a jury. Studies from Canada and Australia have shown the effects of trial reporting on the jurors’ consideration of evidence to be markedly less pronounced than expected. For example, a study from New South Wales found that, although jurors often tracked down coverage that was relevant to their trial, they were generally not influenced by bias or incomplete reporting. Publicity was found to have influenced a verdict in only three out of 41 cases, underlining jurors’ scepticism towards sensationalist and speculative reporting. The need for such information in a Scottish context is clear. If experience elsewhere shows that jurors either do not believe or are uninfluenced by prejudicial information from citizen journalists, bloggers or even ardent tweeters, a knee-jerk overhaul of the 1981 act in the absence of solid empirical evidence would simply put the cart before the horse. A more sensible suggestion, which has been mooted in England and Wales, is an amendment to section 8 of the 1981 act to allow evidence on the matter to be gathered. Discussion of the media brings us to the televising of court proceedings. Although rare, cameras in Scottish courts are nothing new. We have accepted their use in principle since 1992. It was Lord Hewart, the Lord Chief Justice, who said that it is “of fundamental importance that justice should not only be done, but should manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to be done.” Open justice is critical in ensuring the fairness of a legal system, and the televising of certain court proceedings has the capability of furthering that aim. However, the public interest in open justice is not limited to its capacity to deliver fairness in our legal system; there is also a public interest in increasing public knowledge of our legal, court and criminal justice systems. The most recent Scottish crime and justice survey statistics show that 64 per cent of Scots do “not know very much” about the criminal justice system, with 17 per cent saying that they knew nothing at all. Furthermore, only 19 per cent of those surveyed stated that they had ever come into contact with the Scottish judiciary. Making court proceedings more accessible to the public through television not only may increase the public’s awareness of the criminal justice system, but goes to the very heart of the authority of the law.

I acknowledge that concerns exist, but many such arguments are not against the use of cameras in court proceedings per se, although they might be arguments against unfettered camera usage in all forms of court proceedings or arguments for restricting filming to the sentencing or appellant level, as has been proposed in England and Wales. If any proposals included televising criminal trials, strategic camera placement might be one solution to combat not just Margo MacDonald’s concerns, but other concerns that were raised in the Justice Committee’s evidence session. It is important that the nuances in all aspects of the debate are recognised and that it is not presented as an argument between polar opposites. Presenting it as such would inevitably result in the baby being thrown out with the bath water. All parties should work together to avoid such an outcome.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on figures showing an 8.2 per cent drop in retail sales on 2011 and an average 17 per cent drop in high street footfall across eight towns in the Borders in the last four years. (S4O-01250)

Towns such as Selkirk and Duns in my constituency have seen drops of up to 30 per cent in footfall on their high streets. Retailers are crying out for more help from the Scottish Government but, instead, the Government is hitting them further with damaging measures such as the SNP’s retail tax, which has led to a £95 million increase in business rates. Will the Scottish Government finally take real steps to help Scottish shops and high-street businesses and stop that hugely damaging measure?

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to promote local broadcasting and programming in the Scottish Borders. (S4O-01196)

In light of Ofcom’s recent report, “Licensing of Channel 3 and Channel 5”, does the cabinet secretary share my belief that local broadcasting and planning would be better served by having a dedicated, regional service for viewers in the south of Scotland, supplemented with coverage of national Scottish issues, rather than a Scotland-wide service, such as the one that is proposed by STV?

Section 5 contains a ministerial power that the Scottish Government has repeatedly asserted will rarely be used and will apply only to non-operational matters. The power enables ministers to direct the authority in any non-operational matter, and the rationale behind it is that it is required to enable Scottish ministers to act in the public interest and to execute the will of the Scottish Parliament if necessary. However, a number of organisations have expressed real concern that the power risks political interference with the police force. The organisations that have expressed concern include the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Scottish Police Federation and the University of Glasgow’s Professor Jim Gallagher. Amendment 37 accepts that a ministerial power may be necessary but seeks to force the minister to justify its use by issuing a statement before it is used. We still believe that there is a lack of clarity about the instances in which the ministerial power will be used. At stage 2, the cabinet secretary said: “The bill clearly defines the respective roles and responsibilities of the chief constable, the authority and the Scottish ministers. It is absolutely clear that the only person who can direct and control constables is the chief constable.” He added that he was “not persuaded that a statement ... would add to that clarity.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 29 May 2012; c 1385.] If the Government is so clear about when and where the power could be used, I question why it does not support the idea of a clear statement being published before the power is exercised. I encourage the Scottish Government to support the amendment. I move amendment 37.

I am not persuaded by the cabinet secretary’s analysis of how the power will operate in practice. Graeme Pearson set out clearly the concerns that we and Labour have about how the power could be used. The cabinet secretary has articulated some of the circumstances in which the power could be used. I do not see why he is prevented from being more explicit on the face of the bill about those circumstances, or why, before the power could be used, he could not come to the chamber to explain them or set them out. For those reasons, I press amendment 37.

The Scottish Government has estimated that a single force will result in £130 million-worth of savings a year and £1.7 billion-worth of savings over 15 years. However, those figures are based on an outline business case, on which the financial memorandum was based, that was produced in July 2011. The financial memorandum states that it does not provide a plan or blueprint for the future delivery of the services and is not intended to be used to set future budgets. When giving evidence at stage 1, Chief Constable Smith of ACPOS said that the outline business case was “never intended by the police officers who were party to it, or by the consultants, to be a document that contained sufficient detail on which to base significant decisions about investment and savings.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 28 February 2012; c 971-2.] The Scottish Government’s position is that a full business case is a matter for the services themselves, as it will influence and determine the detailed design of the new police and fire and rescue services. The Government expects that that will be completed at the earliest opportunity that is available to the new services. However, when considering the matter at stage 2, the cabinet secretary initially suggested that a full business case would be produced before stage 3, but then went on to clarify that it was still being prepared by stakeholders and would be produced at the earliest possible opportunity. Our amendment seeks to force the Scottish Government to publish a full business case before the implementation of the act. It is hugely regrettable and, frankly, unacceptable, that that has not yet been produced by the Scottish Government. We all accept that the reason behind the creation of a single police force is to produce a more efficient service, but the Scottish Government has not even produced fully thought-out evidence to the Parliament that shows what savings will be delivered. Additionally, our amendment seeks to compel the Auditor General to review the savings that are made by the creation of a single force, following the publication of the full business case. That must be done as soon as is practicable after the creation of a single force, and the report must be laid before the Scottish Parliament. We decided against the inclusion of a time period on the basis that that might restrict the Auditor General or the information available to him. Although the bill allows the Auditor General to consider the efficiency of the single service, it does not explicitly state that any report must consider the savings that are being made. Those are the figures that we need, which is why the Scottish Conservatives have proposed the amendment. I move amendment 39.

During this debate about the creation of a single police force, the cabinet secretary and the Scottish Government have made a huge amount of the massive savings that would be delivered. For the cabinet secretary to come to the Parliament at the final stage of the bill and not have a full business case that explains how the savings will be achieved and not show how the business case will be set out is unacceptable. The onus must be on the Scottish Government to produce more information beyond the outline business case, on which it was never intended that efficiency savings and structural change would be based. That has been made absolutely clear by those who prepared that report. For those reasons, I will press amendment 39.

Local authorities will incur considerable costs as a result of the bill. After all, local authority representatives or staff might well sit on the Scottish police authority and local authorities will have to scrutinise and monitor the drafting and implementation of local police plans. During its consideration of the bill, the Local Government and Regeneration Committee heard from COSLA that the estimated costs for local authorities are likely to be between £3 million and £5 million to cover elected members’ time, policy support, research, analysis and administrative support. Amendment 45 seeks to force the Scottish Government to ensure that sufficient funding is available for local authority engagement with and scrutiny of the single police force; to ensure that the creation of a single force does not leave local authorities out of pocket; and to protect local authority scrutiny of local policing, thus enhancing local accountability. On amendment 47, the bill states that a local police plan is to be prepared by the local commander and submitted to the local authority for approval; that, in preparing the plan, the commander must consult such persons as he or she “considers appropriate”, which might include local authorities, and that the plan can be amended “at any time” on agreement of the commander and the local authority. However, the bill provides no more detail on what happens when the local commander and the local authority cannot agree and section 48, for example, is unclear about what happens if the local authority does not approve a plan. Our amendment seeks to place an obligation on the police authority to draw up a mechanism to address situations in which the local authority and the local commander disagree over a policing plan. That mechanism must be in place before the first strategic plan is approved to provide clarity on what happens if there is disagreement and avoid stalemate. It is also designed to ensure that local commanders do not ignore the wishes of local authorities and to provide transparency in decision making at a local level. The Scottish Government’s position is that there is a risk that an explicit dispute resolution mechanism would become the option of first rather than last resort and would detract from the important relationship between the local authority and the local commander. Surely that does a disservice to the professionalism of our councils and local commanders. The existence of a mechanism to deal with disagreements would not lead to councils ignoring the need for mature debate and negotiation. The alternative is that the bill remains totally silent over what happens when there is disagreement. Amendment 47A seeks to put in place an additional protection for local accountability by requiring the authority to submit the dispute resolution mechanism for approval to the Scottish policing commission, as proposed in a Labour amendment that will be considered later.

Is it not the case that the UK Government set out circumstances in which a new force would be able to claim the VAT exemption but the Scottish Government chose to ignore those circumstances and press ahead with the reform regardless, thereby costing the new force this money?

I rise to speak in favour of Graeme Pearson’s amendment 2, to return the favour from earlier in the day. He proposes the creation of a Scottish policing commission to oversee the work of the single police force. We believe that reform is necessary to protect front-line policing. However, our support for reform is conditional on the protection of local accountability. Graeme Pearson spoke effectively and clearly about the dangers of unfettered power and the need for the Parliament to be able to scrutinise the single police force and hold it to account. I fully accept that the current Government may not have any sinister intentions for our police and security forces, but surely the Parliament’s job is to plan for the worst-case scenario, to protect accountability and to protect the right of this place to hold our police to account. That is why I am happy to support Graeme Pearson’s amendment.

Amendment 69 deals with the required skills of board members of the new police authority. The bill does not express or outline the types of expertise that should be present in the authority. Paragraph 2(3) of schedule 1 states: “The Scottish Ministers must appoint as members only persons who they consider to have the skills and expertise relevant to the functions of the Authority.” However, the bill does not point towards the type of skills that will be required, and neither is there mention of the board’s membership covering different parts of Scotland. Amendment 69 does not seek to list explicitly the types of expertise that should be on the board or the regions that should be represented on it; instead, it seeks to expand on the provision in paragraph 2(3) of schedule 1. Amendment 69 states that authority must include “persons with a range of professional expertise, including financial expertise.” We lodged a similar amendment at stage 2, and the Government’s response was that the board’s expertise would evolve in time to reflect the skills and expertise that will be required at particular points. My view is that a basic requirement for adequate regional representation, local authority cover and external professional expertise from the outset of the single force must be included in the bill. We also lodged an amendment at stage 2 that would have required the authority to consist of between 15 and 19 members. The cabinet secretary rejected that amendment on the basis that that number of members would not facilitate the strategic and collective decision making that the authority requires. Although the Scottish Government rejected our amendment at stage 2, I am pleased that it has lodged an amendment that will increase the size of the board so that it will include between 10 and 14 members, which is clearly a step in the right direction. We are happy to support Lewis Macdonald’s and Alison McInnes’s amendments, which have been debated.

I am pleased to see from the marshalled list that amendments 19 and 26 also have the support of Graeme Pearson, so I thank him again. [Interruption.]

The Justice Committee’s stage 1 report raised concerns about the transparency of the SPA. In response, the Scottish Government asserted that the board will hold meetings in public and publish all papers, but no such requirement is included in the bill. Section 2(3) requires the authority to “try to carry out its functions in a way which is proportionate, accountable and transparent”. At stage 2, we lodged an amendment that sought to compel the board to hold meetings in public and to publish agendas and papers for those meetings “except in circumstances as specified in standing orders”. It was anticipated that that exception would be used only when security or other reasons did not permit a meeting or part of the meeting to be held in public. The cabinet secretary stated that he was sympathetic to our amendment, but he wanted to ensure that its drafting would not unduly restrict the authority’s freedom to determine for itself the best way of going about its business. Amendment 19, which was drafted in consultation with the Scottish Government, requires both the SPA and the SFRS to hold meetings in public and publish agendas, papers and reports. It also requires the authorities to publish a statement that sets out the circumstances in which meetings may be held in private and agendas will not be published. We agree that it is appropriate to include an exemption to allow meetings to be held in private. We would have preferred the authority to be allowed to draw up a statement of circumstances in which it can hold a meeting in private and the statement to be put to Parliament or the proposed Scottish policing commission for approval; however, the current drafting is acceptable. The amendment is an improvement on the wording in the bill, as it seeks to require meetings to be held in public in most circumstances, and I encourage members to support it. I move amendment 19.

I am very pleased that the Scottish Government has accepted my amendments. I wish only that it had taken a more consensual approach to some of the other amendments that have been lodged. Amendment 19 agreed to. Amendment 57 moved—[Jenny Marra].

Schedule 4 to the bill concerns the transfer of constables, staff and property following the establishment of a single police force. Paragraph 9(2) limits the transfer of constables to another area of Scotland as constables will no longer be employed by their regional police force but by the Scotland-wide single force. It says that constables may not be transferred if such a move “would necessitate that constable moving home to a place outwith what was the area of the police force which has ceased to exist.” However, paragraph 9(4) states that the limitation ceases to apply in three cases, which are “if, on or after the appointed day, the constable— (a) is or becomes a senior officer of the Police Service, (b) is promoted to a higher rank, (c) gives the chief constable written consent to the lifting of the limitation imposed by sub-paragraph (2).” The Scottish Police Federation has expressed concern about that provision because it would allow the transfer of officers anywhere in Scotland on promotion to a higher rank. The SPF argues that the provision could damage local policing and act as a disincentive to new recruits due to the disruption that can be caused by relocation. That condition was not included when the previous amalgamations took place in 1975. The Scottish Conservatives believe that it is appropriate to allow the transfer to other parts of Scotland of constables who seek promotion. As with other professionals, constables should be given the choice to relocate in search of promotion. However, the current wording of paragraph 9(4) of schedule 4 appears to allow the relocation of promoted constables at any future point following promotion. In particular, the use of the term “ceases to apply” appears to permit transfers to any part of Scotland at any time if a constable is promoted after the establishment of the single police force. I hope that that is not the intention but, if it is, it would be very disruptive to employees of the new single force, who would be subject to transfer to any part of Scotland at any time following a promotion. My amendment 74 seeks to clarify the situation and would replace “ceases to apply” with “does not apply”. I also seek to reword paragraph 9(4)(b) to clarify that a constable can be transferred only at the point of promotion and not at any future date. We lodged similar amendments at stage 2, and have lodged them again because we feel that, at that stage, the Scottish Government did not fully appreciate the policy intention behind them. At stage 2, the cabinet secretary said that the amendments “would narrow the exception in paragraph 9(4) relating to promotion so that the provision would apply only where the requirement to move outwith their home force area was a direct consequence of the promotion. The effect would be that promoted constables would retain the right to stay in their home force area unless the promotion itself entailed a move outwith the area.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 12 June 2012; c 1462.] However, the current wording would appear to give a free hand to the Scottish police authority to move a constable anywhere in Scotland at any future point simply because he or she was promoted following the establishment of the single police force. We argue that it is not acceptable to put policemen and policewomen in that position. I move amendment 74.

I remain unconvinced that the Government has heard the arguments made by the Labour Party, the Conservative Party and the Lib Dems, and, indeed, the Scottish Police Federation. There is a real concern among police officers about the issue, and it is unfortunate that the Government has failed to take heed of that.

I asked this question earlier in the stage 3 proceedings, but I will ask it again. Can the cabinet secretary confirm that the Treasury set out a number of proposals that would have dealt with the VAT issue but which the Scottish Government has chosen to ignore? I do not care about the proposals that the Scottish Government put to the Treasury; I want to know whether the Treasury made proposals that would have dealt with the point adequately.

I will focus on the single police force proposals. The fire service proposals are certainly less contentious and appear to be a sensible efficiency measure, although any restructuring of the fire service must retain a visible and effective firefighting presence. By making savings in that area, the bill will, I hope, protect front-line services. The Scottish Conservatives support the reform of our police and fire services. Indeed, our manifesto last year contained a proposal for a single police force while the SNP remained committed only to reducing the number of police forces. A single police force could represent an opportunity to get rid of duplication in backroom functions such as human resource, information technology and administration functions, and, in turn, protect front-line policing. I am therefore pleased that the Scottish Government has come round to supporting a Scottish Conservative election manifesto commitment. I am less pleased about how the Government has gone about implementing the policy. The bill is far from perfect. Despite the best efforts of the Opposition parties, it will not adequately protect local accountability or ensure that savings are delivered. The Scottish Conservatives support the idea of reform and a single police force, but that support has always been conditional on a number of factors. Any reform must protect local accountability. Any restructuring must ensure that police services are accountable to local people and the communities that have a direct relationship with them, which they serve. Unfortunately, the bill is very quiet on how the single police force will work with local authorities; instead, the Government has invested a great deal of faith in its pathfinder projects. Only time will tell whether that was a good idea. We would have preferred to have seen real power delivered to local residents by the introduction of directly elected police commissioners. It is unfortunate that the Government has not accepted that proposal or a number of other amendments that the Scottish Conservatives and other Opposition parties proposed that would have provided clarity on local authority engagement with the single force and enhanced local accountability. Additionally, the creation of a single force must deliver efficiency savings, and it is important that those savings are delivered alongside the protection of front-line services. The Scottish Conservatives, too, are committed to the maintenance of 1,000 additional front-line officers, whom we helped to secure during the previous session. That is all the more important given yesterday’s news that the number of crimes and offences committed in Scotland has risen this year. If the bill enables more money to be spent on front-line policing, it has to be welcomed. We have heard a number of times in the chamber that a single police force could achieve £130 million-worth of savings within a year and a total saving of £1.7 billion over 15 years, but those figures are based on an outline business case that was produced in July 2011, before the Government had even decided to establish a single police force. We have already heard that Chief Constable Smith said that that document was “never intended by the police officers who were party to it, or by the consultants, to be a document that contained sufficient detail on which to base significant decisions about investment and savings.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 28 February 2012; c 971-2.] We are still waiting for a full business case to be produced. It remains the Government’s position that that is a matter for the police and fire services. The consequence of that is that the Parliament has been forced to debate a critical piece of legislation without full figures on how much the single police force will save, which is unacceptable. The cabinet secretary has made a bit of a song and dance about the VAT position throughout the passage of the bill. The reality is that, when the Scottish Government first set out the proposals, it had full knowledge that they would result in the loss of the VAT exemption; indeed, its own estimates of the impact of the reforms assume that loss. The United Kingdom Government has tried its best to work with the Scottish Government to make the proposals work and to allow the VAT exemption to be retained, but the Scottish Government has failed to engage. Indeed, the cabinet secretary’s letter to the Treasury minister in June talks about a failure “to offer suggested amendments that would meet your policy without undermining our whole programme of reform”.

That suggests that there were proposals and amendments but the cabinet secretary chose to ignore them. The Scottish Conservatives sought to work with the Government to establish a single police force that was locally accountable and would deliver the savings. I am disappointed by the bill and by the Government’s failure to properly engage.

It is fair to say that all parties share the desire for the Parliament to be modern, flexible and fit for the job that it was established to do—to pass laws that will benefit the people of Scotland and to hold the Scottish Government to account. Of course, the latter point has been given greater significance by the results of last year’s elections. It is more important than ever that the Parliament can hold ministers and Governments to account. It has been 13 years since the Parliament first met, and it is right that we are now considering whether reform is necessary. The passage of the Scotland Act 2012 earlier this year means that the largest ever transfer of financial powers to Scotland since the United Kingdom was created has taken place. The Scottish Government will have to decide how best to use those significant new powers. As the Parliament’s powers increase, the ability to hold to account those who exercise those powers must be robust and effective. Presiding Officer, parliamentary reform has been discussed before, but you must be praised for creating the momentum for change. The Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee was tasked with considering chamber and committee sitting patterns and reported on the topic last December, as we heard from the committee’s convener. A range of recommendations was made, including the recommendation that the changes should be implemented before Easter. It is important to take our time to get any changes right, but that should not be used as an excuse for delay. Equally, we should view the reforms not as the final stage but as part of the process of continuing evolution of our Parliament. The focus of our debate is the committee’s second report of 2012, on parliamentary reform, which outlines the standing order rule changes that are required to implement the proposals. The committee and the Parliamentary Bureau share the same aim for reform. The bureau did not accept some of the committee’s initial proposals, but it has supported fundamental changes to the Parliament’s working practices. It is important to note that some of the committee’s recommendations involved matters that are outwith standing orders and therefore beyond the committee’s control and remit. For example, the committee recommended a trial of allowing a smaller number of longer back-bench speeches in open debate. In response, the Presiding Officer was correct to point out on behalf of the bureau that such a proposal is not for standing orders. I note that the Presiding Officer strongly shares the committee’s aim of encouraging debate and I commend the actions that she has taken to encourage interventions. To that end, we will continue our approach of sharing with members information on debates. I turn to the recommendations that the standing order rule changes are to implement. The Scottish Conservatives are broadly in favour of the proposed changes. The creation of a three-day plenary working week will enhance Parliament’s ability to respond to live events. The proposal will not increase the length of the working week, but it will mean that three days a week are available for parliamentary business. However, as we noted in our initial response to the committee, that change should be more than mere tokenism, and substantial business must be scheduled over all three days. The inclusion of question time on all three days and the introduction of topical questions will further enhance Parliament’s ability to respond to recent events and hold ministers to account. The recommendation that committees should be able to meet at the same time as chamber business takes place, when circumstances do not allow them to meet at any other time, is a sensible suggestion to streamline committee business. It is right that that procedure should be used only in exceptional circumstances. Some of the proposed changes raise concerns in my mind and the minds of my Conservative colleagues. The proposed changes will allow debates to take place on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday afternoons. In theory, Government or Opposition debates could be scheduled on any of those afternoons. However, given that the Government in effect controls the allocation of debating time, the concern must be that a Government that was under pressure would allocate Opposition time to the Thursday afternoon, to avoid closer scrutiny. Thursday afternoons are undoubtedly less attractive for a number of reasons, not least because they are at the end of the week and because the media focus on Thursdays is on First Minister’s question time. Like Labour, we argue strongly for a presumption against using the Thursday afternoon debating slot for Opposition debates. It is correct to reduce the time between lodging and asking questions, but the bureau’s suggested timetable will mean that the deadline for lodging all questions will fall at 12 noon on Mondays. Although I am supportive of that, there is a risk of duplication of questions and a reduced opportunity for Opposition members to question the Government on a variety of topics, as all questions will be lodged around the same time. We may want to review how that is working in a few months’ time. As made clear in the initial report, the committee sees this as the start of a process. It is important that the effects of any reforms are considered and further changes made, if necessary. It would be regrettable if another 13 years were to pass without any further consideration of the Parliament’s working week. I am pleased to confirm that the Conservatives will be supporting the committee’s motion.

7. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it expects the estimated costs of constructing the Borders railway to change. (S4O-01045)

I thank the minister for confirming that the construction costs of the railway will not exceed the current estimates. Will he say what the projected income will be from the railway once it is operational?

6. To ask the First Minister, in light of the Scottish Government’s recent decision to hire a public relations firm, what its position is on whether a mechanism should be established to ensure that such services are not used for party-political purposes. (S4F-00688)

I thank the First Minister for that very helpful response. Given that the referendum on Scotland’s future is fast approaching, does the First Minister accept that mechanisms should be put in place across Government to ensure that what is being done is the job of government and not simply the promotion of the Scottish National Party’s separatist agenda?

As other members have done, I will focus on the bill’s proposals for a single police force for Scotland. The proposals for the fire service are less contentious and appear to be a sensible efficiency measure. However, any restructuring of the fire service must involve the retention of a visible and effective firefighting presence. I hope that, by making savings, the bill will protect front-line fire services. Crime remains a real concern for many people in Scotland. Too many people live in communities that are blighted by crime. The challenge is to step up the fight against lawlessness, antisocial behaviour and violence so that our citizens can live free from crime and from the fear of crime. The question that we must ask is: how can we maintain the service that the police provide within the current financial parameters? When public finances are under such extreme pressure, it is appropriate that we look to cut duplication and unnecessary costs across Scotland’s police forces to ensure that we keep police officers on the beat in our communities and not behind desks. However, making those savings will involve difficult decisions. With 87 per cent of the policing budget going on staffing costs and with large savings having to be found, it is clear that there is little scope for minor efficiency savings or tinkering round the edges. The Scottish Conservatives therefore agree that it is appropriate to review the structure of fire and police services in Scotland. I certainly will not defend the historical police force structures if that means sacrificing more police officers who could fight crime on the streets. However, our support for the bill has been conditional on three factors: that local accountability is protected; that real efficiency savings are delivered; and that front-line police numbers are protected. The Scottish Conservatives have real concerns that those conditions will not be met by the bill as it stands. On local accountability, any restructuring must ensure that police services are accountable to the people whom they serve. We need a system that involves local residents, so that communities have a direct relationship with the police who serve them. It would be regrettable if the bill simply amounts to yet another attempt by the Scottish Government to grab power, remove local accountability and centralise services. At least there is a recognition of the importance of local accountability through the proposal in the bill to create, for each local authority, a local commander who is responsible for the delivery of local policing plans. However, we, like the Justice Committee, have serious concerns that that does not go far enough to counteract or balance the centralised single police force. We argue that a better way of achieving local accountability would be to establish directly elected local police commissioners, which is a policy that the Scottish Conservatives have called for repeatedly. Under that policy, operational matters would remain matters for the police, but the police would be accountable to those locally elected police commissioners. Voters and residents would have a direct link to their commissioner and would hold them to account for local police performance. The UK Government is introducing elected commissioners in England. Will the cabinet secretary consider improving the bill by including that policy to enhance local accountability? The second and third conditions for the Scottish Conservatives’ support for the bill are that efficiency savings are delivered and—crucially—that they are delivered alongside the protection of front-line services. When the cabinet secretary made a statement to Parliament on police and fire reform back in September 2011, he said that a single police force could achieve £130 million of savings within a year and a total saving of £1.7 billion over 15 years. I asked him: “What systems does the Government plan to put in place to ensure that those savings are delivered?” His reply was remarkably vague. He said: “Those matters will be dealt with.”—[Official Report, 8 September 2011; c 1562.] The Government continues to provide little detail on how it plans to ensure that the oft-quoted savings are delivered. During the Justice Committee’s consideration of the bill, a number of witnesses expressed concerns—we have heard them repeated today—about how the savings would or could be delivered.

We came out in favour of a single police force before the SNP did. We believe that a single police force will provide not only efficiency savings but a better service to the people of Scotland. It is the Government that argues for the changes because they would make savings. That is the SNP’s principal argument for pursuing the reform. What are the savings and how will they be delivered? The SNP needs to produce a detailed business plan and the costed reasoning for how it will deliver the savings, not just for us here in the Parliament but for the taxpayer, who expects the savings to be delivered. As we heard from my colleague David McLetchie, the savings that the Scottish Government has set out are based on simply an outline business plan rather than a full business case. I repeat the Justice Committee’s call for a full business case to be published as soon as possible, so that the Parliament and the wider Scottish public can understand better the savings and how they will be delivered. That such a case has not been produced ahead of the stage 1 debate is a serious oversight by the Scottish Government. We believe that reform is necessary and that we should not be tied to historical structures that are no longer relevant to policing in modern Scotland. However, the Scottish Government must do more to persuade us that the bill as it stands will deliver local accountability and savings for the Scottish taxpayer.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive how many acres of farmland it estimates will be affected by the proposed changes to the Water Environment (Controlled Activities) (Scotland) Regulations 2011. (S4O-00879)

I have been contacted by many farmers from the Borders who are extremely concerned by the proposed rule changes to ban farmers from applying slurry, fertilisers and solid manures on fields where the land is on a gradient of more than 12 degrees. The proposals come from a Government that portrays itself as the farmer’s friend, yet they would render many of Scotland’s farms completely uneconomical. Why is the cabinet secretary trying to burden Scottish farmers with yet more red tape, and why did the Government try to introduce such a controversial rule change in such a low-key manner, with a consultation of only four weeks at the busiest time of year for farmers?

I congratulate Alison Johnstone on using her party’s business time to bring this very important issue to the chamber. I think that it is the first time during my five years in the Scottish Parliament that we have had the opportunity to debate it. To pick up on Elaine Murray’s theme, I should probably declare an interest, being a cyclist myself. Last summer I spent a week in the French Pyrenees and cycled more than 700km in six days, including 12 of the tour de France’s toughest mountain passes. I might not win all the debating points, but surely I will win that one. The number of people who cycle in Scotland and across the United Kingdom has grown at an incredible rate in recent years. There has also been an increase in the public debate about cycling, following the successful cities fit for cycling campaign by The Times, which I fully support. About 30,000 people have now expressed their support for its eight-point manifesto. Perhaps more important is that the campaign has also been backed by organisations such as the Automobile Association and the RAC. The benefits of cycling have been mentioned by others, but it is also important to recognise that “Cycling is the most efficient form of transport in the world. ... A 2009 study by Professor David MacKay found that an average cyclist will use less than a third of the amount of energy required to walk, a sixth of the energy needed to travel by coach and an eightieth of the energy a car would use.” Given that “three quarters of our journeys in the UK are five miles or fewer”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 23 February 2012; c 343WH.]— it is clear that cycling could and should be promoted as one of our basic transport needs. It is clearly not suitable for all journeys, and there are additional challenges in rural areas such as those in my constituency. However, rural areas and towns can all do things to promote cycling, although the exact details will be different in each case. The health benefits of cycling are significant, and my colleague Nanette Milne will cover them in her speech. Cycling is good for the environment: even if one takes into account the food that a cyclist has to eat, where it comes from and how it was produced, carbon dioxide emissions are a fraction of those from other vehicles. If we hope to encourage cycling—I think that we should—we must ensure that the safety of cyclists is improved. One way to do that would be through improved training. One training organisation suggested that two hours of training, costing £70, would transform the safety of cyclists on the road. We must also look at what our schools are doing to ensure that our children are introduced to the benefits of cycling at a young age, that they are encouraged to cycle to school, and that they are given training to do so safely. However, it works both ways. Some cyclists ignore red lights, thereby endangering themselves. Many others do not use proper lighting on their bikes either at night or when visibility is poor. That is not the responsibility of Government or motorists; it is up to the cyclists to behave properly. When cycling in Europe, I am always struck by how considerate other road users are towards cyclists. Indeed, I understand that in most other European countries the law states that the less-vulnerable road user causing harm is deemed to be responsible or culpable, unless evidence is produced to the contrary. Similarly, other countries often insist on minimum passing distances. Local authorities need to do more to improve the safety of cyclists. Some councils have very good cycle-friendly schemes, but others have been found wanting. We must do more to invest in cycling infrastructure, not least to ensure that our roads are up to cycle quality. As a cyclist and a car driver, I know that what might be a relatively small hole for a car often becomes a more serious problem for a cyclist. We will support the Scottish National Party and Labour amendments. I lodged my amendment simply because I feel that the motion is slightly too prescriptive and does not recognise the potential involvement of the business and third sectors in developing and promoting cycling. With the Olympics and the Commonwealth games fast approaching, the next few months and years will give us a huge opportunity to transform cycling in Scotland. If our cyclists are as successful as we hope, many more people—particularly youngsters—will get on their bikes. Finally, I will be taking part in the Galashiels triathlon in about nine days. I encourage Alison Johnstone—or any other member who wishes to join me—to take part, because cycling is very important. I move amendment S4M-02522.1, to leave out from “considers that active” to end and insert “; commends the Cities fit for cycling campaign by The Times, which has led to cycling being given more prominence in public debate; supports greater business and third sector involvement to boost infrastructure development, and notes the potential that the Olympic and Commonwealth Games can have in contributing to an increase in the number of people taking up cycling.”

The Scottish Conservatives are pleased to support the bill’s general principles. A vibrant tenanted sector is vital to Scottish farming. As a Parliament, we should do all that we can to create a better environment for the letting of farmland to tenant farmers and to encourage new entrants to tenant farming. I believe that the bill goes some way towards achieving that. The Scottish Conservatives are happy to support a number of proposals in the bill, such as the extension of the definition of “near relative” to include grandchildren and the prohibition of upward-only rent reviews. However, I remain concerned about a number of issues, on which I will focus today. On the suggestion that the definition of “near relative” should be extended, it became clear during scrutiny of the bill that some members of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee—particularly those from the Scottish National Party—would like the definition to be widened to include not only grandchildren, but nieces and nephews. The logic behind that is that some tenant farmers may not have children or grandchildren, and so the tenancy could be forfeited on their passing. However, if the tenancy rights were conferred on nephews and nieces, the tenancy could be carried on in the wider family, which would restrict the landlord’s ability to retake possession of the property. On that point, I fully agree with the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, who in his evidence to the committee cautioned that any extension of the succession rights could have unintended consequences. An overly broad definition could further limit the landlord’s confidence and create even more uncertainty in the tenanted sector. If such a definition was implemented in an attempt to protect the tenant’s rights, the landlord’s rights could be seriously undermined, which would make it more unlikely that a landlord would lease his land in the future in order to avoid the effective loss of his property.

That was very helpful, but it does not necessarily mean that I have to agree with that view. I agree with the cabinet secretary’s view that there could be unintended consequences. We must think very carefully before further reforming the definition. I raised in committee the issue of the bill’s impact on the ability of landowners and prospective tenants to freely negotiate their tenancy agreements, and the impact that that has on new entrants. There is a view that the freedom to contract is being undermined. That is having an impact on the supply of land, which in turn has an impact on new entrants’ ability to come into farming. Tenant farmers and landowners have told me that, because they are unable to negotiate freely, they are entering into short-term arrangements rather than secure tenancies. As a consequence, tenant farmers are not prepared to invest in the land and the farm steadings in the way that they would have done if they had the benefit of a more secure tenancy. Given the drop in the number of tenancies, which we have heard about already, we should be concerned that, by further interfering with the parties’ contractual freedom, we could be indirectly undermining the parties’ ability to enter into arrangements as they wish to. I know that that is not the Government’s intention, but we must keep the unintended consequences of such changes in mind when we consider further reform. In the brief time that is available to me, I will focus on the lack of data. In January, the Government released figures that showed a 10 per cent drop in the number of holdings with tenancy agreements between 2005 and 2011. However, it became apparent during the committee’s scrutiny of the bill that there is an issue around the lack of accurate data in a number of areas, including rented land, which makes it much more difficult to understand fully the extent of the implications of the bill or of any possible future reform. The briefing note from Scottish Land & Estates states that there is scepticism about those numbers, which show only a snapshot of the issue and fail to take into account that there are a number of destinations for the land once the tenancy comes to an end. Some of the land is bought back by the tenant, some is taken back to be farmed by the landowner and some is split to support existing businesses and current tenants. I agree with the committee report that the Scottish Government must, as a matter of urgency, work with the relevant parties to ensure that more accurate data is collected. The fundamental issue is that we must get the balance right between the rights of the tenant and those of the landlord. The relationship between the two parties must be based on mutual respect and confidence in the other party, rather than leave those involved fearful of letting their land or unwilling to invest in their tenanted property. The bill will make progress in the right direction, and we are happy to support it, but we must be careful about further reform.

6. To ask the First Minister whether he considers that separation from the rest of the United Kingdom could be negotiated within a year of an independence referendum. (S4F-00558)

Another non-answer from the First Minister this afternoon. Given what he has said about a possible timetable, will the First Minister enlighten us as to the discussions that he has had with each of Her Majesty’s Government’s reserved departments on the implications of separation for Scotland?

The purpose of the debate is to highlight the case for the reintroduction of local rail services between Edinburgh and Berwick-upon-Tweed, but more particularly for the reopening of Reston and East Linton stations for local train services. Before I get to the substance of the debate, I thank those members on all sides of the chamber and from all political parties who have supported my motion to allow the debate to take place. I know that a number of MSPs hope to speak in the debate, and I look forward to hearing their contributions. I put on record my admiration for the rail action group east of Scotland—or RAGES as it is known locally—for its tremendous work and relentless campaigning to bring rail services back to Berwickshire and East Linton. Particular recognition should be given to its chairman Tom Thorburn, vice-chairman Barrie Forrest and secretary Russell Darling. I doubt that the campaign would have had the impact that it has had were it not for their hard work, which has been supported by the RAGES committee. That work has also been supported by the wider community, in the form of Coldingham community council, Eyemouth town council, Reston community council and Joyce McLean from Reston. I do not have time to name everyone who is involved, but I am delighted that many of them have been able to join us this evening in the public gallery. My motion refers to the need for rail services for Reston and East Linton. However, for the purposes of the debate, I will focus on the case for Reston, as it is in my constituency. I am sure that lain Gray and others will focus on the case for East Linton. The eastern Borders and Berwickshire area does not have good transport links and I believe that that is now having a serious impact on the economic viability of the area. Indeed, a recent study highlighted particular concerns around Eyemouth and suggested that it faces the danger of rural marginalisation. It is estimated that a train station at Reston could serve a population of approximately 10,000 residents in the eastern Borders, giving those residents easy access to the economic powerhouses of Edinburgh and Newcastle. Young people would be able to stay in the area while commuting to access further education and high- quality, skilled jobs. By offering improved public transport links, those communities would also be able to attract new families who would look to take advantage of the Borders’ quality of life. Crucially, retaining people and attracting new residents would have a knock-on effect on the overall viability of Reston, Eyemouth and other Berwickshire communities. There would be more families to use local schools, spend money in local shops and more generally support the life—the existence—of the local community. New businesses would be attracted to the area and there would undoubtedly be huge potential for the untapped local tourism market, not just in Berwickshire but across the Borders, to be exploited. We all know that we live in tough economic times and that public money must be spent wisely to ensure good value and maximum public benefit. However, there is no doubt in my mind that extending local train services to Berwickshire and Berwick-upon-Tweed from Edinburgh would be money well spent. I hope that that was evident to the Minister for Housing and Transport during his recent visit to East Lothian and Berwickshire. In the limited time available to me I would like to make the following points to the minister. Those who have been involved in the campaign are frustrated by the fact that it will now be necessary to pursue the Scottish transport appraisal guidance 2 appraisal process. The minister’s predecessor—with whom we had positive engagement and who visited Reston and East Linton—made it clear to me, lain Gray, and the other campaigners that a STAG 2 appraisal would not be necessary and that, instead, Transport Scotland would pursue an alternative study into the viability of reintroducing local train services. Frankly, there is no point trying to work out the rights or wrongs of the current position or the reasons for it; I mention the issue only to record officially the frustration that was felt by the campaigners when they were told that much of the work would have to be repeated, and that that would have to be done in a very short timescale. To that end, I would be grateful if the minister could give two commitments when he winds up the debate. First, I would like the Scottish Government to give a commitment that it will ensure that Transport Scotland meets the costs of the STAG 2 process. Secondly, I would like a commitment to be made that, within the new rail franchise agreement, the possibility of local rail services returning to Reston and East Linton will be kept open. I also say to the minister that it is clear that, unless the project has the political backing of the Scottish National Party Government, it is going nowhere. If the minister believes that the money cannot be found or that the business case cannot be made, I urge him to come clean and say so. Frankly, it is better that the campaigners know where they stand rather than be given false hope. The Scottish Government should not fall into the trap of thinking that the Borders railway will be the answer to all the public transport problems in the Borders. I was particularly concerned when the Minister for Housing and Transport stated recently in this Parliament that the Borders railway was the SNP’s number 1 priority for improving public transport in the Borders. The reality is that the Borders railway will go to Galashiels. It will arguably improve public transport to residents living in and around the central Borders, but it will do nothing to assist communities further afield, such as those in Berwickshire. I hope that the SNP Government understands that every resident in the Borders should be able to access good-quality public transport, not just those living in and around Galashiels. I hope that the minister will also acknowledge that the delivery of local train services to the eastern Borders and East Linton could be achieved at a fraction of the cost of the Borders railway. I will finish where I started. I again thank colleagues for supporting my motion and those who will speak in the debate. The motion and the campaign have strong cross-party support. We now need the political muscle of the Scottish Government to make the project happen.

19. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to promote the teaching of major Scottish historical events that have significant anniversaries in 2013 and 2014 in schools. (S4O-00787)

I am pleased that the minister is aware of the significance of the battle of Flodden to the Borders and to my constituents. Significant plans are already under way to mark its 500th anniversary. Does the Scottish Government have any specific plans to promote that event in schools in the Borders and throughout Scotland?

I, too, thank Iain Gray for securing this important debate and giving us the opportunity to raise our concerns about the proposals. I give my apologies for having to leave the chamber slightly early. The recent news that many courts are under threat of closure is worrying for the future of justice in Scotland. It is particularly threatening for the delivery of justice in rural communities such as those in the Borders for which I have the privilege of being the MSP. The potential impact of such closures would have significant implications for ensuring that victims are treated fairly and that justice is delivered in an efficient manner. The effective operation of the court system in Scotland is essential to ensure a fair judicial process for all those who are involved. I suggest to Joan McAlpine that the current backlog of more than 14,000 cases surely shows that our justice system cannot accommodate any further reduction in the number of courts. We have heard that the Scottish Court Service report proposes closing up to 15 of Scotland’s 49 sheriff courts. We should remember that rural residents often travel long distances to attend court already. The court closures would affect travel time for witnesses and victims alike, but the change would disproportionately affect people in rural areas. I believe that further serious consideration of the proposals is necessary. Another important point is that the Scottish Court Service document has also revealed that the number of sheriff courts hosting jury trials could be reduced from 47 to 14. If fewer than a third of the courts remain in operation, court schedules could be further delayed and there could be little chance of a fair and swift trial. Cases involving jury trials, which often deal with the more serious matters, cannot be taken lightly, and jury trial postponements are already a concern for many under the current system. In my constituency, Duns and Selkirk are two of the sheriff courts facing the possibility of closure. As they cover a vast geographical area, they consider a large number of cases. The courts in Scotland that remain open could easily face further backlogs, lessening our citizens’ chances of seeing justice quickly and efficiently. As Christine Grahame said, the Lord President gave evidence to the Justice Committee last November. Lord Hamilton gave a number of examples of how the court structure could be reformed. In particular, he noted that sheriff courts and JP courts could be combined in a single building. He also noted, as we have heard, that maintenance costs are rising in court buildings. However, I would say to the Lord President, and indeed to Christine Grahame and others, that that in itself is not sufficient reason to close nearly a third of the sheriff courts in Scotland, particularly given the disproportionate impact of closures on rural areas, such as mine.

The key principle—I was moving on to this—in our considerations is ensuring that access to justice is made as easy as possible. Iain Gray made that point in his speech. We need to ensure that, wherever residents live in Scotland, they are able to obtain easy access. The Lord President stated in his submission to the committee that the next step in the process is to get “judicial members to consider what principles” ought to be applied in the provision of court services. Fundamental to that is our ability as a nation to deliver justice in rural areas. Transportation links and the means of travel in rural areas must be considered closely before a closure plan can be approved. Given that the burden of the court closures falls on rural communities, the factors that affect those communities must be a key principle to be considered by the Lord President and by the Scottish Government when it finally has to ratify the approvals. Clearly, the Scottish Court Service must conduct full consultation with local communities before taking any decisions. The opinions of the people using the court system must be considered, to ensure that justice is delivered quickly for those accused of crimes, for the victims of crime and for other people using the system. The rural communities of Scotland, such as those covered by the Selkirk and Duns courts, are very concerned about the possibility of closures. It is just as important to provide an efficient and accessible justice system to such communities as it is to people living in Glasgow or Edinburgh.

In conclusion, I again congratulate lain Gray on securing the debate, and I hope that the Scottish Government will reflect on the important points that have been made in Parliament today.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive how it is supporting deaf and hard-of-hearing people in the Scottish Borders. (S4O-00709)

A number of my constituents who are deaf and hard of hearing have contacted me about the difficulties that they have experienced when they need to contact emergency services and their general practitioners. Many local health services rely on text phones to solve that problem. Such phones cost in excess of £100, so residents often prefer to use text messaging on their mobile phones. However, none of the emergency services and few health centres offer that facility. Is the minister aware of such initiatives? What can be done to encourage use of text messaging from health services to deaf and hard-of-hearing people?

4. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body whether it considers the Parliament’s IT system to be fit for purpose. (S4O-00693)

Many members are increasingly frustrated by the inadequacies of the IT system that is offered by the Scottish Parliament in the Parliament campus, in our constituency offices and when we are working from home—or trying to do so. From my perspective, there are concerns around the capacity of our e-mail system, the ability to file electronically and the ability to manage cases effectively. Given the increasing volume of e-mail correspondence that members are receiving, will the corporate body examine e-mail systems that are used by other bodies and groups to ascertain whether there is a better system that we could and should be using?

9. To ask the Scottish Executive what its transport priorities are for the Scottish Borders. (S4O-00667)

I note that the minister did not mention Selkirk. A few weeks ago, I received a letter from a constituent. It reads: “I voted for the SNP last year because I supported their campaign and petition to bring a bypass to Selkirk. Can you find out for me when the bypass will be built by the SNP please?” Does the minister still support the building of the Selkirk bypass and, if so, when will it be built?

1. To ask the Scottish Executive what its policy is on ending automatic early release of prisoners. (S4O-00529)

On several occasions, we have seen how automatic early release allows some pretty dreadful crimes to be committed and how it fails the victims of crime. The cabinet secretary has been saying for some time that the Government wishes to scrap automatic early release—in fact, that was in the 2007 and 2011 SNP election manifestos. Notwithstanding what the cabinet secretary has said, can he give a commitment that it will be abolished before the end of the current session of Parliament?

Will the minister give way?

That is great foresight. Why have the A1 and other significant trunk roads through the Borders not been identified for improvement between now and 2030? Is it because those roads go to England and the rest of the world?

I thank my former colleagues on the Justice Committee for their work in scrutinising the bill. Together with the clerks, they did a good job in considering how the bill could be improved. When the Scottish Government first announced that it would delay the bill’s passage, that was welcomed by all sides as an opportunity to make serious changes to the poorly written and vague first draft that came before the Parliament. It is highly regrettable, therefore, that we have reached stage 3 and yet the bill has shown remarkably little improvement. The SNP will probably use its majority to push through this lacklustre response to what is a blight on Scotland’s culture. No one doubts that sectarianism is an evil that must be removed from our society in Scotland, and any right-minded person would want to achieve that. However, I would argue that the way to tackle such unacceptable behaviour is not through vague and potentially harmful acts of Parliament but through better enforcement of existing laws. Those are not just my thoughts. Aidan O’Neill QC described this as the worst drafted bill that he had ever seen, and concerns have been raised by the Law Society of Scotland, the Church of Scotland and others, which are all worried about the potential harm that the bill could cause. They agree that bad law is worse than no law. There are a number of reasons for that, which my colleague David McLetchie identified. The Scottish Government has failed clearly to define the behaviour that it is trying to criminalise. The SNP has been unable to identify the problem at the heart of the issue, and its members cannot seem to agree on whether it is tackling a religious or a political issue. As such, the Government has produced a catch-all measure that could result in those with innocent intentions being punished by the law. There is no clear definition of what constitutes an offence, and many are rightly concerned about what might be caught and become criminal behaviour. Churches throughout Scotland are worried that Christian teachings might be in jeopardy because of the vague definitions in the bill. Other organisations have raised similar concerns. Indeed, when I asked the minister in committee whether the singing of the national anthem would constitute an offence, she was unable to answer me, stating that it would depend on the other circumstances. I know that the minister will direct members to the guidelines that support the bill, but that is not the point. The legislation itself must be certain and clear, and it is simply wrong of the Scottish Government to rely on guidelines to deal with the inadequacies in the bill’s drafting. Many are concerned that the bill will impinge greatly on the ability to associate, speak freely and voice opinions with anyone or on any matter. That will inevitably mean that the people who are criminalised are not the individuals who are peddling these unacceptable views but innocent Scots throughout the country who will be seen as committing an offence, despite having honest intentions. Although there is an agreement that we must tackle this serious issue, that does not condone the something-must-be-done mentality that the SNP Government has adopted. Existing measures are in place that, if used more effectively, could start to deal with the problem. The Justice Committee report called on both the SFA and the SPL to take more action on the issue and it is vital that they now start to do so. Closer working between the two groups in charge of Scottish football could produce a co-ordinated effort to take action against fans who are guilty of sectarianism. As the committee noted in its report, it is highly regrettable that that has not already been achieved and more pressure should and must be put on them to ensure that the issue is dealt with as a matter of urgency. The Scottish Conservatives will rightly consider any initiative that aims to reduce sectarian behaviour in our society but, having looked at the bill, we think that it has been found wanting. David McLetchie has tried to improve the bill with amendments, but they have been rejected and our concerns remain. We have tried to be reasonable but have been rebuffed by the Scottish Government, which is determined to force through this shoddy bill. I therefore urge every MSP to think carefully before voting to approve the bill. If it is to become law, there are real concerns and a real danger that it could end up causing more harm than it does good.

I congratulate Neil Findlay on securing this important and timely debate. I am pleased to support the motion. I welcome a large number of my constituents to the public gallery. Many of my constituents feel that their communities are coming under attack as wind farm developers submit more and more speculative applications for industrial wind farms. From the outset, I should make clear that I am not against all wind farms. Indeed, as a farmer’s son, I can see and understand why farmers, other landowners and communities would want to generate extra income by having a wind farm on their land. What I am against is the current Government’s obsession with wind energy over all other energy sources and the lack of any coherent strategy to ensure that wind farms are put in appropriate locations. Although attaining clean, renewable energy sources should always remain a priority for Scotland, current strategies excessively burden communities, outweighing any possible benefits. The Scottish Government has set an ambitious target of sourcing all our electricity needs from renewable sources by 2020. That ambitious target has placed greater emphasis on the role that wind power will play in achieving that target. By increasing the role that wind power plays in meeting our electricity needs, the Scottish Government has in effect restricted the expansion of other forms of renewable energy. Wind power is not, and should not be, the only solution. What annoys me and many of my constituents is the failure of the planning system to deal with the legitimate concerns of residents about wind farms in their areas.

I want to make some progress. In many cases, a wind farm application might be opposed by residents, the community council, the locally elected councillors, the council’s planning officials and the local planning committee, yet the developer may then appeal to a Scottish Government-appointed reporter who will quite often impose the will of the Scottish Government and approve the application. No wonder so many Scots feel that the planning system is stacked against them when it comes to wind farm applications. The other frustration that I have is that, by focusing on wind energy, the Scottish Government is failing to plan to provide Scotland with a secure energy supply. We should not forget that nuclear power currently provides a large proportion of our electricity needs, yet the Scottish National Party has no plan for nuclear power in its energy strategy. We should also not forget that nuclear power provides thousands of high-tech jobs, which facilitate the retention of engineering talent within Scotland—and, more particularly, in my constituency. Despite what the SNP Govermnent might say about the safety of nuclear power, the fact remains that Scotland is one of the world’s safest nuclear power providers. While the wind may not blow, nuclear provides a reliable and secure energy supply. In the remaining time available to me, I want to touch on a couple of economic factors around wind farms. Over the next decade, billions of pounds-worth of taxpayers’ money will be channelled into subsidies for wind farms, effectively raising energy prices for hard-working Scots. Fuel poverty is a serious issue in Scotland. Cold winters coupled with rising energy costs have led many Scots to make difficult choices between essential purchases and staying warm. Questions must be raised about whether it is a good use of taxpayers’ money to support wind energy while pushing up energy prices. Lastly, greater consideration needs to be given to the impact of wind farms on our tourism industry. Tourism’s value to the Scottish economy is comparable to that of energy, yet the relentless push of wind farms puts that in jeopardy. I urge the Government to use common sense in setting targets, because unrealistic targets lead to rushed choices on renewable energy. The Scottish Government should think again.

I am slightly confused about Christine Grahame’s position on the issue. Is it not the Government’s fault that we are operating in an environment in which so many communities are under attack from those speculative applications? Is it not also the case that many local councils oppose the application, but the Government reporter approves it?

I will use my contribution to the debate to raise an issue that I am sure many MSPs frequently have to deal with on behalf of their constituents: that is, how local councils and other RSLs allocate houses. Before I do so, however, I want to emphasise the importance of house building and construction to the overall wellbeing of the Scottish economy. According to the Scottish Building Federation, the Scottish construction industry workforce has been reduced by 31,000, or 15 per cent, between 2009 and 2011. Private sector construction has been particularly badly hit, with the consequence that the house-building industry has become increasingly dependent on public sector investment for new work. Those in the sector are therefore concerned by the fact that the Scottish Government’s affordable housing budget faces a cut of 30 per cent between now and 2014-15 and by the impact that that will have on jobs in the construction sector. As my colleague Alex Johnstone did, I will mention the importance of the right-to-buy policy and the success that it has been for many people in Scotland. We should not forget the sense of pride that people gain from owning their own homes. Home ownership gives people a stake in the maintenance and improvement of their communities and neighbourhoods. It also fosters social mobility and enables people to build up capital. That is why we believe that as many Scots as possible should have the opportunity to share in the benefits of home ownership. They must include those who live in social housing, which is why we have opposed, and will continue to oppose, the restrictions on the right to buy that the Scottish Government has imposed in order to prevent people from exercising that right. None of us should forget that almost half a million households in Scotland have taken advantage of the right to buy since it was introduced in 1980. The policy is about more than allowing people to own their homes; the Scottish Government could use the right to buy as a means to re-energise the Scottish economy. By increasing the available discounts to encourage tenants to buy their own homes, it would increase the funding that would be available for investment in building affordable homes for people on low incomes, which would also boost jobs in the construction sector. I am pleased that British Government has recognised that, but I am disappointed that the Scottish Government has not. I will return to the main point of my contribution, which relates to the allocations policy that prevents many RSLs from giving priority to local people when allocating properties. That can often lead to frustration among applicants and anger in communities. Under the current legislation, landlords cannot take into account the length of time for which an applicant has lived in the area. They can give preference to people who reside in the area, but they have to give the same preference to other groups who meet certain criteria—for example, people who want to move into the area to take up employment. We want social landlords, including councils, to be given greater ability to take into account local connections when deciding on housing applications and transfer requests. The situation is a particular concern in rural communities such as those in my constituency. One issue that has been raised with me time and again is the difficulty that people face when they want to apply for a house within their own community, only to find that they are so far down the housing list that it is impossible. The effect of that is to break up communities, to force young people from the communities in which they have grown up and, in the long run, to increase the average age of people who live in more remote areas, which has an obvious impact on provision of services in those communities. I am strongly of the view that the Scottish Government should allow social landlords more scope to give extra weight to local connections in allocating houses. That would be a welcome step that would help to ensure that local people have access to local houses. We must do everything that we can to keep rural communities together and to support families who want to move house within their community. Changes to the allocation rules would benefit rural areas such as those in the Borders. The debate is a welcome opportunity to highlight the importance of the housing sector to the Scottish economy. Even if ministers do not accept our arguments about the right to buy and the importance of the housing sector, the Scottish Government must surely acknowledge the need to help people to stay in their communities by reforming the allocations procedures.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of the National Farmers Union Scotland. (S4O-00381)

The president of NFU Scotland, Nigel Miller, recently called on the Scottish Government to address the mounting threat of cattle scab. Despite its eradication from the United Kingdom almost 50 years ago, the disease has been identified in more than 20 herds in Wales, England and Ireland, with imports from Europe thought to be responsible for its resurgence. How does the cabinet secretary respond to Mr Miller’s warning that if the disease is already in some of Scotland’s herds the Scottish Government needs to intervene with the necessary restrictions on movement to prevent its spread?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and thank Johann Lamont and the Labour Party for bringing this important topic to the chamber, particularly since this will be my last debate in my capacity as the Conservative justice spokesman. The Scottish Government has been good at patting itself on the back in relation to the criminal justice system. However, it is vital that it recognises that, in keeping our communities safe, this is not the time to be complacent. Although I recognise that the latest crime statistics are, overall, encouraging, there are other trends that the Government must take into account. An increase in violent crimes is unlikely to make people feel safer in their communities. Indeed, the latest Scottish crime and justice survey shows that 87 per cent of people perceive the crime rate in their local area either as having stayed the same or as having gone up in the past two years. As the motion highlights, front-line policing is set to face pressure as a result of a reduction in the number of support staff. There are also indications that the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service will not meet its performance targets. Most worryingly, however, the rates of reoffending remain unacceptably high, and have stayed virtually the same for years. Unless we tackle that issue, we will never properly cut crime rates. I will start by dealing with front-line policing. We should not forget that the Scottish Conservatives were responsible for the delivery of the 1,000 extra police officers on our streets. We were pleased to see that commitment extended into the future. However, there seems to be a serious risk of that becoming a public relations exercise rather than a real, visible change in the police presence on our streets. The fall in support staff numbers has led some people to believe that the hole will need to be plugged by front-line police officers. Indeed, the Justice Committee took evidence from the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, which has warned the Government that there are likely to be pressures on front-line policing as a result. It is hypocritical to boast about falling crime rates while allowing police officer numbers, which have been instrumental in that fall, to dwindle again. I have argued, on several occasions, that the single most important thing to tackle in our justice system is the almost unbelievable rate of reoffending, which is the focus of my amendment. The latest Audit Scotland report shows that 69 per cent of those who were imprisoned in 2009-10 had more than five previous convictions. Reoffending rates have fallen by less than 1 per cent in three years, despite having been a policy priority for several years. It seems clear that something must change. I am sure that the Scottish Government—indeed, most MSPs of all parties—will agree that we need to take a different approach. I will touch briefly on the need to tackle reoffending through rehabilitation in our prisons. It is vital that Scotland has a modern, fit-for-purpose prison estate with a focus on rehabilitation. I welcome the commitment to the new Grampian prison as well as the continued investment in the prison estate, and I will follow keenly the progress on that work. The Scottish Conservatives have long argued that both long and short-term prison sentences are vital ingredients of a well-functioning criminal justice system.

I fully accept that reoffending rates are far too high and that the current system in our prisons and in community-based alternatives to prison is not working. However, the answer is not the abolition of short-term sentences; the answer is in reforming the rehabilitation services that we offer both in prison and outside prison. It is vital that Scotland has a modern, fit-for-purpose prison estate with a focus on rehabilitation. The answer is not simply to abolish the short-term alternatives. We must always ensure that there are sufficient prison spaces to deal with those who are sent to prison by the courts and not try to interfere with courts’ discretion to send people to prison if that is their decision. We should not forget that prison terms have several functions. First, they should be a deterrent to criminals, as losing some of one’s basic freedoms for a period of time is a powerful incentive. If it is not, it should be. Secondly, they prevent criminals from committing crimes again—at least, for the time that they are in prison. Thirdly, a modern prison estate should offer effective rehabilitation through a wide variety of purposeful activities and programmes. The Justice Committee has heard evidence suggesting that there is a lack of meaningful activities across the prison estate. That needs to be recognised by the Scottish Government, which should conduct a national review of all Scotland’s rehabilitation schemes to work out what is providing good value for money and what is producing the results that we all want to see. We all know that a lot of the crimes that are committed are alcohol or drug related. For example, last year’s statistics showed that 77 per cent of young offenders were reportedly drunk at the time of committing an offence. Similar data can be found to confirm the link between drug use and crime. It seems clear that helping offenders to deal with their addictions would have a strong impact on the level of crime, especially in relation to reoffending rates, yet we do not seem to be making sufficient progress.

I will have the opportunity to speak later in the debate. I move amendment S4M-01285.2, to leave out from first “; believes” to end and insert: “and that reoffending rates remain unacceptably high; believes that cuts in the number of support staff lead to police officers being taken off the beat to fill civilian posts; further notes that the number of unmarked cases with procurators fiscal doubled to 14,000 in the six months to October and that many of these cases were more than four weeks old; considers that such delays in the processing of offences undermine public confidence in the justice system, and believes that both reductions in police support staff and backlogs in the marking of cases put public safety at risk as well as disillusion victims of crime who should be at the heart of the criminal justice system.”

This has been a useful debate because it has highlighted many concerns that wider Scottish society has about the operation of our criminal justice system. I want to use my closing remarks to focus on the victims of crime. I have always believed that victims should be at the heart of our criminal justice system. A visible police presence is pivotal in giving victims and communities a deserved sense of security, but the other side of the coin is their sense that justice has been done. If there are serious delays in the prosecution of criminals, victims rightly feel disillusioned and disheartened. It is the job of the Scottish Government to ensure that justice is served appropriately and swiftly for the sake of victims and of wider society. Despite what the Scottish Government has said, concerns have been raised about the backlog of cases building up at the Crown Office, not least by the Procurators Fiscal Society—a point that was highlighted well by Alison McInnes. I return to community sentences and rehabilitation, which were raised earlier in the debate. The Scottish Government and, it seems, Christine Grahame are great champions of community sentences. We on this side agree that there is a place for community sentences in our justice system, but we strongly oppose the idea that community sentences should be preferred to prison sentences just for the sake of a reduction in prison numbers. Under the current community payback orders, which in effect replace short sentences, those who are being spared jail include a four-time drunk and disqualified driver, a knife carrier, someone who is guilty of domestic violence and a small-time drug pusher, all of whom have previous convictions. What message does that send to the victims of crime and to wider society? Scottish Conservatives have never shied away from being tough on crime. We need to make sure that criminals do not get off lightly, for the sake of the victims who need the satisfaction of justice being served appropriately. We also need to ensure that we attempt to rehabilitate those who are convicted of offences, whether that is done in prison or during a community sentence. Reoffending rates suggest that the Scottish Government is failing miserably in that regard. We believe that community sentences have to be tough, but there are indications that they are not. A recent freedom of information request revealed that almost a third of offenders who have been given community payback orders do no work whatsoever. There are also clear problems with enforceability of community sentences, as several recent examples illustrate well. It is very important that punitive measures be properly enforced. We all remember the case of the first community payback order, which was breached because the offender simply did not show up. That will always be a challenge with community sentences; it does not apply if the person is serving their time behind bars. Overall, short-term sentences offer better punitive measures in some cases and, combined with proper prison rehabilitation, should and can be more effective. To conclude, I have always stood proudly on the side of victims and not on the side of the criminal. Our criminal justice system should reflect this; victims should be at the heart of all the Scottish Government’s policies on criminal justice. First and foremost, we need to address reoffending and tackle crime in order to lower the number of victims and to make sure that victims can rightly gain a sense that justice has been done.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the BBC trust and what issues were discussed. (S4O-00285)

Earlier this year, the BBC started to broadcast BBC Alba on Freeview. To allow that to happen, 13 BBC radio stations are no longer broadcast on Freeview during BBC Alba’s transmission times. However, a large number of my constituents use the Freeview platform for radio listening, particularly in areas such as Jedburgh, where there is no digital radio signal and the analogue signal is poor. Is the cabinet secretary content with the level of consultation that the BBC undertook prior to that change and is she concerned that the consequence of the change is that it is depriving non-Gaelic speaking communities access to essential radio services?

I, too, welcome the opportunity for members to look in detail at the final report by Lord McCluskey’s review group. We had an informative debate on the interim report in June and we are now in a position to look at Lord McCluskey’s final report. I add my appreciation to that of others for the work that Lord McCluskey and his team did in producing the report. Disagreements on the detail of the report’s conclusions are inevitable, but the report undoubtedly provides a clear and helpful analysis of the issues that are at stake. Unfortunately, many of the Scottish Government’s pronouncements have been less than helpful. To avoid doubt, we should be clear that the McCluskey review endorsed the proposition that the Supreme Court should retain a jurisdiction in respect of appeals in criminal cases from Scotland when those cases raise questions of compatibility with convention rights. The UK Supreme Court acts as a buffer between the High Court and the European Court of Human Rights. It allows human rights issues in controversial criminal cases to be resolved in the UK before the time and resources of an already overburdened international institution are demanded. The cabinet secretary has claimed that referring cases from Scottish courts directly to the European Court of Human Rights would be simpler. Perhaps he should remember that the court in Strasbourg has a backlog of about 150,000 cases and a three to four-year waiting time. If we slowed access to justice through such an approach, we could find that more cases were eligible for appeal. When the UK court rules on Scottish cases, it does not judge on the facts of the case or release a proven or not proven verdict. Instead, its remit is restricted to particular points in connection with the European convention on human rights, so the constitutional system provides a more immediate process for interpreting the human rights rules that the ECHR establishes more conveniently than going directly to the European court in Strasbourg. The motion rightly mentions the Scottish legal system’s historic independence and the need to maintain that. I doubt whether any member from any party disagrees with that. However, I gently remind the cabinet secretary that, just as the proudly independent Scottish legal system historically did not exist in a vacuum, so our justice system today must be seen in the context of our national and international legal obligations. That the High Court of Justiciary has a relationship with the UK Supreme Court and the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg does not in itself imply that Scotland’s legal system is in some way bereft of integrity. Rather, it shows that Scotland and her legal system is an independent part of the United Kingdom and the European Union. As the Law Society recognises, Scots law has always been outward looking, both in providing a model for other legal systems to follow and in looking to other legal systems for good practice and inspiration. We believe that our legal system is strong because of that willingness to learn from other systems, and the SNP ought to be careful that its political attempts to reduce the UK Supreme Court’s influence on Scotland do not come at the cost of an effective legal system that provides fair access to justice for all. That said, we fully recognise the need to tidy up how the UK Supreme Court engages with Scots law in determining points that relate to human rights. It is to be welcomed that the report underlines the need for coherence in the way in which human rights laws are applied north and south of the border. The UK Government has made it clear that it will review Lord McCluskey’s recommendations carefully. The Advocate General, Lord Wallace, has met Lord McCluskey to discuss his report and I understand that he will do so again. In clear contrast to the negativity and bickering from the Scottish Government, Her Majesty’s Government at Westminster has shown that it is prepared to take a responsible and constructive path to ensuring that the integrity and effectiveness of Scots law are respected and maintained. As we have seen, the review group recommends in its report that the UK Supreme Court should have the power to rule on human rights issues that arise from Scottish criminal law cases. However, it argues that that should occur only if the High Court of Justiciary permits the appeal. Permission would be granted through a certificate that notes that the case raises a point of general public importance. The Government, which has done all that it can to undermine the integrity of the UK Supreme Court in recent months, has welcomed the proposal with open arms. We in this part of the chamber believe it to be an unnecessary proposal that might have far-reaching negative consequences for access to justice in Scotland. The Law Society has also made it clear that it disagrees with the recommendation. Its point is that individuals, whether they are in Scotland or in other parts of the UK, have rights that are particular to the individual and they should not be assessed against such a test. The SNP’s dogmatic political desire to narrow the UK Supreme Court’s scope on Scottish matters should not be pursued at the price of restricting full access to justice for Scots. As I said, we welcome the work that Lord McCluskey and his team have done on the role of the Supreme Court in relation to Scots law, but we do not accept the spin that the Scottish Government has put on it. We will continue to fight to maintain the integrity of Scottish criminal law, but firmly within the context of Scotland’s place in the United Kingdom. I move amendment S4M-01133.1, to leave out from “this position” to second “criminal cases” and insert: “the position of the High Court of Justiciary should be maintained in its rightful place at the apex of that system”.

I am pleased to speak in the debate on the important issue of local broadcasting. Christine Grahame deserves congratulations for bringing it before Parliament. The story of broadcasting in the Borders has been mixed in recent years. I will explore some of the background to the debate and consider how we have to got to where we are. For almost 50 years, ITV’s Border Television provided local news and programming to the Scottish Borders, south-west Scotland, north Northumberland, Cumbria and the Isle of Man. It had the second-largest geographical region in the ITV network. Despite the difficulties in catering for such a wide and differing audience, the flagship daily news programme “Lookaround” had one of the highest ratings of any BBC or ITV regional news programme in the United Kingdom. Indeed, one survey in 2005 found that, while “Scotland Today” and “North Tonight” drew a 26 per cent audience share and “London Tonight” took a 28 per cent share, Border’s “Lookaround” was watched by a whopping 42 per cent of the population at 6 pm on a weekday evening. The affection in which “Lookaround” was held by Borderers was further made clear when, in 2007, ITV announced plans to merge Border with Tyne Tees. I remember well in my first few months as a member of this Parliament the volume of correspondence from constituents who were concerned about losing such an important service. Nevertheless, ITV pressed ahead with the merger and, since then, many Borderers have expressed to me their frustration at the reduction of a local service. In August, the UK Government announced 65 locations across Britain that could be in the running to run local television services, including nine in Scotland. According to the Government, the locations have been selected because they have appropriate transmitter coverage, and the list will be whittled down further before the final decisions are made. Despite that, I am disappointed that the Borders and the wider south of Scotland are not included for consideration. The roll-out of the new scheme by the UK Government is to be welcomed, but I have made it clear that ideally the proposals should be modified to allow our region to benefit from a genuinely local TV service. My colleague Alex Fergusson and I have made a written submission to the culture secretary Jeremy Hunt on the issue and to ask why the region appears to have been left out. The Borders and the wider south of Scotland region are already at a disadvantage due to the poor broadband service in many areas. There are also some concerns about the lack of coverage by STV and the recent decision by Freeview to include the BBC Alba channel at the expense of a number of Scottish digital radio channels, on which many of my constituents relied as their only means of local radio reception. I think that we all want local TV to work, but we must also ensure that any local television service is not only local but sufficiently good quality, relevant local TV. I have made clear my disappointment at the Borders being excluded from the list of potential locations for the UK Government’s proposals, and in my final moments I want to bring to the debate a point that some of the local broadcasters in my constituency have raised with me. A number of local reporters have expressed the concern—which we should all bear in mind—that there may be a trade-off between scale and quality when it comes to providing relevant local output. When we talk about local news services, we often hear about local television in a United States context, but those examples often cover significant areas of population consisting of several million people. That is clearly not comparable with the situation in the Borders, in Dumfries and Galloway or in other parts in the south. We should therefore be realistic about what we can expect from a local TV news service, and we should bear in mind the advice from the professionals who deal with the work on a day-to-day basis. We have to strike the right balance between scale and quality if we are to move forward effectively. I congratulate Christine Grahame again on securing the debate.

I thank the cabinet secretary for providing an advance copy of his statement. We have consistently said that, with any restructuring of the police and fire services, the priority must be to retain a visible and effective police and firefighter presence on our streets. We have also said that a system needs to be put in place to ensure that local accountability is protected and, indeed, enhanced, but I am not entirely convinced that the proposals that have been outlined today will do anything to make those services more accountable to the local people whom they serve. Does the Scottish Government think that elected police commissioners would be a way of achieving that goal? The cabinet secretary indicated that savings of £130 million could be achieved from the reforms. What systems does the Government plan to put in place to ensure that those savings are delivered?

I welcome the opportunity to participate in what has been a wide-ranging debate that is of crucial importance to our country and which has given the Scottish Government the opportunity to lay out its priorities for the coming years. Although the political make-up of the Parliament means that the role of the Opposition parties is somewhat different from their role before the election, it is important that the Government works closely with members of all the political parties in this place and does not attempt simply to bulldoze its agenda through the Parliament. My colleagues and I in the Scottish Conservative and Unionist party will engage fully with the Government on issues on which there is common ground and will challenge it when we feel that it has got things wrong. There are a number of issues in the justice portfolio and how we make our communities safer that I want to address, the first of which is reform of the police and fire services. How we will do that has been one of the most high-profile issues in recent months. The Scottish Government has made no secret of the fact that such reform is needed. As we have heard today—and as we have all suspected—it favours a single police and fire service. It is clear that to make the savings that are required, significant changes are needed in how the police and fire services in Scotland are organised. The harsh reality is that the status quo of separate services is not an option. That is a position on which there is almost complete cross-party consensus. We should recognise the progress that has been made in recent years. Today, there are 1,000 more police officers on our streets than there were four years ago. They prevent crime and provide reassurance in our communities. I am very proud of the role that the Scottish Conservatives played in making that achievement, although it is disappointing that certain other parties felt unable to support the provision of those extra officers. A key priority for the next five years is to retain those extra officers. We have made it clear that in any restructuring of police forces in Scotland, the priority must be to retain a visible, effective and locally accountable police presence on our streets. Of course none of us wants to be in the position that we are in of having to make cost savings in important public services such as the police, but if savings need to be made, it is preferable that they are made by cutting down on duplication in police headquarters up and down the country rather than by cutting down on front-line policing. We therefore broadly support the Government’s move to reduce the number of police forces. However, our support will be conditional on having an adequate means of local accountability for the communities that the police serve. James Kelly identified the massive hole in the Scottish Government’s agenda in relation to victims’ rights. In June, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice announced that he intended to introduce a victims’ rights bill to enshrine in law a victim’s right to damages and compensation and to give victims input into sentencing policy and parole decisions. The SNP’s record on being on the victim’s side is questionable. After all, it has presided over a policy of deliberately emptying our jails in the past four years, which has left many victims of crime feeling let down and betrayed by the system. Too often, victims of crime are forgotten. The Scottish Conservatives have always said that we want to give them a strong voice at the heart of the justice system, so we would have worked constructively with the Government if a victims’ rights bill had been introduced.

Fewer prisoners are in prison because of the SNP’s policy of introducing a presumption against short-term sentencing. If we speak to anybody who is involved in the justice system—particularly victims of crime—they will say that that policy sends out completely the wrong message to those who might want to commit crime and to victims, who feel that the system is not on their side. In the short time that remains, I will deal with sectarianism. The Government’s bill to tackle sectarianism is another major issue that we will deal with in the coming months. As we heard from Christine Grahame, the Justice Committee had an informative meeting yesterday at which it took evidence on that bill. I look forward to hearing from other experts and stakeholders in the coming weeks and I am pleased that we now have a proper opportunity to scrutinise the bill, which deals with an important issue. It is critical that we strike the right balance between tackling the problem in our society and protecting freedom of speech. It is clear that we cannot afford to do nothing, but what we do must be as effective as possible. We must recognise that the problem is perhaps wider than just that in our football grounds. The Government’s decision to delay the bill will allow us to produce more robust legislation that tackles more effectively the awful problem that affects part of our society. We welcome parts of what the Government is doing in the justice system, but it is disappointing that several measures are missing from the legislative programme. One of Scots’ biggest frustrations in relation to our justice system is about sentencing. There is considerable room for improvement in restoring public confidence in the criminal justice system. All too often, criminals are seen to get away with serving sentences that do not come close to matching the crime. We should not be seduced by the view that prison exists only to exact retribution and punishment on criminals and should be used as little as possible. Putting dangerous criminals in prison means that they cannot terrorise communities and commit more crime.

That means that our streets and communities are safer. We will work with the Government where we can and we will oppose when we disagree with it.

I am pleased that we have reached the stage of a parliamentary debate on the important issue of the Supreme Court and how it relates to Scots law. Although the workings of the Supreme Court are beyond the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament, the court’s decisions have had a bearing on high-profile legal cases in Scotland, so it is important that we have a proper debate on the issue. That much I warmly welcome. However, the issue has undoubtedly become marred in recent weeks by much tub thumping and name calling on the part of the Scottish Government, which has done little to foster the mature debate that we need on such important issues. Whatever the merits of the argument, encouraging incendiary headlines in our newspapers is not the way to conduct a meaningful and rational discussion on an issue of such importance. The Government ought to argue its case on the basis of facts rather than personal slurs on senior Scottish judges. We in the Conservatives pay tribute to the talent and service of Lord Rodger, who died earlier this week. Along with his colleague Lord Hope, Lord Rodger served as one of two Scots on the UK Supreme Court. From the tributes that have been paid to him this week, it is clear that Lord Rodger brought a substantial talent to his role. His death is a great loss to the Scots legal profession. In the context of today’s debate, he brought a great deal of knowledge of the Scots legal system to the Supreme Court. We are indebted to Lord McCluskey and his team for their interim report, not least because of the timing demands that the Scottish Government placed on them. They have produced a clear and concise summary of the key issues in a short space of time. However, it is not clear what the Government’s rush is to have a debate on the issue. Of course it is important, but why not wait for the final report, by which time the review group will have had time to engage properly with experts and stakeholders in the field? Holding a debate when we have only an interim report suggests that things are being rushed for some reason. No one denies that there are issues with how the Supreme Court engages with Scots law in determining points that relate to human rights. After all, those issues are hugely complicated, given that they deal with the legal relationship between the High Court, the Supreme Court and the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg. That relationship between the workings of a Scottish court, a UK court and a European court demonstrates simply that Scotland is part of the United Kingdom and the European Union. The Scottish Government is clearly uncomfortable with one of those facts—for political and ideological reasons—but they are the facts, and the Scottish Government needs to learn to deal with the national and international legal obligations by which we are bound. That said, we fully support any effort to tidy up the way in which our courts operate and to establish the most effective working relationship between the institutions. The interim report identifies a number of issues in the relationship between the courts. However, it clearly backs the UK Supreme Court’s jurisdiction to rule on human rights in Scottish criminal cases. Furthermore, the report goes on to argue that if, as is the Scottish National Party’s preferred option, the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg is used instead, “there is the potential for further uncertainty and delay.” I am sure that all members agree that we certainly do not want that when dealing with important human rights cases.

I do not quite follow the logic of that. The delay in hearing cases in the European Court of Human Rights is significant—tens of thousands of cases are waiting to be heard. Claimants—people trying to secure their human rights—will not get access to justice any more quickly. Indeed, they will have to wait longer. The consequences of Cadder could have been far reaching if the delay before the case was heard had been much longer than it was at the Supreme Court. Access to justice has been achieved much more quickly under the current system of the Supreme Court than it would be achieved under the system preferred by the SNP. Unlike the First Minister, the report does not say that the Supreme Court does not know or understand Scots criminal law. Some of the best Scottish judges are appointed to the court. It is insulting to suggest that they are unable to consider Scots cases correctly. If the concerns are really about the need to have Scottish judges to determine Scottish appeals, a solution would be to appoint one further Scottish judge to the Supreme Court and thereby produce a majority in Scottish appeals. The report also stresses the need for coherence in the way in which human rights laws are applied both north and south of the border. The UK Supreme Court undoubtedly provides a mechanism to ensure that that happens. I understand that the Advocate General will consider the interim report from Lord McCluskey, and I know that he will be paying close attention to the contributions in today’s debate. However, I have no doubt that he will also draw on the conclusions of his own expert group and the evidence given by the Scottish legal community when they were consulted on these matters. I am sure that this will be a helpful debate in establishing some of the facts surrounding the relationship between the High Court and the UK Supreme Court. Too much of what we have heard from the Scottish Government on this issue in recent weeks has been either devoid of facts, or a deliberate distortion of facts. I move amendment S4W-00447.1, to insert at end: “; notes the realistic conclusion of the interim report that “the Supreme Court would continue to make final and binding rulings on human rights issues including those arising in criminal cases from Scotland”; calls on the Scottish Government to accept this central conclusion, and further notes and expresses its appreciation of the outstanding contributions to Scottish public life and the Scottish legal system made by Lord Hope of Craighead and the late Lord Rodger of Earlsferry”.

Is the member seriously arguing that the European Court of Human Rights would have taken a different decision than the one that the Supreme Court took? Is he saying that, if the case had gone to the European Court of Human Rights, that court would have reached a different conclusion?

I, too, congratulate Margaret Mitchell on securing the debate and on giving the Parliament the opportunity to consider this important issue. We have heard several thoughtful speeches. The PCCS was established in 2006 and took over powers to review the handling of complaints about the police on 1 April 2007. As members are aware, the PCCS’s main function is to review the manner in which a police force or other police authority has handled a complaint from a member of the public. It has the power to direct the relevant police authority to reconsider the complaint. The commissioner is appointed by and accountable to the Scottish ministers. The body plays an important role as the organisation that polices the police. In that sense, it is extremely important for police accountability that it is allowed to operate as effectively and independently as possible. As we have heard, merging the PCCS with the SPSO has been proposed. The proposals were introduced with good intentions but, as Margaret Mitchell’s motion suggests, concerns exist about the practicalities of a merger. I will discuss some of those concerns. First, from a legal and civil liberties perspective the importance of police complaints demands dedicated and specialised oversight. That is not to say that the SPSO deals with unimportant complaints, but complaints about the police often involve complex legal arguments, so a specialist oversight body is more appropriate. If the PCCS were merged with the SPSO, that specialised oversight would, to an extent, be lost. It is interesting to note that most European countries have a specialised police oversight body. To deal effectively with police complaints requires knowledge of criminal law and procedure, the police misconduct regime and the internal policies and procedures that policing bodies apply to all aspects of policing. The concern has been expressed that a transfer would result in the process becoming more complicated for complainers and less effective and efficient. We should remember that the police are here to keep us safe, so we need an effective and efficient organisation that corrects issues that prevent the police from fulfilling their responsibilities. The merger’s appropriateness has also been called into question because of the timing of the proposals. Given the continuing discussions about the future structure of Scotland’s police forces, it seems unwise to press ahead with major changes to the system for dealing with police complaints when significant changes to the policing structure could be just round the corner. I was pleased that the cabinet secretary recognised that when he told the Justice Committee earlier this week that there should perhaps be a pause while further discussions take place on the future of Scotland’s police forces. As for the PCCS’s future structure, a discussion must be had about whether to establish some sort of criminal justice complaints body that incorporates not only the police, but prisons and fire services. The Government should consider that when it returns to the proposals. Whatever the future structure for dealing with police complaints is, a robust system needs to be in place for dealing with unfounded complaints. Of course, genuine complaints must be dealt with seriously, but unfortunately some people abuse the system in a manner that can be described only as frivolous. Complaints must always be investigated and dealt with, but we must do what we can to avoid the police being distracted from undertaking their important job by those who want to misuse the complaints system. We all understand that savings must be made in Government spending. However, who polices the police is crucial to ensuring the safety of the people of Scotland. We all want to keep our police forces as efficient as possible. To do that, we need an organisation that is staffed by law enforcement experts who are devoted to ensuring that Scotland’s police forces are as professional as possible. I thank Margaret Mitchell again for raising this important issue and providing a timely opportunity to discuss it in Parliament.

We are all agreed on the need to tackle the problem of sectarianism in our society. It may seem an obvious point, but it is important that whatever disagreements there may be on aspects of the bill are looked at in that context. None of us wants to see our society blighted by that problem in the future. In the limited time that I have available to me this morning, I will focus on three areas of concern: first, the lack of consultation; secondly, the uncertain nature of some of the offences in the bill and the unintended consequences; and thirdly, the wider problem of sectarianism in small parts of our society. Concerns have been raised in a number of quarters, both by the Justice Committee and by other individuals and organisations, about the speed with which the bill is being pushed through Parliament. Given the nature of the events that we witnessed at the end of the last football season, it is understandable that the Government wants to move swiftly to address the problem of sectarianism. We have seen some very ugly scenes plastered across our television screens and newspapers in recent months; however, we should not pretend that the problems are new. We should be wary of falling into a pattern of legislating to suit short-term media headlines rather than finding long-term solutions to Scotland’s problems. Legislation can make a difference, but we have a responsibility to ensure that it is fair, workable and consistent. There are also concerns about how the legislation might be interpreted. For example, could a republican Scot claim that someone singing “God Save the Queen” was engaging in offensive behaviour under section 1? Despite what the minister has said this morning, neither she nor the Lord Advocate has been able or willing to rule out that possibility, which I still have concerns about. It would be ridiculous if we passed legislation that had the consequence of criminalising those who sing their national anthem. Even more than is usual for legislation on criminal behaviour, much will depend on the police’s and the procurators fiscal’s interpretation of the law; however, the ambiguity that is allowed for in the bill will make their job extremely difficult. What about songs that have more than one set of lyrics but have been known to be offensive in the past? What about football supporters humming or whistling the tunes of offensive songs without singing any of the words? What about songs that do not refer to religious aggravation but instead celebrate events such as the Ibrox disaster or the death of former prominent players? Such songs may not be examples of sectarianism, but they are equally likely to incite hatred and are equally vile in tone.

If the legislation is so uncertain that people do not know whether they are breaking the law, surely there is an argument for taking the time to consult to ensure that we get it right. The bill will clearly put a lot of additional responsibility on our police officers. That is no reason not to pass the bill, but it demands that we tread carefully before venturing down such an ambiguous path. My third and final point is about my concerns for our wider society and what we should be doing to tackle the problem at an earlier stage. The problem of sectarianism in parts of west central Scotland is much bigger and wider than just sectarianism at football matches. The reality is that young men at football matches act in that way as a result of the conditioning that starts at an early age. Certain parts of society—admittedly small—in west Scotland have promoted that culture, including partly through our education system. The segregation of our young people brings them up to believe that the two communities should be kept separate. That is something that I know a little about, having been brought up and educated in the system of west central Scotland—the same system that produced many, if not all, of those who have been responsible for the shocking behaviour that we have witnessed in recent months. I am a former pupil of Kilwinning academy—a school that I am incredibly proud of and which gave me an excellent education, got me into university and probably taught me more about life than many other schools might have done. However, the school—or, more accurately, the system—conditioned me into thinking that there was a difference between those of us who went to Kilwinning academy and those who went to the Catholic school around the corner, St Michael’s academy. Yes, my school was a co-educational, comprehensive, non-denominational school. Yes, I remember that there were some pupils who originated from other parts of the world, but the school was predominately white and Protestant. I remember only one Catholic classmate or, rather, only one classmate who was prepared to admit to being Catholic.

I have quite a lot to say in the time available to me. Every morning, the buses from the Garnock valley would bus the pupils past Kilwinning academy to the Catholic school around the corner. In my early, naive years, I would ask my parents to explain why the buses drove past a school that I thought was perfectly adequate to go to another school. Unfortunately, others at my school were less naive. When the old firm played or on dates of historical importance, I clearly remember the stones and eggs that were thrown at the buses ferrying pupils past my school. The pupils in the buses would spit at my classmates as they walked to school. Of course, the school tried to take tough action against those responsible, but when so many are involved in such behaviour, that is extremely difficult. The education system in that part of Scotland is effectively the state-sponsored conditioning of those sectarianism attitudes. I say that as someone who believes that as a Christian country we should do more to promote Christian values in our young people and to support religious education in schools. In those small pockets of west central Scotland, those attitudes are being entrenched at home and in the wider community. It was not just football supporters or pubs that were segregated in that way. More respectable institutions such as rotary clubs and golf clubs were split on religious grounds. However, we should not be surprised by that, when in west central Scotland we allow our children to be educated into believing that there is something so different about the two religions that pupils cannot be allowed to share the same school building. It is little wonder that parts of our society continue to segregate themselves in later life when that is what they are taught when they are at school. The Government has indicated its willingness to listen to parties from across the chamber and to govern in a consensual manner. I hope that the minister will reflect on the concerns that have been expressed today and ensure that the bill is as fair, workable and consistent as possible.

I work very closely with RAGES, which campaigns for the re-establishment of local train services and the reopening of Reston station. Although RAGES has always welcomed the positive noises from the Scottish National Party Government on the project, it would like to see more concrete action and progress. Does the minister believe that Reston station will be reopened by the end of the parliamentary session in 2016?

9. To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with Scottish Borders Council regarding promoting an integrated transport network in the area. (S4O-00060)

I am sure that the minister will be aware that several bus routes in the Borders are under threat, and he will know that there are growing concerns about the viability of the railway to Galashiels. Does he accept that unless there is an integrated transport network serving all parts of the Borders, fewer passengers will be able to access train services on the Galashiels railway, therefore further undermining its viability?

I am pleased to be able to speak in this important debate this afternoon. The wide-ranging issues that we are discussing are crucial to our country. It is therefore welcome that the Government is taking this opportunity at the start of the parliamentary session to set out its priorities for the coming five years. Although the political make-up of the Parliament means that the role of Opposition parties is somewhat different from before the election, I welcome the Government’s stated desire to work closely with members from all parties. I hope that that responsible approach will be more than warm words and will mean something in practice. My colleagues and I on the Conservative benches will engage fully with the Government on issues where there is common ground, and we will challenge the Government where we feel that it has got things wrong. I congratulate Roseanna Cunningham on her new role and I look forward to working constructively with her. Similarly, I welcome Johann Lamont and Alison McInnes to their new roles. The issues that will be raised today are of fundamental importance in determining what kind of society we live in, how we prevent crime and how we deal with those who break the law. Too many people in Scotland today feel that the criminal justice system is on the side of the criminal, not the victim. That balance is wrong. I will explore a few key areas where I think that we could do more to restore public confidence in our justice system. The first area is policing. We should recognise the progress that has been made in recent years. Today, there are 1,000 more police officers on our streets than there were four years ago, preventing crime and providing reassurance to our communities. I am proud of the role that the Scottish Conservatives played in achieving that, although it is disappointing that certain other parties felt unable to support the extra police officers. A key priority for the next five years is retaining those extra officers. We will push the Government at every opportunity to provide the additional funding to back the policy. As members will be aware, there has been a great deal of discussion about the future of police forces in Scotland. We have made it clear that, in any restructuring of the police forces, the priority must be to retain a visible, effective and locally accountable police presence on our streets. None of us wants to be in the position that we are in—having to make cost savings in important public services such as the police—but if savings need to be made it is preferable that they are made by cutting duplication in police headquarters up and down the country rather than by cutting front-line policing. One of the biggest frustrations that Scots feel with our justice system relates to sentencing, and there is considerable room for improvement in restoring public confidence in the criminal justice system in that regard. We should not be seduced by the view that prison exists only to exact retribution on criminals and to punish them, and that it should be used as little as possible. Putting dangerous criminals in prison means that they cannot terrorise communities and commit more crime, which means that our streets and communities are safer. Prison can and should be the starting point for rehabilitating offenders towards a life free from crime and addiction. We should be aiming to turn criminals from tax burdens into law-abiding, tax-paying citizens. Another challenge for the Government is to restore honesty in sentencing. The public and the victims of crime are becoming increasingly exasperated with criminals being let out after serving only a small proportion of their sentence. We have long argued that the situation would be improved by ending automatic early release. The SNP has made the same case over the past few years. It is just a shame that it has not found the time to take action to end automatic early release. We believe that the SNP Government was wrong to abolish prison sentences of less than three months. Short-term prison sentences are not appropriate in all situations, but we should leave it to the courts to decide when a prison sentence is necessary. The fact that sheriffs and judges used short sentences highlights the fact that they had little confidence in the community sentences that were provided as an alternative. In some cases, custody is appropriate, as it can provide much-needed respite to a partner in an abusive relationship or can give a family the time to move on with their lives in relative peace. More also needs to be done to toughen up community sentences, so that courts and the public have confidence in their effectiveness. Offenders should be carrying out meaningful work so that they are genuinely contributing to society rather than just costing taxpayers money. Last, but by no means least, I want to mention drugs and alcohol. It is a sad fact that drugs and alcohol are involved in a large proportion of the crime that takes place in Scotland. If we want to tackle crime and make our streets safer, we need to tackle the blight of drug abuse in communities across Scotland. I am therefore pleased that the Scottish Government listened to our view and introduced a new national drugs strategy, placing an emphasis on abstinence, rehabilitation and recovery rather than dependence. However, a strategy in itself is not enough, and we will watch closely to see that the Government makes good on its promise to overhaul drugs treatment in Scotland. Quite simply, we cannot afford not to address the problem. Tackling drugs effectively also means dealing with drug abuse in prison, which is a particularly worrying aspect of the problem. If prison is to be the secure environment that we need it to be to allow those prisoners with a drug problem to get clean, we need to be willing to tackle the issue head-on. The Government should consider introducing drug-free wings in every prison to ensure that those who want to beat their habit are given the best possible chance of doing so. We also need to be tough on those who think that they can use prisons to carry on taking and dealing drugs. We remain of the view that the Government should introduce compulsory drug testing for all inmates on arrival and departure from prison. Not only would that prevent the spread of drugs from inmates on arrival, it would send out a message loud and clear that drugs will not be tolerated in our prisons. In conclusion, this debate is a helpful opportunity to outline our priorities for improving Scotland’s justice system in the forthcoming parliamentary session. The decisions that this Parliament will take on the issues will have a direct impact—positive or negative—on the people whom we represent, and it is important that we get them right. Our constituents are also concerned about the manner in which decisions are taken. I hope that the Government will continue to consult all political parties from across the chamber to ensure that we come up with the best possible solutions and results for communities.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Sadly, the problem of sectarianism has been an all-too-common part of the news agenda in recent months. However, I am pleased to have another opportunity to raise this important issue in the Scottish Parliament, and I congratulate Bob Doris on bringing the debate to the chamber. I apologise to the Presiding Officer and other members for having to leave early. As all members will be aware, sectarianism has reared its ugly head in parts of our society for hundreds of years. For far too long, it became an accepted part of footballing culture in parts of Scotland. There is no doubt that progress has been made in recent years, and there seems to be a growing determination to rid Scotland of sectarianism once and for all. Although sectarianism is not confined to footballing communities in the west of Scotland, unfortunately it manifests itself most publicly there. Recent events both on and off the pitch have provided a terrifying reminder of the problems that the vast majority of responsible Scots who want to tackle the problem head on face. There is no place in a civilised society such as ours for the kind of behaviour that we have witnessed in recent months. However despicable those events have been, they have served to rally the decent majority into condemning what has gone on. Too often in the past, discussions of sectarianism have been clouded by apportioning blame or claiming credit for initiatives and strategies. Bob Doris’s motion is helpful in that it provides a positive approach to how we can tackle sectarianism effectively. It also recognises that we need a long-term strategy to tackle the problem, rather than a short-term answer to the latest media headlines. It is important to recognise the work of a number of organisations that have worked with football clubs and communities. They include the anti-sectarianism charity Nil by Mouth and the anti-racism charity Show Racism the Red Card, both of which have worked tirelessly among schools, football clubs and local communities to change attitudes towards racism and sectarianism. Neil Lennon, Walter Smith and Ally McCoist have also taken a brave stance in criticising the excesses of a minority of their supporters. They should be recognised for that. It is right that the Scottish Government should look to strengthen laws on hatred in our football grounds and on the internet. I look forward to Parliament debating those proposals fully in the coming weeks. I welcome the broad thrust of the Government’s plans and look forward to working constructively as the legislation progresses in Parliament in the next few days. Although it is right for us to make progress, the priority must be to get the new laws right, not merely rushed through. We, like others, have expressed concerns about the lack of time that the Government is leaving for proper scrutiny and debate. As my colleague Annabel Goldie has made clear in recent months, we will work constructively to help to create robust laws to help to rid Scotland of this vile problem. The legislation needs to crack down on disorderly and violent behaviour in and around football stadiums, but it is important that it also covers threatening communications that could incite serious violence or religious or racial hatred. Presiding Officer, I again congratulate Bob Doris on securing this important debate and apologise to you and the chamber for having to leave early.

Like others, I am very pleased to speak in this stage 3 debate on the Double Jeopardy (Scotland) Bill. It has taken us some time to get to this point, but I am pleased that at decision time—the last decision time of this session—we will vote to enact one of the Scottish Conservatives’ key manifesto pledges from 2007. It is important that we record our gratitude to the Scottish Law Commission and the Justice Committee for their hard work in bringing us to where we are today on this subject. The Scottish Government also deserves credit for taking the first step in 2007 by inviting the Scottish Law Commission to review the law in this area. There have been some disagreements during the passage of the bill, but the process has generally been marked by consensus and mature debate from all sides in the chamber. At this point, I pay tribute to my colleague Bill Aitken; as Richard Baker pointed out, Bill will be standing down from Parliament and will be making his final contribution to Parliament later this morning. Bill Aitken has been a loyal servant to the people of the city of Glasgow for many decades and, more recently, he has been a formidable convener of the Justice Committee. On a personal level, I will certainly miss his advice and constant support and I am sure that everybody wishes him well for his retirement. [Applause.] At stage 1, several members detailed the history of the double jeopardy principle. They highlighted the fact that it is not a technical term in Scots law but a principle or rule that has never been formally codified. The principle is good, as the finality of criminal verdicts allows the individuals who are involved in a trial to get on with their lives in the knowledge that the matter has been resolved. It also provides the more general benefit of retaining public confidence in the court system. The double jeopardy rule limits the state’s reach over individuals’ lives and protects individuals from the stress of repeat trials. However, as I said in the stage 1 debate, every good principle ought to have exceptions. Many people consider it to be common sense that, when compelling new evidence of guilt arises that was not available at the time of the original trial, the Crown should be able to bring a new trial. However, as such a step is serious, it is right that it should occur only in exceptional circumstances and for the most serious crimes; otherwise, we risk eroding the integrity of our courts and public confidence in the wider justice system. The principles in the bill reflect the interests of not just the accused but the justice system and wider society. As we have seen, it is important for decisions of courts to be upheld and seen to be conclusive. However, it is clear that exceptional circumstances could arise, and our justice system must be capable of dealing with such exceptions. We believe that the principle of double jeopardy is right and should continue. However, it should be reformed and restated in Scots law to allow exceptions when new evidence in the form of an admission of guilt or other new and compelling evidence emerges. When we allow exceptions to the principle, we must put safeguards in place. We are satisfied that the bill strikes the right balance between ensuring that we have a fair and effective justice system and protecting the rights of victims and of individuals who are accused of crime. I am pleased that the Government introduced the bill, which the Scottish Conservatives will support at decision time.

I welcome the debate on local services that the Liberal Democrats have brought to the chamber this morning. I am also pleased to be participating in the national debate about the future of police services in Scotland. The thrust of the Liberal Democrat motion and the debate so far has been about the future of our police forces and the proposals to create a single national police force for Scotland. The priority on the Conservative side of the chamber is to provide an effective, visible and local police service that is accountable to local people and communities throughout Scotland. Our ability as a nation to continue to support front-line policing has been made more difficult by the fact that the Labour Party in Government at Westminster made such a mess of the public finances. However, it remains our priority to maintain the current numbers of police and it will continue to be our priority in the next session of Parliament. I am proud of our record in supporting the police in Scotland. We should not forget that Scotland has 1,000 extra police officers today because of the Scottish Conservatives. If we had left it to the SNP, there would have been only 500 extra; and if we had listened to Labour or the Liberal Democrats—who did not back an increase in police officer numbers—we would have been where we were four years ago, with fewer police officers patrolling our streets and higher crime rates.

Mr Purvis will recall that he failed to vote for the extra police officers that the Conservatives obtained from the SNP budget. Liberal Democrats failed to vote for those extra police officers; they failed to support those extra crime fighters and they failed to support our communities in their battle against crime. Crime remains a real concern for many people in Scotland today. Too many people live in communities that are blighted by crime. The challenge for the next four years is to step up the fight against lawlessness, antisocial behaviour and violence so that our citizens can live free from crime and free from the fear of crime. The question that we must ask ourselves is this: how can we maintain the service that is provided by the police within the current financial parameters? When public finances are under such extreme pressure, it is appropriate that we look to cut duplication and unnecessary costs across Scotland’s police forces to ensure that we keep police officers not behind desks, but on the beat in our communities. Our making those savings will involve difficult decisions. With 87 per cent of the policing budget going on staffing costs, and with large savings having to be found, it is clear that there is little scope for minor efficiency savings or tinkering around the edges. The actual savings that will be available through restructuring of police forces is—as we all know—not yet clear, but they are significant and the lesson from similar public sector reorganisations over the years suggests that those savings can be realised. The Liberal Democrats have argued that restructuring police forces will, in some way, lead to a decline in local police services, but I argue that the complete opposite is true. If we do not reform, and if we blindly defend historical structures with their unnecessary duplications and costs, we will be depriving our communities of the front-line policing that they need and expect.

Any reform will have associated costs. However, evidence shows clearly that in the short to medium term there are savings to be gained. The savings that will be gained by merging organisations will outweigh the costs of restructuring. I completely reject the Liberal Democrat argument. By defending historical structures we are depriving our communities of front-line policing. We need to make savings in order to allow front-line policing to be preserved. I am sure that no member wants a weaker police service for their constituents, but that would be the effect of the Liberal Democrat proposal. We should not get hung up on historical structures and lose sight of our top priority, which is provision of an effective, local and visible police service. I will not get drawn into defending out-of-date police structures if they come at the expense of front-line officers fighting crime in our communities. We should see the situation as a challenge, but we should also see it as an opportunity to reform and improve the way in which policing is delivered. Police officers do an excellent job, often under difficult circumstances, but the truth is that the current structure of policing in Scotland is too bureaucratic and costly. We should also acknowledge the failures of the current systems of accountability, particularly in the more rural and remote parts of our country. For example, most members of the general public have no idea what police boards do, let alone who is on them. We need a system that involves local residents, so that communities have a direct relationship with the police who are serving them. That is key to our support for any reform. Local accountability must be enhanced and protected to ensure that local people know how to hold their local police to account. One way of doing that would be through having local police commissioners who would be directly elected by and accountable to the communities that they serve. Of course, the chief constable should retain operational independence—after all, police officers are experienced in fighting crime—but the elected commissioners would hold the local police to account for their performance and, collectively, would provide strategic national direction. Accountability needs to be at the heart of any reform of the police service in Scotland and we would be very wary of any reform that did not improve it.

The exact detail of how the police commissioners would work needs to be discussed, but we foresee the establishment of between eight and 12 commissioners who would cover the whole of Scotland and would be elected to represent the areas that the police serve. Voters would have a direct link to their commissioners and would hold those people to account for the police’s local performance. The commissioners would also set the national crime rate reductions and ensure that resources were allocated to the right areas. That is the only way of ensuring that local people can hold the police to account. The current system of local police boards does not work. If we were to ask any of my constituents who is on their local police board, they would not know. In such circumstances, how can residents hold the local police to account? They simply do not know. A directly elected local police commissioner who has a direct link to voters as well to the police would give ordinary constituents a much clearer idea of how to hold the police to account. I have to say that I am intrigued by the position of the Scottish Liberal Democrats on the matter, given that Nick Clegg and our coalition partners at Westminster fully support the idea of directly elected police commissioners. Labour and the SNP talk about the need to protect local accountability with a single police force, but they have yet to bring forward any proposals to deal with the matter. Local accountability must be the key to the creation of a national police force. The Liberal Democrats talk about the need for local control, but have brought forward no proposals for reforming the existing failing system and are blindly defending the current structure at the expense of front-line police officers. For those reasons, we cannot support their motion.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning last met the principal of Borders College. (S3O-13203)

The minister will be aware of the difficult decisions that the college has to make because of the reduction in its funding, which include a number of staff cuts. Having spoken to the principal yesterday, I know that she believes that, despite those changes, the college will continue to work hard to deliver the Scottish Government’s priorities. Does the minister agree that our colleges and universities are critical to ensuring that our workers have the skills that the Scottish economy needs as it emerges from the economic downturn, and that it is therefore unfortunate that the Scottish Government has not put in place a sustainable funding future for colleges and universities to secure those skills?

Like other members, I begin by stating that we should congratulate Bill Butler on his hard work and commitment and on bringing the bill to its final stages today. I, too, am pleased that consideration of the bill has fostered a constructive approach at all stages from members from all parties. That has continued to be evident during stage 3 proceedings this afternoon and in this final debate. There has been a strong consensus that the Damages (Scotland) Act 1976 should be reformed, but it has taken a great deal of work to arrive at where we are today. The bill was far from perfect at stage 1, but I am pleased that most of the issues have been addressed. The present system for damages has a number of flaws, perhaps most notably the delays that families can experience in receiving compensation. One of the bill’s most important results is that, by and large, relatives who have recently been bereaved will not have to face lengthy court cases at a time when the last thing they need is further undue strain on their families. The bill, which I hope will be passed tonight, will help to speed up the process and allow individuals to rebuild their lives as quickly as possible. Mr Butler’s bill largely implements the recommendations of the Scottish Law Commission’s 2008 “Report on Damages for Wrongful Death”. However, we should not lose sight of the fact that a large number of organisations and individuals—not least the Justice Committee, the Scottish Law Commission and those who gave evidence to the committee at stage 2—have contributed to the progress of the bill. Although the bill predates my time on the Justice Committee, as the current convener of the committee, I thank my predecessor Bill Aitken, the other committee members and the clerking team for their hard work on it. The aim of the bill is to modernise and simplify the law in this area and to ensure that people are entitled to fair compensation. A number of changes were made at stage 2. Generally, those changes make the bill better. The first relates to the provision for calculating an award for damages in relation to non-patrimonial loss. At stage 1, the bill proposed a fixed 25 per cent deduction of the amount that the victim could have been expected to earn or to receive in benefits over the lost period, to represent their living expenses during that time. Concerns were raised that the arbitrary nature of the figure might not allow individual circumstances to be taken into account. I am therefore pleased that a degree of flexibility has been applied to the figure. In the stage 1 debate last year, a number of members expressed concerns about the definition of those entitled to a recovery. The bill as introduced would have removed the existing right of certain relatives, beyond those defined as “immediate family”, to claim for damages, if they could show that they had been supported by the victim. As was stated during the stage 1 debate, we recognise that a line needs to be drawn to ensure that compensation is directed towards family members, rather than family acquaintances. I am pleased that the definition has been widened to take into account the fact that the nuclear family is not necessarily the norm and that others, such as partners’ children, are now included. This has been an informed and mature debate. Again I congratulate Bill Butler on his work and the progress that he has made on the bill. I am pleased that the Scottish Conservatives will support the Damages (Scotland) Bill tonight at decision time.

The minister will be aware of the widespread concern among support groups for the victims of domestic abuse about the lack of availability of short-term sentences, which the Government has now removed. Victims of domestic abuse are particularly concerned because short-term sentences afforded them respite. Do the Scottish Government and the minister acknowledge those concerns? How does the minister propose to address them?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. It is clear that the Cadder judgment is having a devastating effect on the Scottish justice system. Our conviction rate will undoubtedly suffer, as self-confessed criminals are being allowed to walk free. That comes at a high cost not only to the public purse but to the balance of the Scottish criminal justice system, which is now heavily tipped in the criminal’s favour. The change was inevitable because the previous Labour Government at Westminster incorporated the ECHR in the Scotland Act 1998, which the Scottish National Party whole-heartedly supported. Does the cabinet secretary regret the SNP’s full support for incorporating the ECHR in the 1998 act? Given that we need to wrestle back control of the justice systems throughout the United Kingdom to both of Scotland’s Parliaments, will the minister support a review of the ECHR’s whole operation?

When my colleague and party leader Annabel Goldie opened a debate on double jeopardy in February 2007, she expressed hope that common ground might be found to take this important issue forward. Unfortunately, the then Scottish Executive was not quite ready to engage properly on the issue. I am pleased that we are now at a stage where there is sufficient common ground to allow the matter to be progressed. It is important to acknowledge at the outset the work of the Scottish Law Commission in producing the report that underpins what we are considering today. Although the bill is not a carbon copy of the report, it is a product of the commissioners’ hard work, expertise and knowledge, and we are in their debt for their efforts. The Justice Committee’s report adds further weight to the debate and we should also acknowledge the work that Bill Aitken and his colleagues have done on the bill. Members will be aware that, although there has been an established principle for hundreds of years that an individual once tried and convicted or acquitted of an offence should not be subject to another prosecution for the same offence, the rule against double jeopardy has not been enshrined in statute before. We believe that the rule against double jeopardy is an important principle in the operation of our justice system and that it should be codified in statute. The finality of criminal verdicts allows individuals who are involved in a trial to get on with their lives in the knowledge that the matter has been resolved. It also provides a more general benefit in that public confidence in the court system is retained. The rule against double jeopardy also limits the reach of the state over individuals’ lives and protects individuals from the stress of repeat trials. Indeed, the rule is considered so important in the protection of liberty that it is written into the constitutions of many countries including the United States, Japan, Pakistan and South Africa. It is for those reasons that we agree that there should be a general rule against double jeopardy. As with every good principle, there should be a few significant exceptions, which are outlined in the Scottish Law Commission’s report. It seems to me common sense that, if there is compelling new evidence of guilt that was not available at the time of the original trial, the Crown should be able to bring forward a new trial. Given the seriousness of such a step, however, it is right that that should happen only in exceptional circumstances and for the most serious of crimes. It is worth noting that provisions already exist in law for an individual acquitted of an offence to be retried for contempt of court or even perjury if it is clear that their acquittal was based on false evidence. There is disagreement over certain exceptions, including the use of evidence that emerges after the trial, the list of offences for which a retrial could be brought and the new law’s retrospective nature. I am sure that the Justice Committee will examine those details in more detail at stage 2, but there is a clear direction of travel in favour of the bill’s general principles, which I believe reflect the interests of not just the accused, but the justice system and wider society. The Conservatives are particularly pleased to be able to vote for the bill at decision time, as it brings forward a commitment that the Scottish Conservatives set out in their 2007 election manifesto. Indeed, we were the only party to call for these changes at that election although, to its credit, the SNP Government was quick to invite the Scottish Law Commission to review the double jeopardy law in November 2007. There are many examples over the centuries of other countries borrowing or copying the better attributes of our legal system. However, in the area that we are debating today, we seem to be following the example of changes that have already been made in other countries. As Richard Baker has already pointed out, in England, the Macpherson report on the investigation into the tragic murder of Stephen Lawrence in 1993 contained a damning assessment of the role of racism in the Metropolitan Police. However, in that report, Sir William Macpherson also recommended: “That consideration should be given to the Court of Appeal being given power to permit prosecution after acquittal where fresh and viable evidence is presented.” In 2001, the Law Commission in England and Wales recommended that, in murder cases only, the Court of Appeal should have the power to quash an acquittal if reliable and compelling new evidence of guilt emerged and if a retrial would be in the interests of justice; moreover, in 2003, the Criminal Justice Bill, which reformed the law on double jeopardy, was passed at Westminster. Of course, that is not to say that we should blindly mirror developments in the legal system of England and Wales, but there is an imperative to consider such a change to the law in Scotland, given the nature of the issue and changes in evidence and how it is gathered. I also suggest that victims in Scotland would find it unacceptable that they might be denied the entitlement to justice afforded to those in England and Wales. We believe that, although the principle of not being subject to double jeopardy is right and should continue, it should be reformed and restated in Scots law to allow exceptions where new evidence emerges in the form of an admission of guilt or in other new and compelling forms. Clearly, in allowing exceptions to the principle we will have to ensure that there are certain safeguards, but we are satisfied that the bill strikes the right balance between ensuring that we have a fair and effective justice system and protecting the rights of victims and individuals accused of crime. I am pleased that the Government introduced the bill. The Scottish Conservatives will support it at decision time.

7. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met representatives of NHS Borders. (S3O-12813)

The cabinet secretary will be all too aware of the importance of community and cottage hospitals in rural areas such as the Scottish Borders, and she might recall the previous Liberal-Labour Executive’s extremely controversial decision to close hospitals in Jedburgh and Coldstream. Does the Scottish Government agree that local hospitals in rural areas are highly regarded by the communities that they serve and that they are often much more accessible to patients than larger general hospitals such as Borders general hospital? Will the Scottish Government support NHS Borders to ensure that the remaining community hospitals remain open to continue to serve the communities that they serve?

1. To ask the Scottish Executive how it is managing the supplies of salt and grit. (S3O-12703)

Although the recent severe weather has eased in recent days, Scottish Borders Council remains concerned that it may not receive the grit and salt that it has on order to see it through the rest of the winter. Can the minister confirm that the Scottish Government will do what it can to ensure that Scottish Borders Council receives those supplies and that there will be no intervention by the Scottish Government to ration supplies?

I am sure that, like me, the cabinet secretary has met constituents whose communities have been blighted by individuals causing severe disruption and engaging in antisocial behaviour. Very often, those constituents have sought the help of the police, the antisocial behaviour unit and local housing providers without any success and it is not until cases get to court and the offenders in question are sent to prison, albeit for a very short time, that the constituents in those communities get any respite from that behaviour. What will the cabinet secretary tell his own constituents now that he has taken away the possibility of respite?

Like others, I pay tribute to Rhoda Grant for bringing this important bill before us. Of course, we would all rather that we did not have to debate how to tackle domestic abuse in our society. However, the sad fact is that it has become an all-too-regular part of Scottish society. Indeed, the police currently record on average 142 incidents of domestic abuse each day, despite the efforts of many—including Government agencies and voluntary groups—to raise awareness of domestic abuse. Because domestic abuse still pervades too much of our society, it is right that we support the main policy objectives of the bill: to increase access to justice for the victims of domestic abuse and to enable the police and prosecutors to provide a more robust response to breached civil protection orders, which, in turn, may deter abusers from further abusive action. The Conservatives believe that much of the bill will provide additional protection to victims and send out a strong message that Scotland is taking strong action to address domestic abuse. Therefore, we support its general principles and will support it at decision time. I will highlight one issue about which we have concerns: it is important that we state exactly what is meant by domestic abuse. Scotland’s national strategy to address domestic abuse recognises that domestic abuse can take the form of physical, sexual or mental and emotional abuse. That is important when we remember that we need to tackle not only domestic violence, but the various types of controlling behaviour that can have a terrible effect on relationships. Section 4 provides a statutory definition of domestic abuse. There needs to be clarity in the definition, particularly as it might result in criminal sanctions. The Law Society of Scotland has expressed a number of concerns about the proposed definition, particularly in relation to the inclusion of the phrase: “an established relationship of any length”. We are sympathetic to the Law Society’s view that the definition should perhaps be removed altogether and, instead, the courts should use the broad definition contained in the Protection from Abuse (Scotland) Act 2001 and the broader general dictionary definition. Although figures show that there has been a 4 per cent decrease in incidents of domestic abuse in the past year, the scale of the problem is still staggering. The police recorded more than 50,000 incidents of domestic abuse in 2009-10. Anyone can be a victim of domestic abuse, regardless of ethnic background, income, gender or age. However, the statistics tell us that the vast majority of domestic abuse incidents are perpetrated by men against women. As is often the case, such figures do not paint the full picture of the consequences of such behaviour. Each incident is harrowing for the victim and can ruin relationships. Domestic abuse also affects others—particularly children, who often witness the abuse and can be left with massive emotional and sometimes physical scars. I hope that the debate signals that more action to tackle the problem of domestic abuse is required and that the Parliament is taking it.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. This has been a very useful debate. It has given us the opportunity to raise an important issue while highlighting some of the technical concerns that we have about the bill. I have already highlighted our concerns about the definition of the term “domestic abuse” in the bill. Section 2 has also been highlighted by a number of members: we, too, have serious concerns about attempts to make legal aid available without means testing. At a time when difficult decisions must be made about the use of public resources, we do not think that that would be a sensible move. There is an argument that, if the financial eligibility test for legal aid in cases involving domestic abuse were removed for pursuers, that would contravene article 6 of the European convention on human rights and the principle of equality of arms. We are not persuaded by the arguments in favour of doing that and do not think that they have any substantial merit, especially as the additional cost to the legal aid account could be significant. I have great sympathy with the view that people who need to take legal action to protect themselves from domestic abuse should be able to do so regardless of cost; however, with the legal aid budget coming under pressure in the current financial climate, it is important that we take a responsible view of the use of public funds. We believe that passing a new act of Parliament is not the only answer to the problem of domestic abuse. There must be a culture shift, so we welcome steps to help with the prosecution of people who commit domestic abuse. We need to increase confidence in our criminal justice system and in social services. In order for prosecutions to be successfully brought, our courts need to have confidence in the disposals that are handed down. In order to act as a deterrent against further offending, and to protect victims, community sentences need to be more robust, with clear consequences for those who defy them. Furthermore, the courts need to have access to short-term custodial sentences, which can often provide the respite that victims and families need. Those are, perhaps, arguments for another day, but it is important that we bear in mind the bigger picture, as we consider how best we can effectively tackle domestic abuse. Despite some concerns, we will support the bill at decision time tonight. I again congratulate Rhoda Grant on what she has achieved so far.

I thank the cabinet secretary for an advance copy of his statement. The Scottish Conservatives agree that it is appropriate to review the structure of fire and police services. I will certainly not defend historical police force structures if that means sacrificing more police officers who could fight crime on the streets. One police force and one fire service are preferable, if we can protect or enhance local accountability. We would achieve that by establishing directly elected local police commissioners. Operational matters would be for the police, but they would be accountable to those locally elected commissioners. Does the cabinet secretary support the establishment of locally elected police commissioners to ensure accountability? If not, how will he protect local accountability?

To ask the Scottish Executive what encouragement careers advisers give pupils to interest them in pursuing a career in farming. (S3O-12439)

Does the minister agree that many careers advisers do not have first-hand experience of the high-level skills and opportunities that are available in farming, for example in production, research, business development, green technology and land management? A number of schemes have been used overseas and in England to encourage school leavers to look more closely at a career in farming. Has the Scottish Government considered using such initiatives in Scotland?

Like other members, I welcome the opportunity to debate this important issue. I thank Hugh Henry for bringing the matter before the Parliament. He has undoubtedly worked extremely hard on the issue for many years. No one in the chamber will question his good intentions in bringing the bill before us. It has already been said many times this afternoon, but is worth repeating, that any form of abuse of those who work with the public is unacceptable. Our principal aim should be to ensure that the law is able to deal with such behaviour as effectively as possible. We will oppose the bill tonight, but not because of any disagreement with the principles behind it. The bill highlights a serious issue, as there are far too many attacks on people who are just doing their jobs, but we are not persuaded that the bill will provide a solution to the problem and believe that it will serve only to complicate the legal framework that already exists to protect people from violence and other abuse. I will expand on those points and consider some possible alternatives. Many people in Scotland do jobs where they potentially face threatening or abusive behaviour. Cathy Jamieson and Marilyn Livingstone both highlighted their experiences, and various members have experienced or witnessed people being given a hard time when they are just doing their job. Staff in my constituency office were recently subjected to a horrific experience involving threatening behaviour while they were trying to help a constituent. The case, however, was dealt with by the local police and the matter was brought to court under existing law. As in so many areas of the criminal justice system, it is not that we need more law—far from it. Rather, we need to be better able to enforce the existing legislation. The police expressed concerns to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee on the need to prove motivation for aggravated offences. If the bill were enacted, rather than having to prove just the basic offence, the police would need to provide additional evidence to prove motivation. According to the police, that would make it harder, rather than easier, to secure convictions. I also agree with the view of the Law Society of Scotland, that the existing common law provides sufficient protection to workers who provide a service to the public, as it takes account of aggravating circumstances. The principle of an independent judiciary means that sheriffs and judges have the flexibility to take various factors into account when deciding a sentence. We erode that principle at our peril.  Of course there are exceptions to that. For more than a century, aggravations have existed in our law. It has been generally accepted that police officers, more than any other occupation, get into physical confrontations in the course of their job, but when we continually add various groups to the list of people who are protected by aggravations, we exclude, by definition, other members of society from such protection. I cannot see why there should be any distinction between workers in different sectors. The bill could discriminate between victims of crime on account of their job; that would be a serious mistake for the Parliament to make. Mr Henry continues to raise an important issue that we must consider carefully. We must also consider carefully whether the bill is the best tool to achieve the outcome that we all seek. Like the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, I do not believe that it is. As the committee's report concludes, the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government should address these important issues as soon as possible, "particularly with regards to the introduction of sentencing and prosecution guidelines and the collection of relevant and transparent data." It has also been suggested that the Government should run a public campaign against the behaviour that the bill seeks to address, to make it clear that an attack against workers is an attack against the communities that they serve. We would support such initiatives.

I note Mr Pringle's concerns about the proposal for a single police force and the issue of local accountability and meeting the needs of local communities. Does he agree with the coalition Government at Westminster that the way in which to address that is by having elected police commissioners represent the views of local communities?

I welcome the opportunity to discuss the Government's first annual report on the antisocial behaviour framework. It is undoubtedly a good thing that the Government is required to report annually on progress on implementing the framework as it provides a regular opportunity to hold the Government to account on its progress. It is important to make it clear that the Scottish Conservatives supported the legislation in 2004, in committee and at stages 1 and 3. We did that with some reservations, particularly about the use of dispersal orders, as we believed—and still believe—that the police already have enough powers at their disposal to deal with such problems.

I want to make some progress. Nevertheless, on balance, we supported the legislation as we believe that communities should not be blighted by antisocial behaviour and crime. I turn to the report. The principle of regular reporting to the Parliament on progress is a good one because it allows more and better accountability. The principles that are espoused in the report are also good. Prevention, integration, engagement and communication are all important in ensuring that we tackle crime and antisocial behaviour as effectively as possible. As James Kelly pointed out, the problem is that it is too easy to get lost in a sea of platitudes, fuzzy rhetoric and local government buzzwords, and to lose sight of any meaningful progress that has been or is being made. The psychobabble and socialworkspeak stand in contrast to the commonsense approach that the SNP took in opposition. Indeed, its 2007 election manifesto stated: "Labour say vandalism is anti-social behaviour, we believe it is a crime. We believe anti-social behaviour orders should not be used when the criminal justice system is a more appropriate way of dealing with offenders." I agree. If a crime has been committed, the police should be involved and criminals should face the  full force of the law. Anything less does a disservice to our communities and sends the wrong message about what is acceptable behaviour. The SNP manifesto went on to say: "Putting more police into local communities and our new focus on tough community punishments will help move the focus more effectively onto police deterrence and strong action against low level criminal activities that reduce the quality of life for too many people across Scotland." I am pleased that the SNP, however reluctantly, was persuaded to make good its pledge on police numbers. However, it is a pity that the commonsense approach that it took while it was in opposition has been abandoned since it got into government. Despite the tough talk in its manifesto, for three years the SNP has eroded confidence in our criminal justice system. It has called for six-month sentences to be all but abolished, extended home detention curfews and increased the number of offences for which fixed-penalty fines can be issued. Although we want to avoid people ending up on the path of crime, those who blight our communities with antisocial behaviour should face up to the consequences of their actions. Fines must be enforced, community service must be swift, effective and efficient, and those who are sentenced to prison must serve the sentence that the judge passes down.

I will take an intervention from Mr Stevenson.

As the member will recall, I was not present in the Parliament in 2004. I welcome the opportunity to discuss the report that we are debating today. I welcome the areas of success that the report highlights. For example, Scottish Borders Council is praised for the work of its safer communities team in effective prevention and early intervention approaches to antisocial behaviour. I know from experience that the team works well because of the effective partnership between council staff and  local police officers. As a constituency member in the Borders, I have regular dealings with the team and know that it works extremely hard to do what it can to find solutions to local problems of antisocial behaviour. Scottish Borders Council is recognised as an example of best practice. That is demonstrated by the fact that it has seen a marked reduction in complaints about, and reported incidents of, antisocial behaviour. The four pillars for dealing with antisocial behaviour are helpful. However, as I said when we last debated the framework, another pillar—that of enforcement—seems to be missing. We cannot ignore the fact that antisocial behaviour is happening. I am sure that all MSPs get letters from beleaguered constituents who live in daily fear of such behaviour. When measures are taken, they must be robustly enforced or they are pointless. Therein lies the heart of the matter. We should do what we can to encourage people not to engage in crime and antisocial behaviour. Unfortunately, some people will inevitably choose to break the rules, so preventive measures will achieve only so much. As in other areas of the criminal justice system, we need effective means of redress when there are problems, and we need protection for victims, punishment for wrongdoers and help to ensure that they are rehabilitated in order to minimise the risk of reoffending. I move amendment S3M-7605.1, to leave out from "the progress made" to end and insert: "that, while progress is being made across a range of areas in improving community safety, the public must continue to be encouraged to report antisocial behaviour and that where examples of good practice exist these should be replicated as widely as possible."

This has been a useful debate, and has highlighted the need to reform the way in which Scots law deals with damages. A number of useful speeches have been made, most of which have centred on two key points: the 25 per cent deduction for living expenses and the proposed changes to the definition of relatives who are able to claim damages. Stewart Maxwell's speech was useful in highlighting the committee's concerns about the 25 per cent loss of earnings deduction. Mike Pringle highlighted the need for reform but expressed the concern that the proposed approach—particularly in relation to the 25 per cent rule—might be too simplistic. I share those concerns and am therefore sympathetic to the rebuttable presumption. The Justice Committee's report stated: "If a rebuttable presumption could be drafted in such a way that it provides flexibility only when it is needed, without undermining the benefits of a fixed deduction in the majority of cases, it might still offer the best way forward. The Committee therefore urges Mr Butler and the Scottish Government to engage constructively in consideration of this question." The Scottish Conservatives see that as an attractive compromise, as in most cases it would avoid the distress caused by having to go through family accounts when the relatives are feeling particularly vulnerable, but at the same time it would enable defenders to oppose settlements where the 25 per cent deduction was not appropriate. The rebuttable presumption would also be an invaluable tool where families felt that they were being undercompensated. We urge Mr Butler and the Scottish Government to work together on the issue to try to find a way forward  that will ensure that no family has to go through unnecessary distress and that they are protected and given the right level of compensation. Before I close, I want to deal with the definition of relatives and their ability to make a claim. Part of the difficulty with the bill is the requirement for a degree of ambiguity. The bill must allow for flexibility, as people have different personal circumstances. However, it must also provide protection, to ensure that those who need and deserve compensation receive it quickly and painlessly. Section 14 would remove the rights of certain relatives to claim for damages, even if they could show that they had been supported by the victim. Of those who would not be able to claim, the Justice Committee was given the example of a niece or nephew who was supported through university by their aunt or uncle. Although we do not want to prevent those who have entitlement to claim from doing so, we also recognise that there is a finite amount of compensation. The Justice Committee report says: "real injustice could result if too much were taken away from family members to compensate relatively casual acquaintances." One way of addressing that problem would be to limit the right to claim to those who are able to establish a substantial loss of support. A definition of "substantial" would be required to ensure that the net was not cast too widely or not widely enough, as that could provide further difficulties. I am pleased that Bill Butler has indicated a willingness to resolve difficulties with the Scottish Government and others to take matters forward, and I again congratulate him on bringing the bill to this stage.

The ability of a citizen to recover damages from another person because of an injury or a death that that other person caused involves a controversial area of our law that is certainly not without its failings. We all agree that the subject must be dealt with appropriately and effectively. The issue of damages is no stranger to the Parliament. It was dealt with through the Rights of Relatives to Damages (Mesothelioma) (Scotland) Act 2007 and the Damages (Asbestos-related Conditions) (Scotland) Act 2009. I, too, congratulate Bill Butler on ensuring that his bill has reached stage 1. I commend him for his hard work and the dedication that he has shown on the bill's journey thus far. In Scots law, when an individual suffers an injury or contracts a disease as the result of an act or an omission by another person, or as the result of the acts or omissions of a legal entity such as a company, damages can be claimed from the wrongdoer. Damages that are awarded for personal injury are intended to restore the victim to the position that he or she was in before the wrongful act or omission took place, to the extent that a financial award can achieve that aim. It is important to remember that the damages that are awarded are not intended to penalise the wrongdoer. The bill implements the Scottish Law Commission's recommendations, which were outlined in its "Report on Damages for Wrongful Death". Mr Butler's bill does not differ from the Law Commission's draft bill, which was produced alongside that report, except in one aspect. The Scottish Conservatives agree with the bill's general principles and will vote in favour of it at decision time. However, the bill is not without its problems, and I will focus on a couple of issues, the first of which is the provision for calculating an award of damages for patrimonial loss—in Scots law, the sum of money to be paid to the injured party by the responsible party that is over and above the compensation that is paid for injury to feelings or emotional distress. The bill proposes a fixed 25 per cent deduction from the amount that the victim could have been expected to earn or to receive in benefits during the lost period, to represent the victim's living expenses in that time.  The proposal is based on the view that a fixed reduction would reduce the need for intrusive questioning about family budgeting and speed up the settlement of claims. Although that is a noble aim, concerns have been raised over the arbitrary nature of a fixed 25 per cent reduction that takes no account of individual circumstances and which could lead to overcompensation in some cases and undercompensation in others. Indeed, it has been suggested that the proposal violates the fundamental principle that a victim should be compensated only for the loss suffered. An option that the Justice Committee considered during its stage 1 evidence taking and which the Scottish Government brought forward in its consultation paper was to put the 25 per cent deduction into statute, but as a rebuttable presumption. That appears to be an attractive compromise if it ensures the avoidance of the distress caused when family accounts have to be gone through at a time when relatives feel particularly vulnerable. The proposal would also enable defenders to oppose settlements where the 25 per cent figure was thought not to be appropriate. The definition of those entitled to a recovery is another difficult area. The proposal in the bill would remove the existing right of certain relatives, beyond those defined as members of the immediate family, to claim for damages if they could show that they had been supported by the victim. We recognise that a line needs to be drawn to prevent unfounded claims. The compensation is a finite amount of money; it should not be diluted or diverted from family members to compensate casual acquaintances. I believe that more work will need to be done to expand the definition without casting the net too widely.

I have another opportunity to speak in the debate, Presiding Officer. I have no more to add other than to confirm that the Scottish Conservatives will support the bill at stage 1.

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. I will raise two issues. First, as we have heard, there has been much speculation about the number of police forces. Given that there has still been no decision as to which structure will be adopted in the future, does the cabinet secretary think that it might have been sensible to postpone any decision on the future of forensic science services until the structure of the police forces had been determined? Secondly, I note that the review of the effectiveness of implementing the new model will be undertaken in 18 months' time. We do not  know whether the voters will allow the cabinet secretary to continue in his current job but, if he does, will he undertake to bring the conclusions of that review to the Parliament?

I recently met the management of the Hawick Cashmere Company Ltd in my constituency. The company is one of the leading textile producers in Scotland, if not the United Kingdom. The management highlighted to me the difficulty that it has in encouraging young people, particularly school leavers, into the industry, especially given the historical difficulties that have been faced by the sector. Does the minister believe that the answer is more effective training, or is it perhaps more to do with improving the industry's profile among school careers advisers, not just in the Borders but throughout Scotland?

I begin by congratulating Jeremy Purvis on securing the debate.  We hold many members' business debates in this Parliament on a variety of interesting subjects, but our topic today must surely be one of the most important: how we best look after those who have chosen to protect our country by serving in our armed forces. The issue is of particular importance as our armed forces continue to be engaged in combat operations overseas. When we hear the word "veterans", the common image is of those who have fought in the world wars and are now rather elderly, but in recent years the realities of our involvement in Iraq and Afghanistan have meant that the image is changing. Indeed, many of those who are recovering in veterans respite homes across the country are in their early 20s. Scotland has a proud military tradition. It is right that we collectively underline our appreciation and admiration for the bravery of our armed forces as a whole. It is interesting to hear from other members about their experiences of veterans and veterans groups in different parts of Scotland. As a Borders MSP, I am particularly proud of the contribution that borderers have made, not only to our armed forces but to the cause of veterans. The strength of our armed forces is a result of the bravery of thousands of individuals, and I am proud that hundreds of those brave men and women have come from communities throughout the Borders. Among some of the better-known names from the Borders is the Earl Haig, who dedicated his later life to the welfare of ex-servicemen, travelling extensively throughout the world to promote their interests and to argue for improvements to their welfare. As the founder of the Earl Haig Fund, which is also known as Poppyscotland, he helped to start the tradition that, perhaps more than anything else in the past century, has focused attention on the issue. It is clear that, even when not in combat, the military lifestyle is unique in the demands that it places on the lives of service personnel and their families. Whether because of the long periods of deployment, the unusual stresses of the environment in which they work or the risks involved, our service personnel have a unique occupation. Although many manage the transition smoothly, moving from that environment into regular civilian life undoubtedly presents real challenges for many others. That is why it is so important that adequate support is in place to help ex-servicemen and women to integrate back into normal civilian life. As we have heard, the issues affecting ex-servicemen and women are varied. I commend Veterans Scotland for its work to promote issues regarding Scotland's veterans. It acts as a co-ordinating voice for the benefit of the ex-service community in Scotland, and it has been  instrumental in making the Scottish Government listen and learn about the fate of our veterans. It is important to recognise the role of the many local and voluntary organisations that provide daily support to veterans who need or ask for assistance. It is right that those services are provided by a mix of public bodies and charities. The Government cannot and should not try to do everything, and the charities and voluntary groups bring to the table expertise and experience that are invaluable in supporting veterans and their families. Assisting those who return from active service has been a challenge to our society for centuries. We should recognise that not enough has been done to support such people in the past. I am pleased that that seems to be changing, perhaps as a result of the current realities of war and the tangible reminder of the debt that we owe to those brave men and women. However, we must not make that a reason for complacency. That is why the debate is important, as it keeps the issue in the public eye. People who have put and continue to put their lives on the line for their country should expect the full support of members of the Parliament and our wider society. I hope that the debate has demonstrated that we give that support.

I, too, congratulate Willie Coffey on securing the debate and on giving Parliament the opportunity to consider an important issue. I am pleased, notwithstanding the absence of the Liberal Democrats, that there appears to be a large amount of cross-party agreement on the issue. We all agree that one primary function of our criminal justice system is to ensure that we properly rehabilitate offenders so that they break the cycle of reoffending. That is good for the individual, but it is also good for wider society. Given the high reoffending rates in Scotland, we are probably not getting close to where we need to be on effective rehabilitation. We all acknowledge the need to understand why so many youths end up in the criminal justice system. According to the Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists, the environment in which people grow up can result in high levels of communication support needs. As the royal college says, offenders who have communication support needs are less receptive to the rehabilitation programmes that are on offer when they are in prison. That is clearly very concerning. We spend a significant amount of public funds on rehabilitation programmes, but if the royal college is correct they may be having a minimal impact because of the communication disabilities of some of the participants. Funding is already tight and will get significantly tighter, so we must ensure that money is spent as wisely as possible. If there is any suggestion that rehabilitation schemes are not as effective as they might be because of other factors, it is important  that we reprioritise our funding to ensure that those factors are addressed. I have visited many prisons in the past few months, including Polmont young offenders institution. It has been apparent to me during those visits that a lot of good work to rehabilitate prisoners is taking place in Scotland's prisons. However, given the high reoffending rates, we need to think carefully about the effectiveness of each scheme. We welcomed the Scottish Government's announcement in July that it would improve help for offenders and those at risk of offending to meet their learning and skills needs. Intervening at an early stage to address patterns of offending behaviour must be a priority. We must ensure that young people are re-engaged with the education process and we must help those who are already in the criminal justice system to develop their learning and skills so that they lead a life away from crime when they leave prison. We need to go further and faster. Breaking the cycle of crime begins with the children of criminals who are locked up in prison. They are deprived of a parent through no fault of their own and should be a concern to us all. Schools, social services, and voluntary and faith groups should work hard together to divert young and first offenders away from criminality. We must do more to tackle crime, particularly with regard to the rehabilitation that we offer and its effectiveness, so that we reduce reoffending rates. The motion and the evidence that has been presented by the royal college highlight a much larger problem. A wide range of rehabilitation schemes are on offer, but we do not know how effective each is at ensuring that criminals are rehabilitated and reintegrated into mainstream society. I congratulate Willie Coffey on securing the debate and the royal college on highlighting this important issue. I hope that it is the start of a wider debate about the effectiveness of our rehabilitation schemes so that we can truly tackle the high reoffending rates in Scotland.

I am pleased that the Parliament will vote in favour of the bill at decision time—I hope that it will do so. Notwithstanding the European convention on human rights and the Human Rights Act 1998, I would argue that, in the past, Scotland has gone above and beyond what is required to protect its citizens' rights. Despite the Supreme Court's ruling, we have a fair justice system. The third verdict of not proven and the need for corroboration are just two ways in which the Scottish system achieves justice and respects individuals' rights. We should not forget that the consequences of the Salduz v Turkey case, which was brought to the European Court of Human Rights, are the reason for the emergency bill that we are considering. In that case, a juvenile had not been granted the right to see a lawyer during the first few hours of interrogation, during which he self-incriminated. In light of the circumstances of Salduz, I find it remarkable that the case can now be used through the human rights convention to influence Scots law in the way that it has. Salduz was convicted of participating in a demonstration for an organisation that Turkey had deemed to be illegal and for hanging an illegal banner. Was the real injustice committed by Turkey when it denied him the right to a lawyer during his interrogation or when it denied him the right to participate in a demonstration? The human rights convention  argues that the right to a lawyer is a fundamental human right, but is the right to speech, protest and association not far more fundamental? It would not be our job to determine the validity of Turkish law, but the consequences of the case are felt here today because of the Supreme Court's decision and the decision of others to incorporate the human rights convention into Scots law in the way that they did. As we heard from many speakers over the afternoon, the impacts of the decision will be far reaching. The costs to the public purse will increase significantly and the police fear that our relatively high conviction rates will be compromised. The decision has also significantly shifted the balance of our justice system in favour of the criminal rather than the victim and the law-abiding majority in Scottish society. Scottish criminal law will never be the same again. Scotland has lost control of its criminal justice system, not as a result of the UK Supreme Court's decision but because other political parties decided to incorporate the European convention on human rights into Scots law through the Scotland Act 1998. We have heard much nonsense from some Scottish National Party back benchers. They say that, in an independent Scotland, things would be much different, but we would still be subject to the convention through the European Court of Human Rights and we would still be living with the consequences of the decision to incorporate the convention into Scots law. The Conservatives are pleased to support the bill and will participate fully in the review of Scotland's criminal law and practice.

The Supreme Court's decision is of importance to Scotland's criminal law—of that there can be little doubt. However, it would be wrong to suggest that it was the decision of some foreign court that was imposing its will on Scottish law. I detected more than a hint of that in some of the comments from the Cabinet Secretary for Justice during his various media interviews in the past 24 hours. I do not remember the Scottish National Party raising any of those concerns when the Scotland Act 1998 or the Human Rights Act 1998 were passing through Parliament. We should also remember that the leading judgments were given by Scottish law lords. I would like to deal with two points in my speech. The first is the suggestion by some in the legal profession that the Supreme Court's decision is itself not compliant with the human rights convention in so far as it does not apply to all cases, even those that are subject to final determination. In my view, that argument flies in the face of the long-established principle of the rule of law, the basic intuition of which is that the law must be capable of guiding those who are subject to it. It must provide certainty and predictability; after all, we must know what the law is if we are to plan our lives and organise our affairs, and that applies as much to public officials as to private individuals. In other words, judicial decisions must enable public officials to administer the criminal law and requiring all judicial decisions in criminal matters to apply to all prior decisions would be a radical departure from the simple truth that lies at the heart of the rule of law. That truth is captured in paragraph 103 of Lord Rodger's opinion, in which he cites Chief Justice Murray's judgment in the Supreme Court of Ireland's decision in the Arbour Hill prison case. This useful analysis illustrates not only how the law can effectively operate retrospectively but, more important, how new judgments can affect previously closed cases. Chief Justice Murray said:  "No one has ever suggested that every time there is a judicial adjudication clarifying or interpreting the law in a particular manner which could have had some bearing on previous and finally decided cases, civil or criminal, that such cases be reopened or the decisions set aside." The reason that it has not been suggested is that no legal system comprehends such an absolute or complete retroactive effect of judicial decisions. To do so would render a legal system uncertain, incoherent and dysfunctional, the consequences of which would cause widespread injustices. On that basis, I do not accept the view that the judgment itself should be retrospective in terms of reopening previous cases, and I hope that the legal profession does not use it as the basis for future challenges. Of more concern, however, is the SCCRC's position. Does it have the power to reopen closed cases, as is perhaps suggested in the Supreme Court judgment? In paragraph 62 of the Cadder judgment, Lord Hope notes that it is for the commission to "make up its own mind, if it is asked to do so, as to whether it would be in the public interest for ... cases" already subject to final determination "to be referred to the High Court." Furthermore, I note that under section 194C of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, as amended, the commission "may refer a case to the High Court" where it believes "that a miscarriage of justice" has "occurred" and that "it is in the interests of justice that a reference should be made". Given my earlier argument about the need of retrospective judicial decisions in a common law system, it is not clear whether there is anything amounting to a "miscarriage of justice" in cases that are already subject to a final determination. In any event, it would surely not be "in the interests of justice" for the commission to refer any such cases. Ultimately, there might be concerns about chilling the courts in that, if the commission referred cases after the Cadder judgment, future courts might be reluctant to make decisions on criminal matters that would involve important changes to the law in case such a move led to a flood of cases under the SCCRC process.

It is critical that we legislate as far as possible to limit the commission's ability to reopen decided cases. Although we certainly hope that the bill achieves that aim, I am not sure that it does. Indeed, I know that the Law Society of Scotland has a number of concerns in that respect. I hope that my concerns do not prove to be legitimate, but only time will tell.

Although a debate on administrative justice and the future of tribunals may not be the most glamorous one that the chamber has ever witnessed, it is an important and timely topic. The issues at stake in tribunals are important to citizens who rely on their services and the remedies that they offer, so the effective operation of the tribunal system should be important to us all. I will examine how we have arrived at the current situation, the strengths and weaknesses of the current system, and the possible road ahead for administrative justice. We should acknowledge the work that has already been done in this policy area—work that has gone a long way towards informing our debate. In particular, the administrative justice steering group, chaired by Lord Philip, contributed greatly to where we are today. Its remit was to provide advice on the administrative justice framework in Scotland and, in particular, the likely impact of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act 2007. In the steering group's report, administrative justice is defined as "initial decision-making by public bodies affecting citizens' rights and interests ...;" and "systems for resolving disputes relating to such decisions and for considering citizens grievances." We should keep that definition in mind, as it highlights just how significant the subject of our debate is to our society and the people whom we represent. We should also acknowledge the role of voluntary groups, citizens advice bureaux and other independent advocates in representing people who have been unfairly dealt with. They are a valuable part of the administrative justice system and play an important role in our society. The principle of tribunals is ancient. Indeed, Roman tribunes—from where the word "tribunal" originates—were elected to protect the rights of the people from arbitrary acts. The tribunal system as we know it grew up on an ad hoc basis during the 20th century. An important landmark was the 1957 Franks report into the abuse of executive authority and maladministration. Critically, it moved tribunals from an executive and administrative model towards a judicial footing, based on the three principles of openness, fairness and impartiality. The Lord Chancellor, Kenneth Clarke, has outlined plans to create a unified judiciary in England and Wales under the overall leadership of the Lord Chief Justice. That would mean bringing together the administration of the courts and tribunals in England and Wales and would involve primary legislation, which the Lord Chancellor has indicated he is willing to introduce. However, it would also have implications in Scotland, as the senior president of tribunals is a statutory role that has jurisdiction here. The Lord Chancellor has made it clear that any transfer of the senior president's tribunal responsibilities to the Lord President in Scotland should preserve the benefits of the existing arrangements here. I am pleased that constructive discussions have taken place between the UK Ministry of Justice and the Scottish Government, and I hope that ministers will continue to keep members informed of the progress of those discussions. Members will be aware from their constituency case loads that public bodies do not always get it right in the delivery of services or the upholding of rights. Indeed, the redress of grievances has been and continues to be one of the main roles of a politician, whether an MP, an MSP, an MEP or a councillor. Having regularly to represent constituents in seeking to redress grievances gives us a good background when it comes to  legislating to ensure that our system works most effectively. As the Philip report highlighted, there should be three aims to administrative justice. First, our focus should be on ensuring that decisions that affect people's rights are correct first time. Secondly, tribunals exist to ensure that, when decisions are incorrect or the treatment of citizens is otherwise defective, there are effective redress mechanisms. Thirdly, public bodies should learn from their mistakes, so as to increase the likelihood of getting it right first time. As the Lord Chancellor has indicated, the priority in any transfer of responsibilities should be that we retain the benefits of our system, but we should also seek to improve any areas of it that have been identified as having weaknesses. Measured against the aims of the administrative justice system, the Philip report concluded that incorrect initial decisions and other administrative failings are more frequent than they should be. Those decisions affect people's lives, and it is therefore extremely important that as many of those decisions as possible are correct in the first instance. On the issue of effective redress, the report concluded that the current system was operating "tolerably well", although it had "important deficiencies". It identified difficulties in individuals being able to access the means of redress on grounds of cost, lack of expertise and other confusion over the process of some complaints mechanisms. Thirdly, the report stated that many organisations are not effective in gathering or implementing feedback that might inform their drive to efficient and correct decision making. Some organisations generate large numbers of complaints every year over a long period with little sign of improvement. That is unacceptable. This is a useful debate. I hope that it will inform the future course of action regarding administrative justice. By redressing grievances, tribunals play an important role in our society, and it is right that we should consider ways to ensure that they continue to do so in future. The issues at stake in tribunals are often of great importance to individuals, so ensuring that the system is operating as effectively as possible should be of paramount importance to us. As it says in my amendment, when those powers are devolved, we need to ensure that the best possible model is achieved, capturing the best of the existing system while dealing with any existing problems. I move amendment S3M-7116.1, to insert at end:  ", and further notes that the Lord Chancellor has emphasised that any transfer of powers should seek to preserve the benefits of existing arrangements."

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has had discussions with the United Kingdom Environment Agency regarding the management of the River Esk in the south of Scotland. (S3O-11376)

The minister will be aware of difficulties in recent weeks regarding the rod licensing regime, which the UK Environment Agency administers. During the past few days, the agency indicated that it is prepared to reach a compromise on the issue. The minister is aware that the issue causes great concern to the local communities. There are reports of a decline in business. People are deciding no longer to fish on the rivers because of their difficulties in getting the relevant licence. Will the minister assure me and my constituents that the Scottish Government will do whatever it can to reach a solution with the UK Environment Agency, so that the issue can move forward and fishing on the rivers can return to normality?

I thank the Labour Party for using its time to debate the future of forensic services in Scotland. It is all too easy to forget the difficult and challenging job that the people who are involved in the forensic service do and the role that they play in the investigation and prevention of crime. For many people, their knowledge of forensic services will extend to what they have learned from occasionally tuning into episodes of "CSI: Crime Scene Investigation" or watching the actors in white jump suits on "Taggart", but to the victims of crime, the role of forensic services is pivotal, as they are involved throughout the process, from the crime scene investigation through to the case being brought to court. The passing of the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006 established the Scottish Police Services Authority, under the umbrella of which forensic services have fallen since 2007. The new structure brought together the existing forensic labs, fingerprint bureaux and scene-of-crime offices that were located across the country. I have long argued in the Parliament that crime needs to be dealt with swiftly and in an efficient and effective manner. Forensic services play a massive part in ensuring that that happens; they are an imperative part of the process. They ensure that the facts are reliable and are produced in  time, they give victims the closure that they require, and they ensure that the police and the Crown Office have the information that they need to make appropriate decisions. The services that are provided range from crime scene investigators, fingerprinting and DNA testing to drug analysis. Those are vital services that must continue to meet the demands that are put on them by service users. As the SPSA's modernisation paper sets out, demand for the services varies across the country. That variation is down to not just crime patterns and volume, but practices and policies in specific areas. The current economic climate holds many challenges and will involve making tough decisions. It is against that backdrop that the SPSA presented its modernisation paper, in which it states: "We continue to face considerable challenges in the short to medium term at least with likely year-on-year real term reduction to our budget, rising cost (extra inflationary) of consumables and changes to demand that will place significant pressure on our ability to meet financial targets and customer expectations." Four options are presented, three of which offer alternatives; the other is basically the status quo. Although we realise that spending must and will be reduced, we must strive to reduce it by achieving efficiencies that do little to take away from the vital services that continue to be required. It would be irresponsible simply to look towards the option that saves the most money, regardless of the consequences. We accept that it would be wrong to continue with no change, even though that would offer the quickest savings—it would produce total efficiencies of around £1 million in 2011-12, as opposed to the £140,000 that the other three options would result in—and we recognise that short-term spend on the evidence management solution will allow for longer-term savings. Option three has generated the majority of concerns, as it suggests the closure of facilities in both Aberdeen and Edinburgh. Grampian Police, Northern Constabulary and Lothian and Borders Police have all expressed their alarm at the potential impact that those closures would have on local service delivery. Further concerns have been raised about the loss of specialist jobs. Given that forensics play such a crucial role in the delivery of justice, I must ask what the full consequences of such closures would be, not just for the police, but for the running of courts and, of course, for the wider public's access to swift justice. In July, my colleague Mary Scanlon, who will speak later in the debate, lodged a motion that recognised the importance of forensic services to policing and crime detection in the Highlands and  Islands and the Grampian area, and which highlighted what the closure of the Aberdeen facility would mean for jobs in that area. The process that the SPSA has gone through in coming to its recommendation should be transparent, and I am more than a little disappointed that the responses that it received to its paper have not yet been published, although I understand that the SPSA is awaiting authorisation to do so from those who submitted evidence. Furthermore, it appears that we will not find out what recommendation the SPSA has made or how it came to make that decision until the future structure of forensic services in Scotland has been decided, which is also unfortunate. A new structure is inevitable, but it must allow the forensic services to continue to provide a first-class service. In my opinion, option two appears to offer the best alternative, in that it would allow services to be maintained across Scotland, thereby protecting access to services for the police and, more widely, access to justice for all. That should be our principal aim. I move amendment S3M-7045.1, to insert at end: "; acknowledges the concerns raised about the loss of specialist jobs, and further notes the concerns of local communities and the police about the proposed changes."   Robert Brown (Glasgow) (LD):  >First, I apologise to members for having to leave before the end of the debate—I do not usually do that, but I have a long-standing engagement to fulfil this morning. This is an important debate on a subject that has been characterised by fixed agendas, inadequate consultation and the wrong priorities. The Scottish Police Services Authority has had, to say the least, a chequered career since its inception, but its record on handling the debate on the future of the forensic services in Scotland must stand at the nadir of its fortunes. The SPSA's plans to merge the units at Aberdeen and Dundee go back to 2007. At that time, neither Grampian Police, the Procurator Fiscal Service, the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland nor the laboratory staff had been consulted. The users of the service and the people who provide it were left out of the loop. One might imagine that it would be difficult to progress plans in that way, and that any plans that were produced might be a trifle defective. After huge local protest, the cabinet secretary—to his credit—asked the SPSA to re-examine the issues and engage in fresh consultation. The SPSA then constructed a consultation that merely  outlined and justified the closure of the Aberdeen laboratory; it did not even include an option for the service to remain in Aberdeen. The Minister for Community Safety described the paper as "a question and answer paper ... not a consultation".— [Official Report, 8 January 2009; c 13920.]  The common feature throughout was that the SPSA regarded the closure of the Aberdeen service as a foregone conclusion. Perhaps uniquely, that botched consultation attracted the condemnation of all parties, including even the Scottish National Party MSPs for the area. To echo my earlier intervention on the cabinet secretary, it would be totally amazing if the end result of all that was that there were no forensic services north of Dundee. That is a different proposition to the non-event of services in Inverness, Wick or Dumfries: we do not have such services and nobody is proposing that we should, but that is not to say that we should not have suitable and reasonably accessible services throughout Scotland. We eventually got the 2010 proposals, which presented four options, but a proposal to close the forensic unit in Edinburgh had appeared. That seemed to be a rather bizarre result of the way in which thought on the matter had moved forward, and it went against what seemed to be a categorical assurance from the cabinet secretary in answer to a parliamentary question from Mike Pringle in February 2009. I say to the cabinet secretary that it is highly unsatisfactory that we do not have the recommendation—which is a different issue to the Government's response to the recommendation—today. I accept his assurance that he has not personally received it, although I bet that his officials have received it—which is not quite the same thing—and are awaiting the report going to the cabinet secretary. Secret government is not the way forward. There is a major debate on the issue, and members must be properly informed about the proposal. It is hardly the full, frank and transparent consultation that the cabinet secretary promised in May 2008. There are a number of specific considerations. The first is that a decision to end forensic services in Aberdeen or Edinburgh would be very costly to reverse in the event that the Government and the SPSA got it wrong and it led to the problems that staff have predicted—and perhaps some that have not been predicted. It has taken some years to build up both the facilities and the staff complement, so there is an element of irreversibility if the decision proceeds in the way that the SPSA appears to wish it to.  The second—and driving—consideration must be the effectiveness of the service, which is a point that Mike Rumbles has repeatedly made, not least during today's debate. It is clear that police forces have confidence in the current arrangements, but also that there are issues of varying demand and practice that reflect different practices and procedures throughout the country. Both option one and option two in the SPSA's paper progress that consideration with significant annual savings; I am not sure whether the two options are mutually exclusive, or if elements of both could be incorporated. The debate should take place, and the decision should be made, around that consideration. The third consideration is the need for timely and local responses to need. Some procedures need to be turned around within hours, as I think Richard Baker said, and that will manifestly not be possible if samples have to be sent from Aberdeen to Dundee or from Edinburgh to Glasgow. The fourth consideration is the question of scarce finance. Even in these days of financial pressure, decisions should not be dictated by that concern if the result is otherwise unsatisfactory. All four options—as has been pointed out in the debate—offer significant savings on top of the efficiencies that have been obtained in recent years. The Liberal Democrat amendment brings out a further aspect, which is the mantra of centralisation that appears in many respects to drive things these days. We see it with the proposals to merge the Scottish police forces into a single Scottish police force, and we see its hidden hand too in the proposals to reduce the number of forensic science laboratories. I say to the cabinet secretary that although those issues cannot be approached dogmatically, Scotland does not suit a one-size-fits-all approach from Government. Centralisation can mean loss of local control and access, and it certainly means the removal of local jobs and services. There has been a high-handedness and arbitrariness about the approach to the forensic science laboratories issue. There is a strong sense that people are going through the motions and that there is impatience with the troublesome concerns of democratically elected representatives of the relevant areas from all parties. Even now, as has been mentioned, we are in the ridiculous position of today's debate taking place in a vacuum, because we do not know—although we can guess—the recommendation that the SPSA has made to the Scottish Government. Members have the opportunity to tell the Government today that that is no way to proceed, that the concerns are not just valid but persuasive, that the loss of local forensic services will damage  policing in Scotland and that the uncertainty that has dogged the issue for three years should be ended. The debate has taken place with the cabinet secretary and members of the Government sitting off to one side, almost as arbiters. They are not: the SPSA is a Government agency that is responsible to the Government, and it is working to a Government agenda. In 2008, the SPSA's director of forensic services stated: "That's why the Cabinet Secretary has given a clear signal that 'doing nothing' around the existing lab infrastructure is not an option." If that is not a direction of travel, I do not know what is. If that agenda means modernisation, greater efficiency or improved standards, we are with the cabinet secretary. If, as it sounds, it means the closure of local services, the cabinet secretary should be for turning post haste. The debate gives him the opportunity to recognise a mistake in the direction of travel and to act to keep local services throughout Scotland. I move amendment S3M-7045.3, to insert at end: "; believes that decisions on the future of the national forensic service should be driven by the quality of the services needed and provided; regrets the history of inadequate consultation and consideration by the SPSA over the structure of the service; deplores the way in which the SPSA regarded the closure of regional services as a foregone conclusion, and considers that the controversy surrounding the issue serves as a warning as to the dangers of dogmatic centralisation."

Will the member take an intervention?

I welcome today's debate and the degree of consensus that I hope now surrounds this important issue. For the first time since devolution, we have a national strategy to deal with Scotland's serious problem of substance abuse. Clearly, we welcome that. I want to underline our support for  the strategy, but I also want to remind the Government that its record in dealing with Scotland's drug problem will be judged by its success rather than its strategy. I want to look at the current extent of the problem and how effectively it is being tackled, with particular reference to drugs in our prisons. As James Kelly pointed out, it is important that we never lose sight of the scale of the problem that we are trying to tackle. Far too many people in our society use drugs, and a worrying proportion of those are dependent on drugs. When the minister first introduced the strategy two years ago, he rightly said: "there can be few more pressing issues ... than tackling problem drug abuse." — [ Official Report , 29 May 2008; c 9087.]  Scotland had then, and has still, more problem drug users per head of population than any other part of the United Kingdom and more than most comparable western countries. Last year, Scotland had 545 drug-related deaths—more than 10 every week of the year—and almost 40,000 drug-related offences. Those sobering statistics underline the fact that literally thousands of families are being scarred by drug abuse and its consequences. Nor do those statistics take into account the wider costs to society, both economic and social. Put simply, this is a problem that we cannot afford to avoid any longer. As I said, we support the Government's decision to adopt a new drugs strategy based on recovery and leading to abstinence—not least because we proposed it, and it is the right strategy—but as Churchill once pointed out, "However beautiful the strategy, you should occasionally look at the results". For the drugs strategy, the results matter, given that we are dealing with hundreds of lives every year. So let us look at the results. Although drug deaths are down by 5 per cent, the total is still the second highest on record and is well in line with annual fluctuations. It is difficult to paint an accurate picture of drug use across the country, given the illicit nature of the activity, but it is easier to identify trends among members of our prison population, who are subject to regular surveys. I was particularly worried when the cabinet secretary revealed, in a recent answer to a parliamentary question, that the number of prisoners being prescribed methadone has risen by 37 per cent over the past four years. Furthermore, the proportion of prisoners receiving methadone relative to the whole prison population continues to grow. That is a concern, as it suggests that efforts to move drug addicts towards abstinence are not working properly. Some people said that such an increase was a positive step, as  it might mean that more people are being taken off heroin but, although that might be true, the whole reason why we fought for a new national drugs strategy based on recovery was to use methadone as a stepping stone to abstinence. More recent figures show that 20 per cent of prisoners who are prescribed methadone are on a reducing dose, which means that 80 per cent of such individuals are in effect being parked on methadone and forgotten about. Clearly, more needs to be done to turn the strategy into results on the ground. Scotland may have an unenviable reputation for drugs use, but it is certainly far from unique in that respect, so it is important that we learn lessons from other countries in which action has been taken to face up to drug problems. One such example, as my colleague Annabel Goldie has highlighted on previous occasions, is the approach that was adopted in Pennsylvania. The authorities in Pennsylvania recognised that "Eliminating drugs in prisons is a crucial aspect of ensuring that prison order and safety are maintained, but perhaps most important, eliminating the problem ensures that inmates abstain from drugs during the time they serve their sentences—a necessary first step on the road to long-term abstinence". Almost 10 years on from that brave new approach, Pennsylvania has reported that its prisons are virtually 99 per cent drug free. Imagine that. In Scotland today, the idea of an almost drug-free prison population is a dream. In 1999, Pennsylvania's prisons reported that the number of drug finds as a result of cell searches had dropped 41 per cent, assaults on staff had decreased by 57 per cent and inmate-on-inmate assaults had declined by 70 per cent. We have proposed a number of measures that I believe would help us on our way to achieving similar results. All prisoners should be subjected to a drug test on their arrival in jail and subject to random drug testing thereafter. Testing must be comprehensive, robust and consistent. We also want drug-free wings in every institution, where prisoners who want to come off drugs can be removed from the availability and the temptation of drugs. We must also recognise that the Government cannot solve the problem alone. The role that is played by voluntary and faith groups in helping the vulnerable is one of the greatest strengths of our society, and it should be recognised and encouraged. The job of any responsible Opposition politician is to support the Government when there is common ground and to challenge it when improvement is needed. The Government should be given full credit for introducing the national drugs strategy, and we will support the strategy that we worked to deliver, but we would not be  doing our job properly and would be doing our country a disservice if we did not challenge the Government to do more to ensure that the strategy is the success that our country desperately needs it to be.

The bill has been on a long journey, and not just as it has passed through its final stages today. As others have said, many have been involved in getting the bill to this stage. I will not waste time repeating the thanks that others have given, but I will particularly thank Erin Boyle in the Conservative research team for her help to me during the stages of the bill. The bill is complex and covers many areas of our criminal justice system. It is true that many aspects of the bill are not contentious and act simply to tidy up the existing criminal justice system, so much of the bill can be welcomed. However, as members have heard today, we take serious issue with the proposal to create a presumption against short-term sentences. The language might have changed, but the SNP Government's enthusiasm to empty Scotland's jails without putting in place a robust community sentencing regime is no less diminished. The failing in the current system—this is a key point—is that our prisons do not offer short-term rehabilitation options to those prisoners who are on short sentences. Indeed, some would suggest that effective rehabilitation is not in place for any of our prisoners. It is bizarre to suggest that people can be rehabilitated in their communities based on a few hours of contact each week but that absolutely nothing can be achieved during a short-term sentence in prison. Simply because our prisons are not successfully rehabilitating people during short-term sentences does not mean that we should abolish such sentences completely. Much more must be done to identify the underlying causes of criminality, what can be done to support offenders during their time in prison and, perhaps more important, what agencies should be involved in their rehabilitation once they are released.  On the other side of the coin, we should consider the impact on communities of short-term sentences when a disruptive individual has been removed and put in prison, albeit for a short time. It might not be for very long, but those residents whose neighbourhoods have been blighted by the activities of that individual—many of us have constituents in that situation—often get the respite that they have been longing for. Similarly, during the detention, albeit for a short period, opportunities might open up for local antisocial behaviour units and housing associations to put in place more permanent solutions to deal with the individual concerned. The bill has been through a long process, so it is unfortunate that we find ourselves unable to support it at stage 3. We have supported the need for short-term sentences for many years, and the Government could have had our support today had it not insisted on reinstating the controversial proposals on sentencing. It is with much regret, but in the interests of Scotland's criminal justice system and the law-abiding majority of Scots, that we will vote against the bill at decision time.

We have two concerns about the amendment. First, we are concerned that it has not been properly scrutinised. Secondly, we have concerns about the dual licensing system. In addition, many—if not all—members will have received a letter from Toni Bartley, who wrote on behalf of many women who work in lap-dancing bars in Glasgow to express concerns about how the proposed regime would impact on their ability to work. Indeed, Ms Bartley speaks with some passion about the impact that amendment 198 would have on her job, as I found out when I had the opportunity to meet her here in the Parliament to discuss her concerns. Indeed, she is in the public gallery. Toni Bartley was, quite frankly, insulted by the claims that lap dancers are prostitutes being exploited and that their work is demeaning. For those who do not know, Toni is in fact a politics student at the University of Strathclyde and hopes to become a teacher. Her job helps her to pay her way through university. Many of us made choices to work in clubs or shops or bars to support ourselves while studying. This young woman has chosen to dance. Some of us might have moral objections to that, but I am a great advocate of freedom of choice. To ensure the safety of those who choose to work in such an environment, and to avoid exploitation, I believe that rigorous enforcement of the licensing regime, regular police visits and internal self-policing are required. I have been  assured that all of that takes place. However, I am open-minded and am prepared to look at all the evidence. If there is a need for additional legislation, it should be introduced only after further and proper examination of the current procedures. I am perhaps not the most likely advocate of lap dancing, of which I suspect other members might have more experience, but I am happy to look at all the evidence. We will oppose Ms White's amendment 198.

The purpose of amendments 195, 196 and 197 is to deal with the unforeseen consequences for the sports of archery and fencing in Scotland in relation to the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Act 2007, which came into force on 1 June 2010.  Under the 2007 act, archery and fencing will be severely compromised in their ability to attract new participants, because the ability to buy equipment will be restricted. Equipment for the sports is expensive and it is unfair to expect new participants to purchase items when they start. Most clubs are able to attract new members by using an equipment hiring system. Without new participants, these Olympic sports will ultimately cease to be played in Scotland. Amendments 195 and 196 would amend the 2007 act to afford archery the same exceptions as exist for fencing. A delay in such provisions being agreed to by Parliament will be a serious risk to thousands of archers in Scotland. Furthermore, the world cup of archery, which comes to Edinburgh this summer, will be threatened. If amendments 195 and 196 are not agreed to, thousands of people will be unable to participate and there will be an economic blow due to withdrawal from future events. Amendment 197 would support sporting goods dealers throughout the country and would ensure that participants continue to have access to equipment. The amendment would require all dealers to conform to the recording regulations under the 2007 act. The change would require a sporting goods dealer to buy one licence from the local authority where their primary place of business is located, which would cover them to operate throughout Scotland. Scottish Fencing has been notified that two major businesses in Scotland that deal in equipment will no longer attend events if they have to purchase a licence for each event. Eastcote Archery, which is a major equipment dealer, has estimated that if it wanted to deal at every event in Scotland, licensing would potentially cost at least £4,800. That would be an unjust charge, particularly given that fencing and archery clubs exist due to the work and time that are given by many volunteers. The sports are played by a minority of people, but that is no reason to legislate in a way that will cause problems for people who enjoy them, or to harm the sports' ability to attract new participants. The 2007 act had the best intentions for society, but to place fencing and archery alongside knife crime would be unfair. The amendments have the support of the Scottish Sports Association, Scottish Fencing and the Scottish Archery Association. I hope that the Scottish Government will give them due consideration, particularly in the light of the forthcoming world cup of archery. I move amendment 195.

I speak in favour of my amendment 188, which was drafted in opposition to the Scottish Government's amendment 63. At stage 2, the Scottish Government lodged amendment 378 with the intention of creating a new statutory offence. My colleague Bill Aitken and a number of members of all parties expressed concern about the wide-ranging nature of that amendment, which could, arguably, have impinged on freedom of speech. The Government withdrew its amendment at stage 2 and said that it would return with a revised formulation at stage 3. The Scottish Conservatives recognise the issue that has arisen from the appeal court ruling in the Harris v HMA case—that some public element must be present for a breach of the peace to occur—and the need to resolve that issue. At committee, the cabinet secretary discussed the concern that the decision in the Harris case had made it more difficult to prosecute criminal behaviour that had arisen from domestic disputes and in other circumstances in which there is not necessarily a public element. It was hoped that the Scottish Government's amendment at stage 3 would have been narrower in its drafting than what we are faced with. I would not suggest that my amendment 188 is perfect; it does not take account of domestic abuse in civil partnerships or abuse towards an ex-partner or a partner who does not reside with the victim, which it should. However, its imperfections aside, its aim was to limit the offence to a person in a defined relationship and to allow more scope for the police and prosecutors to deal with domestic abuse incidents. The scope of the offence that is created in amendment 63 applies far beyond domestic relationships or protecting the police from abuse. It can apply to one-off comments by anyone anywhere in Scotland, and carries a penalty of up to five years in prison. I believe that, in its current form, the offence created in amendment 63 could inadvertently interfere with civil liberties and free speech, as amendment 378 could have. I lodged amendment 188 to encourage further debate on how best to tackle the consequences of the ruling in the Harris case. I agree with the  Government's intention and that action needs to be taken to allow the police and fiscals to charge and prosecute behaviour that would previously have been dealt with under breach of the peace. My amendment, which was originally drafted by Labour's former Advocate General for Scotland, Lord Davidson, goes some way to demonstrating how the scope of such provisions could and should be narrowed. It is important that we act on the issue as quickly as possible, but that is not an excuse for badly drafted or wide-ranging provisions with unintended consequences. We must ensure that the issue is addressed without threatening freedom of speech. I hope that the Scottish Government will seek to withdraw amendment 63 and will go back to the drawing board and introduce a narrower provision that deals with the specific issues that have been highlighted.

The need to understand the problems in our prisons and why rehabilitation is not happening is a problem that we all share and an issue that we all acknowledge across the Parliament, but abolishing short-term sentences is not the answer. It will simply make the situation worse. We need to make prisons better able to rehabilitate and to understand the underlying concerns of reoffending.

The power of Scotland's courts to choose the length of prison sentences that are served by criminals should be maintained free from interference. That is the only way to protect our communities, and it should be the first step in the process of rehabilitation. For those reasons, we cannot support the amendments to create a presumption against short-term sentences, which will do nothing but extend the arm of the Scottish National Party's soft-touch Scotland.

Will the member give way?

Our prisons should serve four functions in society: they should protect the public, deter potential offenders, punish criminals and rehabilitate those who are inside. The most important of the four functions is the protection of the public from those who decide to commit crimes, closely followed by the need to rehabilitate criminals to ensure that we are addressing the underlying causes of their criminal behaviour and stopping the cycle of reoffending.  Short-term custodial sentences will always be a necessary part of our summary justice system. If an individual is a persistent offender or continuously breaches their community sentencing orders, the judiciary may feel that a short prison sentence is the best disposal to fit the circumstances. The possibility of a short prison  sentence needs to remain an option that is available to the courts in dealing with some offenders. The role of the Government should not be to restrict the courts' ability to send people to prison, but to support the courts in their sentencing disposals and to ensure that adequate provisions exist to allow the disposals to be carried out. The courts must be allowed to retain their independence and they should be left in charge of sentencing. If the courts want to use short-term sentencing, Parliament should not prevent them from doing so. It is perhaps true that short-term prison sentences do not achieve much by way of rehabilitation, but surely that means that we need to reconsider how we can use prison time more effectively to deal with rehabilitation, even if just for a few months. Just because there has been little success in rehabilitating some offenders during short sentences, there is no reason to abolish short-term prison sentences altogether.

The Scottish Conservatives welcome the review of sheriff and jury procedure and, like the Scottish Government, thank Sheriff Principal Bowen for preparing this important report. The first duty of any Government is to protect society from those who seek to undermine it and any reform to our criminal justice system must not detract from that aim. However, we welcome any recommendations for streamlining current procedure and encouraging the justice system to be swifter. At a time when there are serious constraints on public expenditure, it is vital that services are provided efficiently and cost effectively. That that very principle guided the report's thinking is important. The review's analysis and recommendations are very helpful, with the main intention of making judicial processes in Scotland more efficient and effective. I am glad that Sheriff Principal Bowen had the foresight to take account  of the likely stringencies imposed by potential public spending cuts. Scotland's sheriff courts are greatly important to our judicial system and, given that business in them is increasing, it is imperative that they work well. The statistics in the review that show that the number of cases heard in sheriff courts has been increasing only underline further the need for a more efficient service. We are pleased that the review recommends the introduction of compulsory business meetings to ensure that the Crown and the defence discuss cases at an early stage in proceedings, and I hope that such a move will result in parties being better prepared for court appearances and will lead to a higher number of guilty pleas being made at an earlier stage. I hope, too, that such meetings will ensure that those who are involved in the first diet meeting are focused on their purpose as a clearing house for cases going to trial. Evidence from areas in which good communications already exist clearly suggests that early engagement and communication between the Crown and defence help to remove churn and adjournments at first diet and increase the number of section 76 pleas. Under the proposed procedure, parties must at the first diet meeting be in a position to reliably inform the court of their state of preparation for the trial, particularly in relation to the availability of witnesses. As Sheriff Principal Bowen makes clear, although the Crown and defence state that they are willing to engage in early discussions, those discussions very often do not occur or are ineffective. I hope that the formal compulsory business meeting between the two parties will increase co-ordination, although I suggest that Sheriff Principal Bowen's claim that it will "generate a culture of effective engagement beyond the CBM ... for the ... duration of the case" is somewhat optimistic. Similarly, the sheriff principal's stress on the need for "a fundamental change of mindset by the Crown and defence so that they appear for First Diets as fully prepared as possible and do not continue the current practice of seeking continuations to finalise their preparations" could be viewed as too idealistic or optimistic. We welcome Sheriff Principal Bowen's analysis of and recommendations on the processing of witnesses, given that the current system in Scotland has been proven to be not particularly cost effective. Indeed, senior police officers have called for reform of the current process, which is based on an ineffective computer system that routinely calls officers to give evidence when they are not required, taking them off the beat and away from protecting communities.  The cost of such inefficiency has been millions of pounds of taxpayers' money. In May, Stephen House, the chief constable of Strathclyde Police, Scotland's largest force, revealed that last year his force spent £4 million on extra wages for officers attending court on their days off. On 21 April 2010, an apparently typical day, 312 Strathclyde police witnesses were called to court, but just 10 gave evidence. Moreover, more than a quarter of those who were called were on leave. Chief Constable House then drew comparisons with a similar-sized force, Greater Manchester Police, which spent under £100,000 bringing officers to court. We will all agree that we can learn from other forces about how to work more effectively with the Crown to avoid calling officers to give evidence on rest days and during annual leave. That should not be happening and the Scottish judicial system should be trying to operate as efficiently as possible and to be responsible in its spending and with its organisational structures. In that light, we are glad that the review recommends that a witness be cited to give evidence only where it is known that the case will proceed to trial and we welcome the recommendation that greater use be made of stand-by arrangements for witnesses and of means to clarify which witnesses will be required for trial. Such a move will be successful in making Scottish courts more time efficient and cost effective. Although issues regarding jurors fall between the scope of the review and the reforms that the Scottish Government is progressing, some of those issues directly affect the efficiency of court procedure. Jury service is an important public duty and, without the attendance of jurors, the justice system could not function. The review illustrates inefficiencies in the jury processes in Scotland, particularly concerning jurors who fail to attend. By not turning up to court after citation, jurors cause more inefficiency and hinder the judicial process. We therefore welcome Sheriff Principal Bowen's recommendation that sheriffs make greater use of the provisions of section 85(6) and 85(7) of the Criminal Procedure (Scotland) Act 1995, under which fines can be imposed on those who fail to attend court to perform their jury service. The evidence that Sheriff Principal Bowen presents for that recommendation is an example of a more efficient judicial process under which such fines were imposed. Not only did that act as a punishment for those who failed to attend, but the resulting media coverage acted as a deterrent to those with similar plans in mind. We recently welcomed the measures in the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill to extend the age limit for jurors from 65 to 70. However, we continue to press the Scottish Government to  extend to 70 the age limit for jurors serving in civil court proceedings. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the findings of the review and hope that the recommendations are implemented successfully. We believe that the people of Scotland deserve a modernised court system. I hope that we will find agreement that the implementation of the recommendations would result in a more time-efficient and cost-effective service to the people of Scotland. I move amendment S3M-6636.1, to insert at end: ", and further recognises that, with constraints on the public expenditure, it is vital to ensure that justice continues to be delivered swiftly and in a cost effective manner."

I welcome today's debate on violence against men. In 2003, during the annual debate on violence against women, my colleague Murdo Fraser asked the then Scottish Executive when it intended to bring forward a debate on violence against men. As much as I welcome today's debate, and I am pleased to be able to take part, I am saddened and ashamed that it has taken seven years for the Parliament to recognise this as an issue that needs to be discussed. It is important to recognise that abuse or violence by one person against another, regardless of the relationship or sex, is always unacceptable. Domestic violence must be one of the worst violations of trust, in which someone turns what should be a loving and caring relationship and makes it perverse, creating a  situation where someone feels torn between their love and the pain that is being inflicted on them. Nobody is in any doubt that the majority of victims of domestic abuse are female: 85 per cent of those who were victims of domestic abuse in Scotland in 2008-09 were, indeed, female and it is vital that we continue to support and work with those that provide services to women who find themselves living in abusive and violent relationships.

Indeed, they are the reported cases. Sorry—in 85 per cent of reported cases of domestic violence, the victim was female. However, that does not mean that we should ignore other groups who find themselves victims purely because they are in a minority. Male victims of domestic violence may be a minority, but it is a growing minority and one that is growing rapidly. More and more men are coming forward as victims of domestic violence. As the minister stated in his opening remarks, in 2008-09 just under 8,000 incidents of domestic abuse in which the victim was male were recorded. That represents an increase, since 2000-01, of 175 per cent, which is an incredible increase and a shocking number of incidents. Fifteen per cent of domestic abuse incidents report a male victim—that figure is too high, and too high to continue to ignore.

I do not have those figures to hand. However, the point that I am making is that it is not just a matter of members of one sex being the victims of domestic violence. Both sexes are affected—they are not affected to the same extent, but there is a growing problem that is affecting male victims, which the Parliament has to recognise. It is disappointing that there is an annual increase in the number of incidents that occur. We should question whether that is due partly to an increased feeling of confidence about reporting such events. If that is so, we should perhaps be relieved that people who are living in such abusive relationships feel able to come forward and seek help. There has been a dramatic increase in the number of males who have reported domestic abuse. If that is due to better reporting, that should perhaps be welcomed. I welcome it for two reasons: first, because of the bravery that is shown by these men and any victim who tries to break the vicious circle that they have found themselves in; and, secondly, because it shows  that stereotypes and stigmas are finally starting to be broken. In 2008-09, 57 per cent of domestic abuse incidents that were recorded by the police involved a victim who had previously been abused. That is why it is vital that we do everything that we can to encourage victims to come forward, regardless of sex, and support them in making a change. The other part of the debate concerns the fact that support has not been made available to male victims of domestic abuse in the same way that it has been for female victims. To follow that point through, does that mean that there has been inadequate provision for female domestic abuse offenders, compared with that which has been in place for males? That is a point that Mary Scanlon raised when the Public Petitions Committee considered this issue. The Scottish Conservatives are not calling for funding to be withdrawn from services that provide security and support for female victims of domestic abuse, but we can no longer ignore the prevalence of violence against men and not address it. Much of the support that is available for domestic abuse victims is targeted at meeting the needs of female victims, because they are the majority and because those who are subjected to domestic abuse require a specific sort of help. However, that latter point also applies to males. The figures show that 43 per cent of men said that their most recent experience of physical domestic abuse was "just something that happens", in comparison with 14 per cent of women who felt the same way. That percentage of women is far too high, but it is unacceptable, in a modern society, for 43 per cent of male victims to believe that. I hope that I have gone some way towards dispelling the myth that seems to persist in some parts of this Parliament that, in supporting provisions that provide help for male victims of domestic abuse, we are in some way not supportive of the provision of support for female victims. That is simply nonsense. That argument does not work the other way round, it does not work on any other topic and it should not be allowed to work on this issue, either. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the Scottish Government's commitment to supply funding for the men's advice line helpline. I especially welcome the Government's commitment to collect statistics and information. Now that we all, quite clearly, recognise this as a problem, if we are to tackle it efficiently and effectively, we need to have a better understanding of what we are dealing with.  I hope that the Scottish Government and other parties can support our amendment, which will enable us to come to a better understanding of the scope of the problem that Scotland faces and how best to address it. I am disappointed in the amendment in the name of Johann Lamont. Frankly, she seems to be fighting the battles of yesterday when this debate has moved on. I move amendment S3M-6531.1, to leave out from fourth "that" to end and insert: ", and requires the Scottish Government to report back to the Parliament with further details on the information collected and what action it plans to take before any future decisions about services are made."

I am aware that the minister is aware of the on-going problem at Peter Scott & Company Ltd in Hawick, which is a manufacturing firm of over 130 year's standing. Like me, the Scottish Government has been in touch with the administrator—indeed, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has done so. I heard only today from the administrator that thousands of pounds of social and holiday contributions that staff have made appear to be at risk. Will the minister and the Scottish Government exert whatever influence they can to ensure that those funds are reimbursed to these important workers in the manufacturing sector?

As other members have already pointed out, we need to acknowledge that our society faces significant challenges when it comes to our relationship with alcohol. Too many people drink more than is good for them, and that has a devastating effect on families, communities and individuals. Everyone in the chamber undoubtedly agrees that action must be taken to address those problems. In that respect, the debate has been encouraging, because it has highlighted our consensus that we must face up to the problems and look for a way for society to address them. As we have already heard from Murdo Fraser and Mary Scanlon, the Scottish Conservatives believe that many parts of the bill, however well intended, do not address the alcohol problem that we face. Murdo Fraser spoke in detail about the problems with the Scottish Government's proposals to introduce a minimum price per unit of alcohol. We all agree that the price of alcohol will  be a key part of addressing problem drinking. The difference is that Scottish Conservatives think that it should be targeted through the taxation system. Apart from the fact that the Government remains unwilling to specify the minimum price that it wants to introduce, its proposals would penalise moderate and responsible drinkers while ignoring the real issue of tackling the underlying problems that cause people to drink heavily in the first place. The minimum pricing proposals would punish rather than help those who decide to drink heavily. Another key problem with the proposals, and one that would have a particular impact in my constituency in the Borders, is that they would create a new cross-border booze cruise culture. Individuals would be encouraged to buy more alcohol than they had planned if it was at a reduced price across the border. That comes into direct conflict with the initial intention of the bill to reduce the quantity of alcohol that is consumed irresponsibly. The new coalition Government at Westminster has made it clear that it is opposed to a system that unfairly penalises responsible drinkers, pubs and important local industries. It would be bizarre for Scotland to introduce a system of minimum pricing that would encourage people to cross the border from Scotland to England, particularly from the Borders and central Scotland, to purchase alcohol. How would I explain to the owner of the local shop in Coldstream, where I live, why the Scottish Government has decided to drive its customers across the border to spend their money in off-licences in England? The minimum pricing proposals would encourage individuals who live in and around the Borders constituencies, such as my own, to make the short journey into English towns such as Cornhill and Berwick-upon-Tweed to purchase their alcohol. There is considerable evidence from the Republic of Ireland that individuals are prepared to cross the border into Northern Ireland to make savings on their purchases and there are real concerns that the same behaviour could result in Scotland. Evidence from Ireland has also shown that one in four households have made the short journey across the border into Ulster to purchase alcohol from retailers to take advantage of reduced prices. As Helen Eadie highlighted, Asda's best performing store in the whole of the United Kingdom is in Enniskillen, where alcohol is about 25 per cent cheaper than it is in Dublin, from where many of the customers travel. The bill, if enacted, would act as a catalyst for cross-border trade, taking away valuable business from Scottish retailers at a time when we should be giving them full support.

The bill, if it is enacted, would make matters even worse. It is important that we should be working with our colleagues south of the border to put forward a coherent proposal to minimise the impact of cross-border trade-offs. We have concerns about other aspects of the bill. As members have heard, we oppose the social responsibility levy, which seems to be an arbitrary punishment on retailers, whether or not they act responsibly—I was particularly taken by the point that Mr Brown made in his closing remarks. The vast majority of retailers take a keen interest in preventing irresponsible behaviour by their customers; after all, they are often integral parts of the communities that they serve. Such a levy would also threaten to undermine much of the good work that many retailers do in supporting local sports clubs, charities and other organisations. That is another example of where the legislation imposes a blanket penalty, even for those who have a responsible relationship with alcohol—in this instance, responsible retailers. As I said, there are areas of considerable agreement on the way forward. We agree that the practice of selling alcohol at below cost price should end. We also agree that better education on the dangers of binge drinking may be effective. However, it is clear that we really need better enforcement of the existing regulations. For the small number of retailers who flout the law, there should be tougher penalties and a crackdown on breaches of licensing rules. Other members have highlighted the bill's intention to allow licensing boards to increase the legal age for buying alcohol in particular areas. As I argued during a previous debate on the SNP's proposals to increase the age limit, I cannot understand the situation in which an 18-year-old can vote, go to war and get married but cannot be trusted to buy a bottle of wine in an off-licence. There is no evidence to support the SNP's minimum pricing policy, so we urge the Parliament to support Murdo Fraser's reasoned amendment at decision time to give us the opportunity to have a more coherent and joined-up approach to deal with this serious problem.

I commend Hugh Henry for putting this issue on the political agenda, and for the work that he has undertaken to get his bill this far. Many workers in Scotland work in threatening environments. It is wrong that anyone should feel intimidated just for doing his or her job. It is estimated that 38 per cent of people working in a public-facing occupation in Scotland have suffered verbal abuse from a member of the public in the past 12 months. The number of assaults reported against people who are working in local government rose from 9,121 to 9,910 in 2009 alone. The campaigns that have been undertaken by the unions have done much to highlight the fact that antisocial behaviour towards such employees is not only unacceptable but against the law—and that is the key point: it is already against the law.  During the debate on Hugh Henry's motion on the freedom from fear campaign, it was rightly highlighted that the origin of most attacks is connected to the sale of alcohol. The conflict that arises from shopkeepers and shop workers policing the sale of age-restricted products is frequently the starting point of the abuse that they receive. Looking at the proposal to introduce a bill to make such attacks an aggravating factor, we need to know how that would fit with other aggravated offences. It is important to say that the courts can and do take account of a wide range of factors, in addition to the type of offence committed, when determining the appropriate sentence for a particular offender. Any previous convictions that the offender may have, their age and their motivation are just some of the factors that the court will consider. The courts might regard some of those as mitigating factors, possibly leading to a lesser sentence, while others might be treated as aggravating factors, possibly leading to a greater sentence. However, we as legislators might decide that to send out a clear message, to courts and to society more generally, a particular factor should be considered as aggravating an offence. The concept of creating statutory aggravation for offences committed out of prejudice towards a specific group in our society is not new. We already have legislation for crimes motivated by racial hatred in the Crime and Disorder Act 1998. More recently, in section 74 of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003, the Scottish Parliament created an aggravation for crimes motivated by religious prejudice. More recently still, we have passed the Offences (Aggravated by Prejudice) (Scotland) Act 2009, which introduced new statutory aggravations that may be applied in cases in which there is evidence that a crime has been motivated by malice or ill will based on the victim's actual or presumed sexual orientation. As we have heard from others, the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005 created the specific offence of attacking an emergency worker, or someone who is assisting them, who is responding to emergency circumstances. Hugh Henry's proposal would extend the tougher protections in the 2005 act to workers who provide a service to the public and, in so doing, come into face-to-face contact with them. My concern is that I do not know where all this will end. To quote from a recent article in The Herald : "If you are white, heterosexual, not religious, don't work for the emergency services and are not disabled, you've just become a minority group in Scotland. In the eyes of the Scottish Parliament, if you belong to the above grouping and you are the victim of an assault - verbal or physical - the courts don't have to treat your attacker as harshly as they would otherwise."  Like the Herald journalist who wrote that, I am baffled by the approach that we are taking. The victim feels the same pain regardless of whether they fall into any of the categories of aggravation. No group is entitled to any less protection and that means that no group should be entitled to any extra. Indeed, no one, regardless of how we categorise them in society, should have a crime committed against them. The removal of crime from our communities should surely be our objective, rather than the constant addition of aggravating factors. Of course, at certain points in history, we need to send out powerful messages that certain behaviour is not acceptable. Clearly, there can be an important role for any legislator in sending out that message. As a general rule, however, we should not use legislation simply as a tool to send out a message. As we said when the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Bill was debated, it would have been much more logical to allow the common law to do what it does best—providing flexibility of application according to the severity of the offence. The independence of our courts is one of the fundamental principles of our justice system, so we need to be careful not to be seen to be micromanaging the role of judges and sheriffs. While I have concerns about the principles behind Hugh Henry's proposed bill, I also foresee serious concerns about some of the specific details of the bill and how it would work in practice. Those concerns might be dealt with when we see the draft bill, but we need to consider carefully how they will be dealt with. In particular, some of the definitions in the bill might be unclear. It is important that legislation is precise enough not to lead to confusion in its interpretation. For example, how would we define a worker who provides a face-to-face service to the public? Would someone who works in a call centre be covered? How about a teacher who is teaching a class of young people? In the age of internet shopping, are we sure that the definitions will be wide enough to cover that and the developments that might happen in future? Is the protection only for those who work in the public sector, or would it extend to those in the private sector?

The point that I was trying to highlight is simply that it is difficult to define and pinpoint which workers would be protected and which would not. Why should a call-centre worker who is the subject of a serious verbal assault not receive the protection that a worker in a face-to-face environment would receive under the proposed bill? We need to be clear about why people are excluded or included, especially as the common law already provides many of the protections that Hugh Henry seeks to create. I cannot see why there should be any distinction between workers in different sectors. The bill could discriminate between victims of crime on account of their job. That would be a serious mistake for the Parliament to make. In conclusion, Mr Henry continues to raise an important issue that we must consider carefully. Equally, we must consider carefully whether legislation is the best tool to achieve the outcome that we all seek. I move amendment S3M-6350.1, to leave out from second "Parliament" to end and insert: "Scottish Government must ensure that the courts have a full range of disposals to deal with such antisocial behaviour including sentences of six months or less."

We are under no illusion about the damaging effects that serious organised crime has on our society. Colleagues from all parties have given us examples of how it impacts on the communities that they represent, but we should remember that such criminal acts affect not only those who are directly involved in them, and not only those in our communities here in Scotland or across the United Kingdom, but people across the world—from the poppy fields in Afghanistan to the drug plantations in Columbia.  Given that 48 per cent of serious organised crime groups in Scotland are involved with the importation and/or distribution of drugs, it is impossible for us to distance ourselves from the atrocities that are carried out in other countries in an attempt to supply illegal drugs in this country. I doubt that many of those from mainstream society who like to snort the occasional line think about their actions as helping to fund the drug cartels in Columbia or consider which groups own the poppy fields in Afghanistan. There are an estimated 52,000 problem drug users in Scotland and the wider economic and social costs of drug abuse are £2.6 billion. The cost of dealing with drug-related crime is £684 million. We are talking about huge figures. Serious organised crime makes victims out of every single one of us. I am not talking about those who buy the occasional dodgy DVD or a fake handbag—even those who are not directly involved feel the impact. The cost of fraud to every man, woman and child in Scotland is estimated to be £330 per year so, thus far, in my lifetime, it has cost me just under £11,000. There is therefore a responsibility on everyone, at every level, to ensure that they do not involve themselves in such criminality. The Conservative amendment recognises that there is a need continually to adapt the methods that we use to attack serious and organised crime, just as the criminals adapt their methods. The area is constantly evolving, changing and growing and our deterrents and monitoring must do likewise. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the strategy that was produced by the serious organised crime task force, and of course we welcome the continued co-operation between the different agencies involved. Serious organised crime is a much more sophisticated type of criminality and it takes many guises. We cannot rely on the police or the SCDEA alone to tackle it; a lot of different agencies need to work together, with a joined-up approach, sharing information and having a common goal. Only when we take a more sophisticated attitude to tackling this type of crime can we hope to make progress. It is vital that crime is not seen to pay. The problem with serious organised crime is not only that it appears to pay if someone gets away with it, but it pays big bucks. It can be a very tempting road to go down, especially in the current economic climate. We must therefore ensure that people do not see criminality as a viable alternative in order to make ends meet. Our young people must be at the forefront of our minds when we think about that challenge, because they are the most vulnerable to being influenced when they see known criminals—the Mr Bigs—rolling around in expensive cars, owning a massive home or taking several holidays a year.  Our young people need to see healthy, proper role models who have worked hard and legitimately for their outcomes. I welcome the work that the task force is doing in that area and the recognition that it is about not just targeting the criminals, but preventing people from involving themselves in such pursuits through education and the redirection of energies into more positive pursuits. We welcome the recent "Joint Report on the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002", which was highlighted in the Labour amendment and mentioned by Richard Baker. We have long argued for the quick seizure of assets from those who have funded their lifestyle through their criminality. We need to send out a consistent message that crime does not pay. I am afraid that the Scottish Government has not always achieved that consistent message. Part of our efforts to tackle serious organised crime should be to deter people from getting involved in crime in the first place. The SNP Government, aided and abetted by its friends in the Liberal Democrats, falls short in that regard, especially in the area of sentencing. An end to automatic early release and a return to honesty in sentencing are vital to reinforce the message that crime does not pay. Only then will we send would-be criminals that consistent message. It is all well and good to educate people about why crime and serious organised crime is wrong, to share information, to work together and, as the strategy puts it, to divert, disrupt, deter and detect, but unless these people feel the heavy force of the law and are not released on home detention curfew less than halfway through their sentence to continue their activities, I fear that we will not address properly the underlying concerns.

To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on exempting common ridings and other similar community events from the provisions of the Police, Public Order and Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2006. (S3O-9765)

I acknowledge that it was the previous Liberal-Labour Administration that introduced the 2006 act, but I hope that the cabinet secretary recognises the importance of the historic common ridings and festivals to their communities in the Borders, and that he acknowledges the many hundreds of volunteers who organise and manage the events. Many volunteers and groups feel that the regulations are now strangling their events with red tape and extra administration. Will the cabinet secretary agree to meet me and some of the organisers of the events to discuss their concerns and to seek to agree a way forward?

I have listened with great interest to the debate, and—perhaps not surprisingly—have been left feeling rather disappointed by the Liberal Democrats' attitude to protecting the public and our police officers in violent and threatening circumstances. It is no great surprise that the Liberal Democrats have such an attitude. When they were in Government we saw crime and offences soar to more than 1 million, with a 12 per  cent increase in all crimes and offences, a 5 per cent increase in violent crimes and a 44 per cent rise in drug crime. They failed to get to grips with the justice system then, and it appears that they are still failing in their attitude even now. As my colleague Bill Aitken said, published statistics show that the number of assaults against police officers rose between 2000 and 2007 by 58 per cent to 12,974. Our police officers do an amazing job and should be commended and encouraged for that. They put themselves in dangerous situations every day, and there is an obvious risk in their job. All are accepting of that, and chief constables have to ensure that their officers are equipped to deal with any risks that they face. Their protection must evolve to keep them as safe as possible, and safety measures should develop as crime and the potential risks develop. The Scottish Conservatives therefore fully support the use of Taser technology being an operational matter for chief constables.

We are happy to leave it to chief constables to decide how they operate in their areas. It is appropriate that the officers who are using the Taser equipment are trained to know when it is appropriate to use it and when it is not. It is an operational matter for the police in their respective areas. The reason for piloting the extended use of Tasers by response officers is to enhance their ability to protect the public, the subject, and the officer, and in particular to reduce on-duty assaults and the number of days that officers are absent following an on-duty assault. It is also interesting to note that the subdivisions that have been selected for the pilot have been chosen because of the high number of police assaults in those areas in comparison with other areas in the force. The police have a duty to protect the public, and that must be done in as safe a way as possible. We acknowledge that Tasers are powerful weapons, that they must be used proportionately and that clear guidelines must ensure that they are used only when absolutely necessary. That is why appropriate training is imperative and we must ensure that self-protection training and equipment is always up to date. The Scottish Conservatives have made it clear that we want to rebalance the justice system, put victims first, and move to increase the public's confidence in the criminal justice system. Only when we return to honesty in sentencing, and  ensure that community sentence orders are robust and enforceable can we begin to fix the problems that have been caused in our justice system. The police's principal aim is to protect the public, but to be able to do that they need to be able to protect themselves. It is therefore appropriate that we should look at Tasers and other technologies so that we can achieve that aim. I support the amendment in Bill Aitken's name.

I would also like to start by recognising the hard work that the Equal Opportunities Committee has done on the inquiry. I imagine that, at times, examining the subject was not easy or comfortable. The debate has given us a deeper insight into how members view female offenders, why females offend, how they should be dealt with, who should be in prison and how to prevent reoffending in the future, to name just a few of the issues that have arisen. Everyone in the chamber agrees that we must ensure that, once someone has been sentenced to punishment, we do everything possible to attempt to rehabilitate them and give them positive options and choices in life. Every opportunity must be taken to support them to  make the right decisions, although it should be recognised that there will be a few who, for whatever reason, will not or cannot make the right choice to improve their situation. I have visited some of Scotland's prisons—admittedly, not Cornton Vale—and I have always found such visits to be informative, particularly with regard to how people struggle to cope with their new environment. I will now touch on some areas of the report. Some of the statistics in the report regarding Cornton Vale are astonishing. The one that I would like to pick up on is the statistic that 98 per cent of inmates had drug addiction problems—a point that was also made by Angela Constance. However, it was interesting to read the evidence from Sue Brookes, the head of offender strategy and partnership development at the SPS, who stated: "drug use will never be prevented absolutely, and it is a mistake to try to do so."—[ Official Report , Equal Opportunities Committee , 5 May 2009; c 1011.] I recognise and understand, as did the committee, that certain security measures might not be suitable for use on all offenders, especially those who have a history of abuse. However, trying to prevent drug use absolutely would not be a mistake, and that should be the aim of the SPS. It is unacceptable that prisoners, regardless of their sex, have access to illegal drugs while in custody. The SPS must and should do everything possible to prevent drug use in prison. The Scottish Conservatives have a zero tolerance approach to drug use in prison. No matter how long a prisoner is in custody for, it must be ensured that as much information and help as possible is provided to them to help them to get off drugs. Substance abuse is a long-standing issue and, in many cases, results in people being trapped in the revolving door to prison. People who want to get off drugs should be given help and encouragement to do so. Whether their sentence is six months or six years, it should make no difference.

I accept that point and will deal with the issue shortly. The report examines issues such as mental health, families outside prison and substance abuse, which I have already touched on. It is important to examine those areas and others if we are to understand why prisoners offend in the first place and what it is that needs to be done to prevent them from reoffending.  Although many prisoners get offered support in prison and have access to all sorts of courses and classes, it can be quite a different matter when they are released, as James Kelly pointed out. I have heard many stories about the difficulty that ex-prisoners face when they find themselves back in society trying to secure a job and a home and to create a new life. Often, it is easier to return to bad habits, especially if their friends and members of their family are themselves offenders or substance abusers. It was interesting to read what the report said about throughcare, the importance of which we recognise. There is clearly a possibility for greater use of the voluntary sector in that area to ensure that needs are met. I also welcome the establishment of the reducing reoffending programme, and I look forward to hearing the cabinet secretary report back to Parliament on it. I will finish on a point that some might find controversial. The statue of justice is a woman bearing a sword in her right hand and a set of scales in her left. In many depictions she is wearing a blindfold, which represents the belief that the law must be administered without fear or favour. If someone commits a crime and the sentencer believes that the only suitable disposal is a period of imprisonment, they should be allowed to pass that sentence regardless of the offender's wealth, rank, race, age, sexual orientation, religion or gender. There are many victims in our criminal justice system, and sometimes those who commit crimes are the victims of their own circumstances or situation in life. We have a duty to ensure that they have every opportunity to change their behaviour and that they are given the support to make the right choices. We believe that in a lot of cases, a custodial sentence—even one of six months or less—is the only suitable disposal, especially as community sentence orders are continuously being breached. We note the report's recommendations, but if we do more to tackle rehabilitation in prison, and drug and alcohol addiction more widely, we will help female prisoners, male prisoners and wider society.

I, too, begin by congratulating Christine Grahame on securing this important debate. I apologise to you, Presiding Officer, and to other members, as I need to leave for another engagement after making this speech. The post office network has experienced significant change over recent years, and I am pleased that we now have the opportunity to examine proposals that could help us to create a more sustainable network. I will concentrate on the key role that the post office network plays in rural communities such as those in the Scottish Borders and on what we can do to maintain a sustainable network for future generations. I am especially pleased that the motion recognises that post offices are of particular importance in rural areas such as mine in the Borders. Although the figures for the usage of branches in urban areas might be higher than those for rural communities, post office branches in rural towns and villages are often the hub of the local community. That became increasingly apparent during the consultation on the network change programme in 2008. I was contacted by thousands of constituents who were concerned  about losing their post office branch. Hundreds of residents attended public meetings that were organised in the communities that were affected by the proposed closures. The representatives from the Post Office Ltd were left in no doubt as to the extent to which local residents value the service that they receive at their local post office branch. Many people were frustrated that those closure proposals could have left them without local access to services such as benefits and pensions, road tax renewals and general postal services. However, there were also specific situations that were unique to individual communities that highlighted the value of having a local post office. For example, in one town, a large number of small businesses relied on a local and reliable postal service to send out mail orders to customers. In another village, it was clear that the proposals would lead not only to the closure of the post office but to the loss of the local shop, which had become the community hub such was the high regard in which the sub-postmistress was held. Across my constituency, there was a feeling that the proposed changes were another example of the decline in rural communities. As is recognised in the recent report by the National Federation of SubPostmasters, the potential for diversification by using the post office network to deliver existing services—whether from the United Kingdom Government, the Scottish Government or local councils—is huge. Despite the recent closure of branches, the post office network's unrivalled reach over all parts of the country is a tremendous resource that should be used to its full potential. As the recession forces Governments and local authorities to reassess the way in which services are delivered, the post office network is in a prime position to help to deliver those services. Like Christine Grahame, I want to highlight the experience in Wales, where for several years now a post office diversification fund has made available grants of up to £50,000 to branches in the most deprived or most isolated areas. Introducing a similar model in Scotland could encourage enterprise and help to create businesses that are more diverse and, therefore, more resilient to fluctuating trends in the economic cycle. To conclude, I am pleased that we have had an opportunity to debate this important topic. I look forward to hearing the minister's response on how the network can be supported.

A mix of opinions has been expressed in the debate. I suppose that the real point underlying the issue is how we balance public money spending restrictions with our wish to create an ideal. Such difficult questions undoubtedly will continue to arise with increasing pressures on the public purse. There has been some investment in recent years in our prison estate—in HMP Addiewell, HMP Bishopbriggs and new developments at the HMP Edinburgh site—but many of our prisons have not been fit for purpose for some time. Aberdeen prison is one such establishment. The Scottish Government must find the best and most cost-effective way of improving and potentially expanding the prison estate without compromising safety, security and rehabilitation. Contrary to popular belief, we do not believe in locking up criminals and throwing away the key. In an ideal world, prisons would not be needed, as there would be no crime, but we are discovering that ideals are not and cannot always be met. As long as there is crime, there will be a need for the disposal of custodial sentences—even sentences of six months or less, I say to the cabinet secretary. We must ensure that, once people have been sentenced to such punishments, everything is done to attempt to rehabilitate them and give them positive options and choices in life. The creation of HMP Grampian at Peterhead may not be ideal. Several MSPs across the  chamber have highlighted many problems that the move is likely to result in, and we share many of the concerns that have been expressed. The Scottish Government will need to demonstrate how it plans to address those concerns. Evidence to the Public Petitions Committee on the petition stated that approximately 80 per cent of those who are serving custodial sentences in HMP Aberdeen are from the Aberdeen area. The cabinet secretary has pointed out that only around 50 per cent of those from the Aberdeen area who are serving a custodial sentence currently do so at HMP Aberdeen. A 70-mile round trip to visit a partner or parent is not an easy journey, especially where public transport links are not great. I know from the prison visits that I have made throughout the country and from talking to prison governors and staff that sometimes the only thing that can pull a person out of the vicious circle of reoffending and a life of crime is their family, particularly their children. We recognise all the issues and problems that are raised with relocating the prison at Peterhead. However, the planned prison will allow better access visits for female prisoners and young offenders who are currently held in Cornton Vale, Polmont and Glenochil. The new arrangements will be considerably more convenient for their families. However, I look for an assurance from the Scottish Government that the specialists who are required to deal with such offenders will still be available at HMP Grampian. There cannot be a prison in every town and every city, and there will always be difficulties in ensuring that every prisoner's needs are met. It is a question of striking the right balance. I have great sympathy for those who will find it difficult to visit a relative in HMP Grampian and for prisoners who will not have as much access to their families as others, but there is no ideal solution. I fear that the Peterhead solution is perhaps as good as we will get.

To ask the Scottish Executive what it is doing to support the textiles industry in Hawick and the Scottish Borders. (S3O-8854)

Following the minister's meetings with me in the Scottish Borders and the cabinet secretary's visits to Hawick, they will know what a precarious position the textiles sector is in. Since the cabinet secretary's most recent visit to the town, the new Hawick development committee, of which I am a member, has met regularly to help to develop plans to regenerate the town and, in particular, to consider the future of the textiles industry. However, there is growing  frustration that the Scottish Government is not doing more to protect and promote that important industry. I therefore ask the minister or the cabinet secretary whether they are prepared to meet me and other representatives from the Hawick development committee to discuss what additional support might be made available.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is helping to tackle antisocial behaviour in the Scottish Borders. (S3O-08759)

The minister will be aware of the negative effect that antisocial behaviour can have on a community. Having visited the Borders this week, he will also be aware of the tremendous work undertaken by the various agencies to tackle antisocial behaviour and, in particular, to ensure that those guilty of destructive behaviour are held to account, through antisocial behaviour orders or other disposals. Does the minister agree that by scrapping sentences of six months or less, the Scottish Government will be removing from the courts a vital tool in tackling those who persistently commit antisocial behaviour and taking away the possibility of respite for those who have to live with that behaviour day in, day out?

I start by apologising to Parliament for my having briefly to leave after the opening speeches in order to meet constituents. Today's debate has been constructive and has shown the Parliament's continuing commitment to the eradication of domestic abuse and violence against women. The debate has addressed the range of domestic abuse that happens every day and how it affects the women who are the victims and the children and families. It is a distressing fact that in 2009, domestic abuse remains a  problem that faces a significant number of our population: it is estimated that one in five women in Scotland has experienced domestic abuse at some stage in her life, although—as Mary Scanlon pointed out—it is not just women who suffer domestic abuse. I pay tribute to the many organisations that work with women, children and men who experience domestic abuse and offer them support, help and hope at what must be the scariest and darkest point of their lives. Despite the efforts that are made by Government agencies and by numerous voluntary organisations, there seems still to be a sector of society in which domestic abuse persists. We need therefore to continue to keep the safety of victims—principally, women and children—central in our fight against crime. Domestic violence is an atrocious and unjustifiable crime. It is unacceptable and it is a violation of basic human rights. Victims experience not only physical torment; there are psychological and emotional costs, not just directly to the victim but to the children who have to listen to the damaging way in which their father speaks to their mother, or who are terrified to upset their dad because it might result in a beating for their mum. As was pointed out by Marlyn Glen and Margaret Mitchell, we need also to be aware of the financial implications for the criminal and civil justice system, the health service, social services and housing. Domestic violence is a heinous crime that impacts on all areas of society. It is therefore especially important that we continue our commitment to ending domestic violence. Everyone deserves a life that is free from fear. As we heard from Johann Lamont and Cathy Peattie, domestic abuse affects people regardless of their social background, job, age, ethnic group and ability. Five per cent of victims of domestic abuse are under 18, and 2 per cent are 61 or over. As the minister pointed out, recent statistics show an 8 per cent increase in reported domestic violence over the past year. That figure undoubtedly creates mixed feelings. It is good that more people are reporting domestic abuse and trying to retake control of their lives, but does that figure also mean that domestic abuse is happening more frequently? Taking into consideration that many incidents are never reported, that is a truly saddening figure. On average, women are likely to experience 35 assaults before seeking help. According to statistics that were published last week, 13 per cent of those who recorded incidents of domestic abuse with the police had done so at least 11 times previously. Each day, 147 incidents of domestic abuse are recorded by the police and in 57 per cent—more than 30,000—of the cases that  were recorded last year, the victim had previously recorded incidents of domestic abuse. We should, in fighting domestic violence, therefore continue to promote the four Ps—prevention, protection, provision and participation—so that we and other groups that are involved in the fight can help those women escape the vicious circle of domestic violence. That is of paramount importance, because women who have experienced abuse are five times more likely to attempt to commit suicide, three times more likely to be diagnosed as being depressed or psychotic, 15 times more likely to abuse alcohol and nine times more likely to abuse drugs. As we heard from a number of members, including my colleagues Bill Aitken and Mary Scanlon, the effects on children who live in situations of domestic abuse are profound. In nine out of 10 cases the child is in the same room or the next room when domestic violence takes place, but children do not have to see it to be affected by it. Children who live with domestic violence are at increased risk of behavioural problems and emotional trauma, as well as of mental health difficulties in adult life. We need to look more closely at prevention education in relation to domestic violence. A recent Scottish study involving more than 1,300 young people aged 14 to 18 found that one third of young men and a sixth of young women think that the use of violence in intimate relationships is acceptable in certain circumstances. The same study found that 17 per cent of young women had experienced violence or abuse in their relationships with boyfriends. We must therefore continue our efforts to teach boys and girls alike that violence is never acceptable. We must remedy that cultural aberration and end the harmful cycle. The work that is done by the domestic abuse courts in Glasgow has brought benefits not only to victims but to families, so the Scottish Conservatives call on the Scottish Government to consider how that can be replicated throughout Scotland. I fear that among all our efforts to end domestic violence, the Government's decision to axe short sentences in its Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill will have a negative impact on domestic abuse sufferers. As David McLetchie explained during the stage 1 debate last week, that is an important point. Only 12 per cent of the 5,000 people who were convicted of domestic violence in 2007-08 received custodial sentences, 19 per cent received community sentences, 39 per cent were fined and 29 per cent were merely admonished. As Mr McLetchie noted, if there was ever an argument for short-term sentences, those figures surely provide it. The perpetrators who do  receive custodial sentences are more often than not repeat offenders. A custodial sentence can provide a much-needed respite for the victims and an opportunity to escape their violent environment. Many women are trapped in a vicious circle of abuse, and it is our duty to provide a criminal justice system that will protect them by not putting their abusers back in their homes. The Scottish Conservatives believe that domestic abuse is a deplorable and inexcusable crime that continues to have a negative impact on children and families across Scotland. Although legislation definitely has its place in the fight against domestic abuse, the answer does not rest solely in our powers to legislate. We must encourage a cultural shift concerning domestic violence. We must continue to spread the message that domestic abuse—whether against women, children or men—is an intolerable violation of human rights that should not be accepted in Scottish society today.

To ask the Scottish Executive what it is doing to support public transport in the Scottish Borders. (S3O-8555)

As we have already heard, in my constituency in the Scottish Borders dozens of local bus routes will be lost to remote and rural communities unless financial support continues to be provided to the bus companies concerned. Although the minister says that considerable funding is available, the council has made it clear  that it does not receive sufficient funding from the Scottish Government to help support the services in question. Does the minister acknowledge the importance of those routes? What support, in addition to that which he has already outlined, will he provide to Scottish Borders Council?

The bill is complex and epic in the proportions of what it covers. The Justice Committee is to be congratulated on its efforts to scrutinise the bill. Many provisions are not contentious and will simply tidy existing procedures in the criminal justice system. We welcome most of those. The journey to reach the stage 1 debate has been interesting. I am sure that we have all read the many consultation papers in anticipation of the Scottish Government's bill. I remember clearly the debate on the Scottish Prisons Commission's report in September last year, when we discussed in depth the recommendations to reduce the average prison population to 5,000 and to scrap sentences of six months or less in favour of community supervision sentences. As members have done today, I expressed then my concern about where that approach to custody would take us. Despite what the cabinet secretary said today, I am disappointed that the Scottish Government has not heeded those concerns and dropped the proposals from the bill.

I want to make progress. As I said, we welcome some proposals in the bill. For example, we welcome the moves to crack down on the use in prison of personal  communication devices, such as mobile phones. I recently visited several prisons and I was struck by the problems that communication devices present to our Scottish Prison Service. Prisoners share the hand-held phone device but have their own SIM cards, which makes detection harder. The use of communication devices in prison enables prisoners to continue their criminal activities as before. My colleague Ted Brocklebank will consider that in detail later. We warmly welcome the extension of the upper age limit for jurors. That will bring the law of Scotland into line with that of the rest of the United Kingdom and will create a bigger pool of jurors on which the Scottish Court Service can draw. I anticipate that David McLetchie, who has campaigned hard on the issue since 2005, will have something to say on the matter in his speech. I will spend some time focusing on the sentencing provisions in part 1, particularly the creation of community payback orders, and the presumption against short periods of imprisonment or detention. We welcome the creation of CPOs, which will help to simplify the current range of community sentences, but the Government must ensure that CPOs are not only adequately resourced, as the Justice Committee pointed out, but properly enforced. Last year, 35 per cent of community service orders were not completed successfully and 35 per cent resulted in a breach application. With statistics like that it is not unsurprising that the public do not have much faith in community sentences, let alone the criminal justice system. The Scottish Conservatives are not anti community sentencing. Believe it or not, we do not want to see more people locked up in prison. We want to stop offending and, more particularly, reoffending. We believe that community sentences can play an important part in our sentencing regime. However, if they are to work, they must be rigorously enforced and complied with. We have called for the creation of a community court in Glasgow. Such a court would ensure that justice was served and was seen to be done, and it would give offenders every opportunity to make positive choices, change their lives for the better and get out of the vicious cycle of persistent offending. It is therefore disappointing that the Scottish National Party Administration has rejected the setting up of a community court in Glasgow. It should be remembered that imprisonment serves four functions in our society: to protect the public, to deter, to punish, and to rehabilitate. I accept that a sentence of six months or less may not give an offender access to the full range of rehabilitation facilities that someone who is imprisoned for a longer period can access.  However, as important as rehabilitation is—and I believe that all people need to be given an opportunity to make positive changes in their lives—it is not the only purpose of imprisonment. Prison is also to deter people from reoffending; to show them that their behaviour is unacceptable to society and that the consequence of their actions is for them to lose their liberty for a set time as a punishment; and to protect our public and give them respite from a persistent offender or someone who is deemed to be a risk.

We need to understand why they are repeat offenders and why we are not using their time in prison to rehabilitate them more effectively. The argument that short-term sentences are not working is not a reason for abolishing them completely. Those sentences should be more effective as a deterrent. Short-term sentences offer sheriffs and judges the option of dealing with persistent offenders who continuously breach community sentence orders by giving them a short, sharp shock to ensure that they do not reoffend. They also provide respite to communities that are blighted by the actions of the accused. Short-term custodial sentences will always be a necessary part of any summary justice system. Judges and sheriffs do not send people to jail lightly.

I hear members querying my reference to respite. A number of my constituents rely on short-term sentences to provide them with respite from the blight that individuals cause to their communities. Members should not underestimate the effect that short-term sentences can have on our constituents across Scotland. The licensing parts of the bill also require further consideration, particularly their impact on charitable organisations and community groups. The Justice Committee convener mentioned that point. Recently, like other members, I received an e-mail from the Church of Scotland Guild voicing its concerns about the effect that the bill would have on their events and activities. Many local groups run small fairs, coffee mornings and other events at which they invite local businesses to display goods. They also run rallies and ask local bookshops to provide a bookstall during the event. Although the group does not make a profit on many of these occasions, the new licensing  measures will require the procurement of a licence. Local authorities will have discretion over charging, but there are concerns that groups in different parts of the country may be treated differently—which could lead to inequality and unfairness—and that having to get a licence may mean that they will not put on such events in the future. That would be unfortunate for not only the groups, but the local, mostly independent shops, which may suffer a negative impact. In addition, the Scottish Sports Association voiced concerns about the impact that the bill would have on its ability to promote sport throughout Scotland. The SSA noted that the bill would make it unviable for sport clubs that work on a not-for-profit basis to continue to promote their activities or raise funds. Many of the funds that clubs receive from the sale of goods to the public are accrued in relatively small amounts. If they are required to obtain a market operators' licence for such fundraising activities, it is clear that the situation may become unviable. We should encourage and not punish clubs that are being proactive in the pursuit of additional funds. The SSA also believes that the measure will act as a deterrent to volunteering. Without the work of many thousands of volunteers, many sports clubs would not survive. Those sports clubs provide coaching, competition and youth development opportunities to local communities. We should help to facilitate such community involvement. In September, the Scottish Government published "On your marks... Get set... Go: A games legacy for Scotland", in which it stated its ambitions for Scottish sport in the preparation for and years beyond the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow. It speaks of a partnership between the Government and groups such as the SSA in delivering those sporting objectives in the community. How can the Government truly support such statements if it then places additional controls and financial burdens on clubs that are working to promote sport throughout Scotland? We must recognise the effect that the bill could have on charities and community groups in the hope that we will not hinder their ability to continue to do good work in their local communities. The Scottish Conservatives will vote for the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Bill tonight at decision time, but we look forward to seeing the amendments at stage 2 that I am sure will be lodged and which we hope to support.

In September, I spoke in the parliamentary debate on the fire and rescue framework. In that debate I paid tribute—as did members from all political parties—to the immensely courageous and selfless devotion of our firefighters. We can never say too much about the job that those brave men and women do every day, or about their ability to take on the changes and the challenges that the service and society have thrown at them in recent years. We should not forget that fire crews risk their lives to save the lives of others. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the "Scotland Together" community fire safety study. The most striking statistic in Her Majesty's fire service inspectorate for Scotland's annual report for 2007-08 was the 62 per cent increase in deaths over the previous year. That figure is shocking and placed Scotland near the bottom of the league tables on fire statistics in Europe. If there is a way in which we can identify a pattern in fire deaths, we should use it to target people in that group with better education and preventive measures. That is not to say that deaths from fires will be completely eradicated. Accidents will always happen, but we should try to reduce risks wherever possible. The 62 per cent rise in fire deaths cannot and should not be considered in isolation. Over the past 18 years, the number of fire deaths as a  whole has decreased. The study states that Scotland's fire and rescue service "must be commended on their significant progress in reducing these events over many years." That is undoubtedly true. It also states that a single event can have a high impact on the fire death figures because of the relatively low numbers that are involved. It is therefore correct to suggest—as the study does—that we should in the future consider the figures as part of an overall package of statistics. It is also worth pointing out that comparisons between Scotland and the rest of Europe are not as black and white as might at first be thought. The report gives the example of the Netherlands, which highlights the considerable inconsistencies in how countries in Europe record the data. That said, the report highlights certain fire trends, which can allow our services to focus on problem areas that are within their control, and consider how best to move forward and establish best practice in working with other authorities, agencies and the third sector. To understand fire trends, we must look more widely than fire safety. Health and social factors are identified as key indicators in identifying individuals or groups that may be at risk from fire. For instance, the study concludes that alcohol consumption, smoking, mental health and issues to do with mobility and being older play significant roles in determining the number of people who die as a result of fires each year in Scotland. Issues to do with the number of people who live in areas of severe deprivation are shown to impact directly on the number of fire incidents. Given the projected increase in the number of people who live alone and the ageing population, it is likely that Scotland's fire and rescue services will require to direct future strategies, resources and initiatives towards those groups. That said, although the report highlights those issues, it does not say how those factors have impacted on the rise in the number of fire deaths since 2005. It is also worth noting from the study that Scotland has a higher rate of secondary fires than the rest of the United Kingdom. The estimated cost in 2004 of each fire and rescue service response for a secondary fire is £2,000, which equates to £61 million per year for the Scottish fire service, based on the service attending an average 30,000 incidents per year. Furthermore, that total does not include any other costs that may be incurred—not only financial costs, but the costs to communities and the environment. Although we rightly focus on the need to save lives, we should not forget the financial costs involved.  I will focus on a couple of points. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the study's recommendation for more formal data sharing across agencies in order to identify better those who are at risk, and for measures to create better fire prevention education and to put in place any initiatives that might be needed. In September, when debating the "Fire and Rescue Framework for Scotland", I welcomed the fact that the Scottish Government had committed not to micromanage all the services. I highlighted the differences between fire brigades in city centres such as Maryhill in Glasgow and those in my rural constituency in the Borders. However, I went on to say that the report "In the Line of Duty" stated that due to the differences in definitions and recording across the United Kingdom, it is near impossible to create an accurate account of on-duty firefighter fatalities. That, in turn, has meant that there has been very little analysis of the figures or attempts to understand or evaluate the causes. The "Scotland Together" study has also emphasised the need to create better standardisation and ensure that all the services are discussing best practice, not only in recording statistics from firefighting but across all the areas in which they are now involved. The need to work with other agencies on fire safety should be given greater emphasis in strategic planning. The study talks about areas where joint working arrangements and local partnerships have worked and are working extremely well. If we have to look at a way of prescribing standards or creating a framework or strategy to work within, let us first look at where these relationships are well developed, what they are doing right and how it can be further rolled out to suit local needs in other areas of Scotland. We should also not forget the possible role of the third sector in this important area. As time appears to be on our side today, I will raise two additional points. I again raise the issue of the impact that the fire safety regulations are having on bed and breakfasts and self-catering accommodation providers throughout Scotland, but particularly in the Borders and in Dumfries and Galloway. I have raised the issue with the minister in the past. The Presiding Officer, Alex Fergusson, has also raised the matter on behalf of a number of his constituents. The concerns centre around the guidance notes on which compliance and enforcement are based and which are resulting, in some cases, in expensive and unnecessary fire safety measures being put in place that are not proportionate to the risks. I acknowledge that the regulations were introduced by the previous Liberal-Labour Administration and that the minister has recognised the difficulties that the regulations are  creating for people who are operating in the sector. However, it would be useful to have an indication from the minister about the direction of travel on those regulations as the industry needs some clarity.

Indeed, I welcome that news from the minister and I am sure that many people in the sector in my constituency and throughout Scotland will also welcome it. My last point regards costs. The Fire Brigades Union has raised concerns about the cost implications that an increase in fire safety campaigns will have on other services that the service currently provides. The study raised the point that in Scotland we spend less on community safety than does the rest of the UK. The FBU made the important point that fire safety programmes are currently unevaluated and the starting point must surely be to look at how well that work is currently being done, what is working well and what is not. The dramatic rise in the number of fire deaths has perhaps given us a wake-up call; we need to do more to reduce deaths and injuries that are caused by fire. However, it is a complex problem and it cannot be resolved easily. I hope that the debate will allow us to explore some of the options that might be available to us to make Scotland safer by ensuring that all agencies are working together. I move amendment S3M-5172.1, to insert at end: "and calls on the Scottish fire and rescue authorities to consider the benefits of joint working."

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to improve the management of sex offenders. (S3O-8367)

: In answer to Bill Aitken in the Parliament last week, the cabinet secretary said that the Government has significant doubts about the value of a system of satellite tracking of people on the sex offenders register, principally because although the technology can show where people are, it does not reveal what they are doing. However, the technology could have a number of benefits, particularly when used as part of a package of measures to improve the monitoring of known offenders. For example, it could be used to identify an individual in the vicinity of a school or similar establishment. Will the cabinet secretary therefore agree to look again at the potential benefits of the technology?

The First Minister will be aware of the campaign to reopen stations on the east coast main line to bring services to Berwickshire in my constituency. Does he agree that the change of ownership of east coast mainline rail services gives us an opportunity to renew that campaign? Will he commit the Scottish Government's full support to ensure that that part of Scotland once again has rail services?

This debate on supporting families has allowed us to explore the issues and challenges that impact on almost all of us who live in Scotland today. It is important that we discuss and give time to these issues, and address how we will continue to support the family unit. For the vast majority of us, the family is where we learn fundamental skills for life. Physically, emotionally and socially, it is the context from which the rest of life flows. However, family stability in Scotland, and throughout Britain, has been in continuous decline for many years. Increasingly, adults and children face the challenges of families that are fractured, fatherless and dysfunctional. Today, families in Scotland face a range of pressures: unemployment, debt, substance abuse, crime and relationship breakdowns, to name just a few. One in four children in Scotland is growing up without a father and some 200,000 Scottish children are growing up in poverty. Between 40,000 and 60,000 children in Scotland are affected by their parents' drug use and, according to a new report out this week, 137,000 Scots children now have no parent in work. As my colleague Liz Smith stated at the start of the debate, we believe that the family is the most important building block in society. We can no longer stand by and do nothing while that important institution is allowed to be undermined. Governments should not dictate to people how they should lead their lives or tell them what to do, but they should encourage what is good for society, address what is negative and support what is positive. Today's debate has been about considering what needs to be done to support the stable family formation. Where do we go from today? What is the state of the family unit, particularly in Scotland but also throughout the United Kingdom? Scotland is not alone in having to tackle this problem, but we seem to be alone in western Europe in believing somehow that marriage is just another  family formation and that it is not relevant or important. Everybody else out there thinks that it is important enough to recognise and celebrate, so we are unique in our approach. Also unique to this country is the incredibly high level of family break-ups—it is way beyond the level anywhere else in western Europe. We have more families breaking up, more lone parents and more teenage pregnancies. If we are doing something right, I would love to know what it is, because nobody else wants to copy what we are doing. I do not believe that anyone here wants to promote that record. It is clear that something is going very wrong. The Labour members and others in this chamber might not want to think that it is their problem. However, we are not alone in highlighting these concerns. Tom Harris, the Labour MP for Glasgow South, recently stated on his blog: "I can no longer pretend that the army of teenage mothers living off the state is anything other than a national catastrophe ... Such young women see parenthood as one way of achieving a level of independence and self-worth. And they're right, because that's more or less what they get: a flat and therefore some privacy, an income for the first time in their lives." We all know that the problem has been getting steadily worse during the past decade, yet Governments here in the Scottish Parliament—and the Westminster Labour Government in particular—have failed to stand up and take the action that is required to address it. In fact, Labour has the proud record of making the poorest poorer, of creating greater inequalities and of raising youth unemployment. So, what would we do about it and what should the Government, both here and at Westminster, do about it? My colleague Liz Smith has spoken about the importance of improving the parenting skills of parents who need help, and of the need to support the voluntary sector in its work in that area. Believe it or not, some things are better done by the third sector than by the state. She also spoke about the need to improve people's chances of getting back to work by re-energising the jobs market and the economy. We heard from Jackson Carlaw about the importance of universal health visitors. Perhaps one of the most important ways we can help the family unit is by recognising marriage and civil partnerships in the tax system. When people make a public commitment to support each other for better or worse, it is right for the tax system to recognise it. The family structure and process matters. A lifetime commitment can make a significant difference to the behaviours, attitudes and lives of our children, but our tax system does not recognise that or the importance of interdependence between family members and the  way in which it, in turn, benefits wider society. The couple penalty in tax credits discourages low-income couples from making the move from simply living together to making the commitment of marriage, thus implicating the welfare state in the rise of family breakdown. Indeed, comparative European research indicates that welfare benefits can drive up the number of lone-parent families and encourage solo living. Some countries treat people only as individuals for income tax purposes but most advanced western countries—such as Germany, France and the United States—recognise the benefit that marriage brings and reward it in their income tax system. This country should be no different. We continue to let down each new generation by not ensuring that those values are carried forward. Our job as politicians is to ensure that we allow our society to respect and encourage the family unit. If we do that, our society will be better off as a result.

I congratulate Shirley-Anne Somerville on securing this important debate. As she and Des McNulty said, Scotland and Poland have a rich history. Throughout Scotland there is a strong Polish presence, in the workforce and in the culture. People from Poland who have made Scotland their home have shown genuine willingness to integrate into Scottish society—and have done so with marked success—while at the same time celebrating their own culture. Their presence has been hugely beneficial to Scotland's economy; they have provided additional skills to the labour market while making an impact on Scotland's culture. Polish restaurants are dotted throughout the country and several areas have Polish festivals. Many football players from Poland play for Scottish clubs. Polish has become the second most spoken language among Scottish schoolchildren. Scotland is an attractive destination for Polish students who want to study abroad, because of our enduring ties with Poland and our strong academic reputation. I am told that there is even a Polish tartan. Several Scottish towns and cities are twinned with towns in Poland. Edinburgh is twinned with Kraków, and Duns in my constituency is twinned with Żagań in the west of Poland. There is a special relationship, which is steeped in history, and we should continue to commemorate and cultivate it. As the motion says, on 1 September 1939 three Polish destroyers of the Polish destroyer squadron sailed into Leith. Their presence was one of many Polish presences in Scotland during the second world war. The Polish army made a significant contribution and thousands of its soldiers were stationed in Scotland—indeed, the majority of Polish soldiers in the United Kingdom were stationed in Scotland. The Polish 1 st Armoured Division, which was formed by General Maczek, was stationed in the Borders, near Kelso and Duns in my constituency. The division quickly gained a reputation for smartness and efficiency and made a valuable contribution to allied efforts. The Polish Military Staff College, near Peebles, ran air force studies, and an operational training unit for Polish pilots was formed in Grangemouth. Polish pilots fought with the Royal Air Force in the battle of Britain and the Polish navy aided the Royal Navy in the battle of the Atlantic—a plaque that commemorates the Polish sailors who died in the endeavour is on a monument in Prestwick.  The presence of Polish people during the second world war not only provided a significant military contribution but introduced many skilled professionals to Scotland, many of whom chose to stay here after the war. As the Soviet Union began to expand its sphere of influence into Poland, Polish people sought refuge in Scotland. There is a strong Polish presence in our education establishments. In 1941, the Polish school of medicine was established in Edinburgh to train students from the Polish forces in British methods of medicine. The school closed in 1949, but aspiring medical students from Poland can still benefit from the Polish school of medicine memorial fund, which was established at the University of Edinburgh in 1986. Numerous students at the University of the West of Scotland in Paisley can study at Polish universities in towns such as Warsaw and Kraków, as a result of links that were cultivated by Professor George Blazyca, who came from Hawick. Examples of such co-operation can be found throughout Scotland, for example at the Glasgow School of Art, the University of Strathclyde and the University of Stirling. As a result of the relaxation of EU movement restrictions, at least 60,000 Poles have moved to Scotland during the past four years. Some chose to live in cities but many decided to make their home in more rural parts of Scotland, such as Duns, Kelso, Melrose and Galashiels, in the Borders. Regardless of where they settle, they are often noted for their admirable work ethic and dedication. They have supplied workers to the building and construction and tourism and hospitality industries and to the health services, especially in dentistry—an area in which their help was much needed. Many young Poles come to Scotland for education. They want to learn English, acquire new skills and gain experience before they return home. That illustrates the evolving nature of the relationship between the two countries. The Polish community in Scotland is an important presence. Our relationship with the nation itself is also important. Poland is an important trading partner for Scotland and we should support the nation as it grows and continues to strengthen its economy and democracy. Poland is often our ally in the European Parliament and we should aim to continue such an important relationship. From Bonnie Prince Charlie, whose mother was Polish, to Voytek the bear, who was adopted by the Polish soldiers who were living in Scotland, to Polish contributions to medicine, education and business, Scotland's connection with Poland is well established. It is a relationship that we should seek to preserve as both nations benefit from the  exchange. It is therefore appropriate that the Scottish Parliament should celebrate that connection tonight, and I again commend Shirley-Anne Somerville for securing the debate.

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has had with Lothian and Borders Police about rural policing priorities. (S3O-7972)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, although crime in small rural communities is not on the same scale as it is in our cities, it can often cause just as many problems and be a real blight to the people who are affected by it? We all welcome the 1,000 extra police officers whom the Scottish Conservatives secured in last year's budget, but can the Government give a commitment that rural communities such as those in the Scottish Borders will not be deprived of those extra resources for the benefit of larger towns and cities?

I endorse the comments of the minister and others on the tragic loss of Ewan Williamson. The Scottish Conservatives welcome the publication of the "Draft Fire and Rescue Framework for Scotland 2009". Many changes have been made to the responsibilities of our fire and rescue services since publication of the first framework in 2005 by the previous Government, not least because of the events that unfolded at Glasgow airport in June 2007, when we suddenly became aware of how vulnerable we all can be in the face of a terrorist attack. The way our fire and rescue services responded to that situation was testament not only to the bravery and selfless commitment of their workers, but to the efficiency and adaptability of those services. Not long after my election to the Scottish Parliament, I spent a day with firefighters in Hawick in my constituency. It is a day that I will not forget, partly because I was able to fulfil a long-standing ambition to wear a fireman's hat. More important, I was able to experience first hand the dedication of the men and women who are concerned to do their job. Their work involves daily risking their own lives to save others, and it is both physically and emotionally demanding. Alongside the stories of the people who are directly involved in the fire and rescue services are those of their families and the impact that working shifts or responding to pagers can have on family life. A friend of mine whose father was a firefighter in Glasgow spoke of how, as a young child, she would wake up in the night worried about her dad on night shift. As she got older, she would check the news each morning to find out whether there had been any big fires that he might have had to respond to. As we thank and pay tribute to all the men and women who work in the fire and rescue services, we should not forget their families. Each of the eight Scottish fire and rescue services has its local needs, so I welcome the Scottish Government's commitment not to micromanage all the services. It is easy for me to compare the differences between the fire and rescue services in my more rural constituency with those in the city centre of Glasgow. If I remember correctly from my student days—which were not all that long ago—no Saturday night was complete without a 4 am call-out by Maryhill fire brigade to Murano Street halls because a student had decided to have toast after a night out. Each of the 388 fire stations or volunteer units in Scotland, which range from city centre multipump stations to remote rural volunteer units where equipment may be stored in a small garage, needs to have flexibility. It is important that we do not adopt a one-size-fits-all approach.  As I have already said, the roles and responsibilities of the fire and rescue services are constantly evolving. No longer do firefighters' duties amount to responding to fires and occasionally getting a cat out of a tree. Fire-raising is an area of recorded crime that continues to rise—it has risen by 88 per cent over the past 10 years. Fire and rescue services now have to deal with fire-related crimes and antisocial behaviour, so we welcome the Scottish Government's continued emphasis on community safety education and awareness campaigns, and its development of a range of initiatives to help the public understand not only the dangers but the consequences of fire-setting behaviour. Another way in which our fire and rescue services have had to evolve is that they must be ready to deal with major incidents that result from terrorism or extreme weather. I am reassured to see that a review of existing resilience capabilities is being undertaken, with a view to enabling the Scottish fire and rescue advisory unit to assess regularly the total level of resilience capability. Although I have emphasised the importance of flexibility and of local services being adjusted to local needs, there are some matters in which it is important that we take a national approach. We must be assured that if another major incident were ever to take place in Scotland, the eight authorities would have a consistent and joined-up approach. Eight fire and rescue authorities doing things in eight different ways could create major difficulties and compromise safety. We welcome the Scottish Government's commitment to ensuring that high-quality training and support are provided, but those training opportunities must be rolled out across Scotland and must not be focused only on particular authorities. We need to be sure that when new recruits begin their work, their training and development is continued and supported to the same standards, regardless of where they are located. In March this year, I lodged a motion on the FBU's report "In the Line of Duty". I am pleased to say that it rightly received cross-party support. The safety of our fire and rescue services is an issue that should bypass party politics. The report said that because different definitions and recording methods are used across the UK, it is nearly impossible to create an accurate record of on-duty firefighter fatalities. That has meant that very little analysis has been done of the figures, and that there has been little by way of an attempt to understand or evaluate the causes of those fatalities. Standardisation in recording and investigation of fatalities and injuries to firefighters could prevent future deaths. It is important that our fire and rescue service authorities communicate  with one another, not just across Scotland but across the UK. The Scottish Conservatives will support the Scottish Government's motion. We agree with the principles of reducing risk, responding effectively and improving the safety of communities, which can be done more effectively by giving fire and rescue services the freedom to address local needs and by looking at where the services can work together and learn from each other.

As members have said, it is important that we do not forget the horror that unfolded on the night of Wednesday 21 December 1988. I will certainly not forget being told by my father, as he  collected me and my brothers from the school Christmas disco, that a plane had come down in the small Borders town of Lockerbie. When we arrived home, the television news showed the flames licking around the homes on Sherwood Crescent. As a 12-year-old, I could not have imagined the horror of what happened to those poor souls as they fell from the sky. Although the passengers would have lost consciousness through lack of oxygen, forensic examiners believe that some of them might have regained consciousness as they fell to lower altitudes. One forensic scientist told Scottish police that he believed that the flight crew, some of the flight attendants and 147 other passengers survived the bomb blast and might have been alive on impact. None of those people showed signs of injury from the explosion itself or from the decompression and disintegration of the aircraft. For many days, Lockerbie residents lived with the sight of bodies in their gardens and streets as forensic workers photographed and tagged the location of each body, to help to determine the exact position and force of the on-board explosion. Mr al-Megrahi was convicted of that horrific crime on 31 January 2001 and was sentenced to life imprisonment. We should not forget that fact. The Scottish Government and others, most notably in the BBC, have stated that most of the Scottish families affected were in favour of Mr al-Megrahi's release on compassionate grounds. While it is correct to say that the small number of family members who have chosen to speak out are indeed in favour, it is important to record that most people in Lockerbie would prefer to keep their counsel and say nothing. It is therefore wrong to misrepresent the views of those who were so horrifically affected by the events of 1988. Saying nothing is not the same as agreeing with the release of Mr al-Megrahi. The debate has been useful in that it has allowed members to explore ideas in depth. That was not possible during the questions that followed the ministerial statement last week. More questions have been raised since the statement was made, particularly in light of information in the documents that were released yesterday. I hope that the First Minister will use his closing remarks to answer some of the many key points that remain unanswered. For example, why did Mr MacAskill reject the option of keeping Mr al-Megrahi in Scotland, when the police had indicated that they would deal with him if required to do so, and given that Mr MacAskill said that cost was not a consideration? Did the Scottish Government know that a UK Government minister had suggested that the Prime Minister did not want Mr al-Megrahi to die in prison? Did the  cabinet secretary or his officials leak to the Sunday Post or the BBC the story that Mr al-Megrahi was to be released several days before the official announcements? I find it bizarre that Prime Minister Gordon Brown has been unable to say what he thinks about the ruling on Mr al-Megrahi, when so many people in other countries have commented on the Scottish Government's decision. He can find time to write a glowing eulogy for an American senator, he can comment on the death of reality TV celebrity Jade Goody and he can take time out to appear on "American Idol", but he cannot find time to comment on the release of the only man to be convicted of the worst terrorist attack on British soil. The decision has international ramifications and Gordon Brown should be more forthright and honest about what he thinks. The cabinet secretary has made much of the fact that it was for him to decide whether to allow Mr al-Megrahi to go free. He has said on numerous occasions during the past two weeks that the decision was his alone. Of course it was legally the decision of the cabinet secretary; I do not dispute that he was the man who was permitted in law to make the decision. However, we need to know more about the motivation behind Mr MacAskill's final decision. I think that most members think that the decision was wrong and that Mr al-Megrahi should not have been released. For that reason, the Salmond Government has not done enough to prove that its decision to release that mass murderer was based on sound evidence and advice.

The cabinet secretary said that the views of the UK Government were sought on the prisoner transfer agreement. To assist our understanding of the decision-making process on the compassionate release order, will he ensure that all communications between the Scottish Government and the UK Government will be made public? Alternatively, will he confirm that there was no such correspondence or communication?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it is supporting the building of affordable housing in the Borders. (S3O-7496)

There is a great shortage of affordable housing in the Borders and in many other rural communities throughout Scotland, but there is also great frustration in smaller communities about the housing allocation policy. Local people are finding it hard to get accommodation in their own communities. Often, they have to live in inadequate accommodation or move many miles away because of the shortage of local accommodation. That can have a destabilising impact on many small communities. Does the Government plan to do anything to address those concerns?

I congratulate Christina McKelvie on securing the debate. The social work changes lives campaign is to be praised for its important work in helping to create a more positive public perception of the valuable work that social workers and social care staff carry out. Social workers throughout Scotland provide much-needed care to the more vulnerable members of our society. They are the people working day in, day out with the elderly, dysfunctional families, substance misusers, vulnerable children and others who are in need of professional support. Statistics show that one in eight people have used social work services, which proves that social work affects many more lives than is often assumed. Nevertheless, the public image and perception of social workers often fails to reflect the importance of their role. I am therefore pleased that more is being done to address that important issue. Media coverage of tragedies in recent years, such as the cases of Baby P or, in my area of the Borders, Miss X, has created an atmosphere of terror among many social workers. It has instilled a fear that they might be wrongly blamed when something bad happens. Media speculation and inaccuracies—even storylines in television programmes—generate myths about the profession. The increasing blame that is placed at the door of social workers reduces morale and the number of people who apply for jobs in this very necessary field. We heard today that 7 per cent of social work posts in Scotland are vacant. Of course, when a tragedy occurs, it is only right to hold an inquiry into what went wrong, so that we can learn from the mistakes and make the appropriate changes. However, social workers do not stand and operate alone; they co-operate daily with the police, health services and local authorities, so responsibility for cases that go wrong must be shared. Occasionally, we hear a hero story about the police, doctors, nurses or teachers, amid negative coverage. Social workers seem to feature in the news only when things go wrong. Incidents are reported with such ferocity that the whole profession is tarred. However, for every one bad news story, social workers ensure that thousands of children are helped, thousands of families are  supported and thousands of lives are improved. The social work changes lives campaign highlights the unsung heroes in our society who work constantly and quietly for our benefit, to make Scotland safer, healthier and better. The campaign challenges a deep-rooted attitude that will take some time to shift. The social welfare system in Scotland is among the best in the world. The Social Work (Scotland) Act 1968 and the decision in 2002 to give free personal care to older people are examples of that. However, it is time that we recognised the social work profession and changed the negative attitudes that surround it. I congratulate Christina McKelvie again on securing this important debate. I look forward to hearing other members' views on this important issue.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has evidence that shared headships for rural primary schools impact positively on the education of children. (S3O-7387)

The minister will be aware of the proposals in the Scottish Borders to link several primary schools under shared headships. That has caused considerable concern in Newcastleton, where the local primary school is to be paired with Stirches primary school in Hawick, which is more  than 20 miles away. Does the Scottish Government acknowledge that it is, wherever possible, preferable to have a dedicated headteacher based on site in rural schools such as Newcastleton primary school and that local authorities that have large rural areas, such as Scottish Borders Council, often require additional resources to support such schools?

What is the Government's view on whether a dispensing GP practice may be required to cease dispensing when a community pharmacy application has been successful?

I am grateful to have the opportunity to debate an important motion. I acknowledge the presence in the public gallery of a number of residents of Berwickshire, together with one of the Chirnside general practitioners. However, I know that the debate has much wider significance and involves many communities throughout Scotland. The focus of the debate and the point of concern is the suitability and robustness of the National Health Service (Pharmaceutical Services) (Scotland) Regulations 1995, which provide the framework against which NHS boards consider pharmacy applications. The issue is not whether community pharmacists should be allowed to operate at all, or whether in every case a dispensing GP practice is better than a community pharmacy. The question is how the regulations operate and their ability to produce the best outcome for each individual community. It is important to understand how we have arrived at the present situation. Changes to the pharmacy contract in 2006 allowed community pharmacies to provide additional services over and above the traditional dispensing activities. In general, that has made community pharmacies much more profitable as businesses. The result is that more pharmacy applications are being made in smaller communities such as Chirnside that were not previously a viable business location and in which patients are currently served by a dispensing practice. Under the current regulations, dispensing practices are not allowed to offer the same breadth of services as pharmacies can. The regulations, which control the pharmacy application process, were to be updated with the introduction of the new pharmacy contract in 2006,  but so far they have not been altered since 1995, despite the considerable changes that have been introduced by the new contract. A review of the regulations is therefore long overdue. I will return to that point later. One of the greatest failures of the regulations is that dispensing practices are excluded from the NHS boards' pharmaceutical care services planning process. A GP's right to dispense has no legislative protection and can be withdrawn by the NHS board at any time. When a pharmacy application is accepted, the dispensing practice can lose its right to dispense with immediate effect. That sudden impact on income can have a considerable effect on the practice and its patients. When a practice loses its right to dispense, the patients in the community will gain access to a community pharmacy service, but that could come at the cost of losing valuable GP services or, in some cases, a branch surgery, leaving the population without a comprehensive GP service. The Minister for Public Health and Sport has disputed that point in the past. However, I have spoken to a pharmacist who is also a GP, and she is clear that if the dispensing income goes, it is very likely that staff will lose their jobs and the practice infrastructure could be in danger. At a time when many rural communities have already lost many services, such as their local post office, it is important that other vital services are not lost. What needs to be done to address the concerns that exist? The Scottish Government has announced that it intends to review the regulations. I welcome that, but a number of points need to be addressed in that review. I am sure that other members will deal with that matter, so I will deal with three principal issues in the limited time that is available to me. First, it is essential that patients and dispensing doctors are allowed to participate in the pharmacy applications process. In Chirnside, there was great frustration that the views of local residents were not actively considered. More than 1,100 people signed a petition and more than 600 people wrote letters to NHS Borders about the application. The failure to address those concerns adequately completely undermined the decision-making process. The Government has acknowledged that problem in the consolidated regulations by putting a duty on NHS boards to take reasonable steps to consult on applications, but more needs to be done. Secondly, the regulations must more clearly dictate the applications process. I will not dwell too much on that point in relation to Chirnside because of the possibility of a judicial review, but it was clear to me that there was considerable uncertainty throughout the process at the highest  levels in the health board about how the process was to be managed. For example, why can only one application be considered at any one time when nothing in the regulations requires that? That approach was adopted in the Borders. When that point was tested, the GPs were told that it was due to custom and practice. With so few applications under the regulations, it is hard to know what custom and practice were being relied on. Surely there is no reason why competing applications cannot be considered at the same time. Indeed, in 1995, NHS Borders heard two pharmacy applications on the same day in respect of Greenlaw, which is also in my constituency. However, that precedent was not followed. Thirdly, there is confusion about whether the regulations prevent the dispensing GPs from continuing to dispense even once a community pharmacy application has been successful. The British Medical Association has recommended that once a practice has lost its right to dispense, there should be a transition process to allow practices to plan for future service provision. However, in correspondence with me, the minister stated: "the decision to allow a pharmacy to open does not of itself require the dispensing practice to cease dispensing". It would be useful if the minister were to clarify that point in her closing remarks. It would also be useful to know why the market for pharmacy services needs to be restricted in the way that the regulations anticipate. In the Chirnside case, which I know most about, why cannot the GPs continue to dispense either as dispensing GPs or with their own community pharmacy in competition with the new operator? Why should the market be restricted by the way in which the 1995 regulations are being interpreted? Although any review may not be able to unpick the questionable decisions that have already been made, a review can deal with some of the on-going issues that face GPs in my constituency to ensure their long-term survival and the continuation of the tremendous medical services that are provided in the district of Chirnside. I look forward to hearing other members' views on this important issue.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will publish the decision of the public inquiry into the proposed wind farm at Fallago Rig in Berwickshire. (S3O-7286)

In this case, the local authority's planning process has been exhausted and a local public inquiry has been held, but discussions are apparently continuing behind closed doors regarding the serious concerns that have been raised by the Ministry of Defence about the wind farm. Both Scottish Borders Council and East Lothian Council have expressed serious concerns about that process. Does the minister agree that the application has highlighted the lack of transparency that can exist in the planning process for wind farm developments, particularly given the Scottish National Party's policy on wind farms?

Like other members, I begin by welcoming the progress of the bill to stage 3. The quality of evidence throughout and the measured and reasonable contributions from witnesses during the bill's earlier stages are to be commended. The bill provides important clarification in a number of complex and delicate areas relating to sexual offences and the law of rape. The law on rape and other sexual offences has been long overdue for clarification and updating. As Nigel  Don said, academics and petitioners have been critical of the Scots law on rape for many years. The bill undoubtedly modernises the law on rape and sexual offences. Creating a non-gendered approach to rape and widening its definition will, we hope, create a more supportive environment in which victims can come forward. The inclusion in the bill of other forms of sexual penetration, including the use of an implement, is appropriate, and that will be seen as an important step in the evolution of the law on rape and sexual offences. By addressing offences committed on mentally disordered persons and children and offences committed by people who are deemed to be in a position of trust, the bill provides a voice for vulnerable sections of society who are less able to speak out for themselves. Although we acknowledge that children are maturing earlier, it is right that the age of consent has been kept at 16 and that there will be legal consequences for those who do not abide by that law. That view is supported by church groups and others, and it was appropriate for the Scottish Government to retain in the bill the option of criminal prosecution for consensual penetrative sexual conduct between older children. Once it is enacted, the bill will go a long way to addressing and changing the blame culture that surrounds rape and sexual offences in our society. The view that women might invite rape by wearing revealing clothes or by being flirtatious, or if they are drunk, must be completely rejected—a point that was made by Johann Lamont. Some problems in this area of law will remain harder to solve. For example, the definition of consent as "free agreement" does not eliminate the issue that the line between true consent and submission is still somewhat elusive. It is likely that problems will always occur in this complex area of the law. The bill is a step in the right direction, clarifying definitions and providing support for a wider range of victims, but it is important to acknowledge that more is to be done outside the legal arena to tackle attitudes towards the victims of rape. We look forward to supporting the bill at decision time.

Like other members, I congratulate Patrick Harvie on bringing this bill to stage 3. Mr Harvie, along with others, has long campaigned for the creation of new statutory aggravations to protect those who are the victims of a crime because of their actual or presumed sexual orientation, transgender identity or disability. Patrick Harvie lodged the final proposal for the bill in November 2007, which means that he has had to show a great deal of patience and dedication in getting the bill to this stage.  Hopefully, he will feel some satisfaction when the bill is passed this afternoon. Our passing of the bill will send a clear message to those who carry out criminal action that is rooted in the hatred of another human because of who they are perceived to be that we will not tolerate such behaviour. One of the most striking features of hate crime is its ability to affect not only an individual but an entire community of people who find themselves turned into victims because of another's intolerance. A culture of fear is created in a community—a fear because a part of someone's identity that is beyond their control is hated by another. Behaviour of that sort is unacceptable. We already have statutory aggravations for offences that are motivated out of prejudice of some kind. The offence of racial hatred was created in the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 at Westminster, and the offence of religious prejudice was created in the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 2003, which my colleague David McLetchie talked about eloquently during the stage 1 debate on this bill. As Robert Brown and others have said, the flexibility of the common law allows aggravating factors to be taken into account. Why, then, do we need to create statutory aggravations for sexual orientation, transgender identity and disability? The first reason is that, although the common law exists, it is not being enforced. Evidence that was presented to the Justice Committee demonstrated that, although the law was available to deal with aggravations, it was very rarely used, and few people who were subjected to hate crimes had experienced its use. The creation of aggravated offences sends out a clear message that society will not tolerate such an expression of hatred. Hatred itself is not criminal. We cannot police people's thoughts, and we should not limit freedom of expression, but we can target and highlight criminal conduct that is motivated by such hatred. The legislation will give specific recognition to victims who are targeted as a result of hatred of their actual or presumed disability, transgender identity or sexual orientation. It will also bring our law into line with that of the rest of the United Kingdom. As Patrick Harvie stated, the bill will also ensure the accurate recording of aggravated offences of the types that are mentioned in the bill. Until now, that has not been particularly robust, as those offences have been recorded as breaches of the peace or assaults. We cannot deal with a problem effectively until we know its full extent. The recording of this kind of information will give those who deal with crime far more insight into the motivation behind the crimes and will place them in a more powerful position to tackle them.  Attitudes may be constrained by laws and sometimes led by them but, ultimately, it is only by fostering a shared feeling of responsibility that we can promote a tolerant society where people are considerate towards others and their feelings, and where they exercise judgment in what they say and do. However, as Michael McMahon pointed out, we should not believe that laws are a panacea. We will never outlaw hate, any more than we can outlaw anger, but we can set a careful framework to outlaw hatred that does harm, while protecting fundamental liberties. We are happy to confirm that we will be supporting the bill tonight.

We welcome the Scottish Government's cashback for communities scheme and the  millions of pounds that have been collected via the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 and redirected into a range of activities for young people, from sport to culture and the arts. Criminals must learn that crime does not pay, but taking that lesson and turning it into a positive venture for our young people is very powerful indeed. It is important that we encourage our children and young people and direct them to take part in positive community activities. All too often, the lifestyles of those who are involved in criminal activities can look tempting to our young people: nice house, big car, money to burn and what is perceived to be the respect of the community but is much more often fear. In times of economic hardship, what may appear to be a quick and easy way to make money will be all too tempting to many. Our young people have energy to burn, and the different activities and schemes that are on offer allow them to focus that energy in rewarding and positive ways. In the Borders, for example, cashback for communities money is helping to fund Selkirk Dry Bar Association's drop-in youth centre for 12 to 18-year-olds, which has games, computers and music, and provides other activities such as dance and movement workshops, visits to other places and a cookery course that covers everything from cooking to shopping and budgeting. The cashback for communities programme is also providing the £2 million that has been invested in sports facilities in and around deprived areas and the £1.4 million that has been invested to deliver free rugby playing and coaching opportunities. As Bob Doris has pointed out, with the London Olympics looming and the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth games only five years away, cashback for communities money gives us a great chance to engage with our future athletes, to educate them about healthy lifestyle choices and to help to develop their sporting abilities. An important by-product of the scheme is that it brings positive role models to the attention of children and places them at the forefront of their minds. Many of our children are brought up in areas where, as I have said, fear is mistaken for respect and the local gang leaders or Mr Bigs are the only ones with money and commodities. In those areas, crime becomes a viable employment choice and is run like a business. When there are no other obvious options, why would a child aspire to anything else? Crime does not pay—that is the message that the Government needs to send out. Last year, the Crown Office reported that it had recovered almost £23.5 million since the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 came into force. We congratulate the Crown Office on that, and on the important work that it  and the Procurator Fiscal Service do in recovering ill-gotten gains. However, we must go further. Serious organised crime is a major problem in Scotland. Our police and the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency do a great job in tracking down people who attempt to shroud themselves in legitimate business ventures and hide behind layers of criminals, thinking themselves untouchable. The best lesson that we can teach our children is that such people are not untouchable and that they cannot be protected by their assets. Those people deal in human misery, exposing children to drugs and exploiting vulnerable people through prostitution or trafficking, and we need to launch a fresh offensive. As members, such as Margaret Curran and Michael Matheson, have said, we need to consider what is being done in other countries, such as Canada, and particularly Ireland, where the Criminal Assets Bureau uses a multi-agency, multi-disciplinary approach and, most important, the onus is on the criminal to prove that their assets were got through legitimate means, rather than the burden of proof being on the prosecuting authority, which is the situation that our Crown Office is in. The cashback scheme is a worthwhile venture and it is making a difference, showing young people that crime and antisocial behaviour are not the way forward and opening up a range of options and vocations and a different kind of future for many of our young people. The Scottish Conservatives want more money to be made available so that we can expand on the 278 youth projects that currently benefit from cashback for communities funding. However, to do that we might have to make further changes to our legislation so that we can go after Scotland's Mr Bigs and show that crime does not pay. We will support the Government's motion and the Labour and Liberal Democrat amendments.

I, too, congratulate Robert Brown and the Liberal Democrats on raising such an important issue. As we have heard, the case of Madeleine McCann and the plight of her parents, Gerry and Kate McCann, have made the public much more aware of the important issue of missing children. However, it is important to remember that Gerry and Kate McCann are not the only parents who have been left inconsolable by the disappearance of a child. I know that Gerry and Kate McCann have studied best practice in the United States, which is internationally acknowledged to be the world leader in recovering missing children. Since 2003, nearly 400 abducted children in America have been recovered, and Belgium and France have now adopted the American approach. Some 80 per cent of abducted children in the US are recovered within the crucial first 72 hours. Early intervention is the key. We welcome the European Parliament's April resolution to adopt the written Declaration of the European Parliament on Emergency Cooperation in Recovering Missing Children. We should record that it was my colleague Struan Stevenson MEP who initially proposed the written declaration in the European Parliament, before it was jointly sponsored by Edward McMillan-Scott, who is a Conservative, Diana Wallis, who is a Liberal Democrat, and Labour's Glenys Kinnock. Having spoken to Edward McMillan-Scott this morning, I know that he is particularly appreciative of the  support that Glenys Kinnock provided in her capacity as chairman of the all-party rights of the child group. However, more must be done, particularly in relation to the setting up of a missing child hotline, the Amber alert system and a European child resource and policy unit. The Amber alert system in the United States is named after a nine-year-old who was killed by her abductor. It operates like a severe weather warning, with an alert bulletin that is issued following the suspected abduction of a child. The alerts are distributed by the emergency alert system via commercial radio stations, satellite radio stations, television stations and cable TV, as well as e-mail, electronic traffic-condition signs, LED billboards and wireless device short messaging systems text messages. In France, a similar system has been adopted. In the handful of cases in which it has been used, it has been 100 per cent successful. Once the local police decide to issue an alert, a centre in the Ministry of Justice in Paris activates it within 30 minutes. Belgium has a similar system. It is important to note that, in the US, there is growing concern among advocates for missing children that the public are becoming desensitised to Amber alerts as a result of the high number of false alarms. A false alarm is defined as the issuing by the police of an Amber alert without strict adherence to the US Department of Justice's activation guidelines. Any similar system that is adopted in Europe or, indeed, in Scotland will have to ensure that alerts are issued in the correct circumstances. Children go missing for many reasons. The Children's Society estimates that 130,000 children run away, are ejected from home, are abducted or—worse—are injured or killed in the UK each year. Unfortunately, we have no agreed definition of a missing child. The police make no distinction between missing adults and missing children. Also, despite a guidance note that was issued in 2005, each police force operates a different system. Although not mentioned in the motion, that is another issue that must be addressed. The European Commission is responsible for the establishment of an emergency number for missing children—the 116 000 number. However, only four countries, which do not include the UK, have adopted it thus far. The McCanns want to see a European children's centre, similar to the centre in Washington, bringing together Governments, the police and the voluntary sector in a united front to progress work on, for example, the elimination of layers of frustrating bureaucracy and duplication of work. Such a centre would provide a single focal point for data collection, drafting of policies and public communication on all aspects of policy.  The Children Act 1989, which was introduced by Margaret Thatcher and was probably the most far-reaching and progressive legislation in Europe, made the interests of the child paramount and gave them the right to be heard in the UK courts and to have independent legal representation. We should be pushing for the introduction of those concepts across Europe. We will support the Liberal Democrat motion at decision time.

I, too, congratulate Liam McArthur on securing this important debate. Last week, Mr McArthur and I had the opportunity to meet many  of the sheep that will be affected by the proposals as we crossed the southern upland way during the Poppyscotland hearts and heroes challenge. I was certainly reminded of the importance of sheep to the Borders' rural economy. The compulsory electronic identification of sheep has been raised with me a number of times by representatives of my local NFU and individual farmers in my Borders constituency. As members have pointed out, the proposals will be costly and impractical for the farmers who will be forced to comply with them. We should recognise that there is cross-party support in the UK for the view that the EU proposals should be voluntary at most and certainly not compulsory. With nearly 33 million sheep—and 90,000 producers—the UK accounts for one third of the entire EU sheep flock; Scotland has more than 7 million sheep and the nation's sheep farming sector is worth an estimated £150 million to the economy. As a result, the industry plays a vital role in maintaining the landscape and economy of Scotland's hills and uplands. We should acknowledge the pressures that the industry has faced in recent years. In the past 12 months alone, sheep numbers in Scotland have dropped by 368,000 and, in the past nine years, there has been a 24.5 per cent decline in the number of breeding ewes. With that backdrop, it is clear to me that the regulations make no sense and might actually decimate the sheep industry, devastating the environment and the rural economy. The additional costs that are involved in the scheme, coupled with the recording requirements, will force many producers out of business while having absolutely no cost benefit. Indeed, much of the cost will fall on the farmers, with the benefits being delivered further down the chain to the markets and processors. Farmers throughout Britain will be expected to cover 92 per cent of the estimated £65 million costs, while markets and collection centres will contribute 5 per cent and slaughterhouses 3 per cent. The NFU has expressed concern about the standard of the current equipment, which a number of members have mentioned; the available training; and the scheme's workability on farms, which will be a particular challenge to maintaining individual identities within large flocks. Some of those concerns will be resolved as the technology develops and as volume production reduces costs, but some concerns about the regulations are so fundamental that it is hard to see how they can be overcome. I will not repeat what other members have said, but I would be grateful if the minister would respond to the following points. First, like Liam  McArthur and other members, I am interested in finding out what discussions the Scottish Government has had with the UK Government and other member states as they attempt to persuade their politicians of the dangers of the regulations. Secondly—perhaps more important—I understand from correspondence with the Scottish Government that the intention is to introduce the regulations in a negative instrument. Does the Government intend to impose the regulations? If not, can the minister explain the Government's strategy in that respect? Again, I thank Liam McArthur for securing this important debate, which has provided a useful opportunity for us to air the concerns of sheep farmers throughout Scotland.

The cabinet secretary has confirmed that the responsibility for the final decision on transfer  to an open prison rests with the prison governor. However, given that a governor might be subject to political pressure to free up prison space, will the Government consider giving complete responsibility for such decisions to the Parole Board?

Last week was local newspaper week. I am sure that the minister is aware of the threat that faces many local newspapers, including many in the Borders, due to declining revenue and other financial pressures. Will he support that vital sector by ensuring that public notices continue to be published in print editions?

The cabinet secretary has made much of the anticipated costs and why the Government cannot afford to proceed with community courts in Glasgow. However, the Minister for Community Safety has told Parliament in the past that the Government believes that there are costs associated with doing the right thing. Therefore, does the cabinet secretary think that community courts are not the right way to cut crime and reoffending rates?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with the Scottish Prison Service regarding the incorporation of "The Road to Recovery" drug strategy into prison policy on drugs. (S3O-6775)

I acknowledge that all prisoners need access to drug rehabilitation, but it is important that the Government recognises that some prisoners need additional support to get free from drugs and to be put into an environment from which the temptation of drugs has been completely removed. Will the Scottish Government consider creating drug-free wings in Scotland's prisons?

The debate has been useful: it has demonstrated yet again what it means to live in the SNP's soft-touch Scotland, it has shown the Government's attempts further to undermine the credibility of the Scottish justice system and it has helpfully demonstrated the broad coalition that is starting to gather around the SNP's plans. The Scottish Government has continually argued that there are too many people in Scotland's prisons, yet when it comes to toughening up other disposals so that judges and sheriffs can feel confident in their sentencing choices, it has failed miserably. The Scottish Government cannot continue to talk about alternatives to custody with any credibility unless it strengthens current community sentences and ensures that they are completed on time. The Glasgow community court provided an opportunity for the Scottish Government to show that it is serious not only about tackling crime but about tackling the causes of crime. It could have been a one-stop shop not only to ensure that effective and efficient punishment is meted out but to offer offenders every opportunity to start to make positive choices and changes in their lives.

No—I want to make progress. Contrary to the picture that the minister and several SNP members tried to paint, the community court would have been a good use of the limited resources that are available to the Government. In relation to spending money, I remind the minister that he told the Parliament that "There are costs associated with doing the right thing."— [ Official Report , 11 March 2009; c 15652.]  What does that say about the Government's attitude to the issue? We can assume only that the minister and the Government do not view tackling the underlying causes of crime as doing the right thing. Definitive evidence shows that community courts produce results and provide value for money in the medium to long term. As we heard from my colleague Bill Aitken and from Richard Baker, we can look to the Midtown community court and the Red Hook community court in New York in the United States, which house a drug treatment service, domestic violence counselling, job training and a medical unit, all of which are made available to victims and offenders. The results speak for themselves—increased compliance, significant reductions in crime, increased use of alternative sanctions and, crucially, a slashing of the level of fear of crime.  As Mike Pringle said, closer to home, we can look to the community justice centre that has been established in Liverpool. Early evidence suggests that that has also been successful, particularly in reducing low-level offending and antisocial behaviour. A recent YouGov poll discovered that, on witnessing low-level crime such as graffiti, vandalism or underage drinking, 30 per cent of Scots would report it but would think that nothing would be done and 34 per cent would not report it because they would think that nothing would be done. From those figures, we can have no doubt that the lack of public confidence in our justice system is at the heart of the problem. That is why the SNP's approach is fundamentally flawed—Cathy Jamieson made that point.

I am happy to give way.

We wrongly assumed that since the court was in the SNP's plans, the SNP would deliver it and the point was not for negotiation. That is another broken promise from the SNP Government. Community courts in Glasgow and other parts of Scotland could have increased public confidence in the criminal justice system by creating visible and robust community sentences and by using local businesses and service providers to deliver justice and rehabilitation. The SNP Government has done nothing to instil public confidence in the criminal justice system; it has called for six-month sentences to be all but abolished, extended the use of home detention curfews and increased the number of offences for which fixed-penalty fines can be issued. The Scottish Government is watering down our criminal justice system at every opportunity. We want to prevent people from ending up on the path to crime, but we have made it clear that those who blight our communities should face up to the consequences of their actions. Fines must be enforced, community service must be swift, effective and efficient and those who are sentenced to prison must serve the sentence that the judge hands down and not spend half their sentence in the community. Soft on sentencing, soft on criminals, soft on prisons—the Government will not spend money on cutting crime by tackling the underlying causes of crime because it does not think that that is the right thing to do. We should be clear that we can forget the SNP's grand plans for an independent  Scotland—they are no more. Its new master plan seems to centre around the desire to create a soft-touch Scotland. That is a master plan that we utterly reject. We urge the Parliament to back our motion.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many patients will be removed from dental waiting lists following the opening of new dental facilities at Coldstream and Hawick. (S3O-6667)

I am sure that the cabinet secretary will agree that it is the massive underinvestment in dental services by the previous Liberal-Labour Administration that has resulted in this chronic shortage of NHS dentists in the Borders. I am sure that she will also agree that dental checks are an important part of general health checks. What action will the Scottish Government take beyond what has already been announced to address the fact that waiting lists in the Borders are still growing?

The Scottish Government's framework on antisocial behaviour is full of key points, outcomes, recommendations, actions and strategic aims, but it is hard not to get lost in the sea of rhetoric and warm, fuzzy words. It is also hard to discern from the document what the Scottish Government needs to do to improve the operation of antisocial behaviour legislation. Of course we want to prevent antisocial behaviour in the first place. Of course we want better integration of agencies, to ensure that they are better at sharing information and resources. Of course we want our communities to be made more aware of, and involved in, the process. It goes without saying that better communication through the media and the ending of stereotyping are needed, and that we must make the public more aware of antisocial behaviour and share success stories so that best practice can be copied, where it is needed. However, the Scottish Government has failed to consider aspects of the antisocial behaviour legislation that are not working, and to re-examine the process in order to ascertain how it can be improved. For example, we know that by March 2008 no parenting orders had been issued. I had hoped that the report would explore why. Do authorities think that parenting orders are not suitable disposals? If so, why? What can be done to improve parenting orders, or should they be scrapped? I do not understand the Labour Party's obsession with parenting orders, given that there is no evidence that they are successful. Of course we need to focus on preventing antisocial behaviour—we welcome that approach—but we should be addressing the causes of crime and antisocial behaviour in an attempt to prevent people from ending up on a one-way street to pain and misery. There is a need to ensure that young people's energies are focused on positive activities and diverted from the negative influences that can easily lead people into lives of crime and disorder. The previous Executive's approach to antisocial behaviour was about window dressing and did not tackle the underlying issues. Despite Paul Martin's right-wing rhetoric, which would have made many a Tory proud, Labour in Government was soft on crime and soft on the causes of crime. If, during eight years in office, Labour had effectively addressed the problems that cause antisocial  behaviour and crime, we would not be debating the matter today. Meanwhile, the SNP Government has taken "soft-touch Scotland"—that well-known Tory catchphrase—to a whole new level, through its policies to scrap six-month sentences and extend home detention curfews. We welcome the strategic aims, which are intended to create better communication between agencies. It is important that all relevant agencies are able to share information, and that they have a clearer and wider idea of what is happening in the communities that they serve. We should look to the local authority areas that already have joined-up services—such as my constituency, which is the Scottish Borders—to see what can be learned. It is likely that the people who cause antisocial behaviour have problems of their own that need to be addressed, which might include drug or alcohol abuse, or family problems.

I do not think that anyone disputes the connection between alcohol abuse and crime, but the approach to tackling irresponsible drinking is a matter for another debate—indeed, we debated it only last week. We will be able to deal with and stop the type of behaviour that is blighting the lives of so many of our constituents only when we take a joined-up approach. We agree that there is a need to inspire young people with positive role models and mentors. All too often we are faced in the media with images of drunken or drugged celebrities falling out of nightclubs, and it is becoming increasingly common that those celebrities are involved in some kind of antisocial behaviour. We need to move the focus away from the celebration of that type of behaviour. We need to ensure that our young people are not always demonised as the offenders in cases of disorderly behaviour. Most of Scotland's young people—I can certainly think of a number in my constituency—are involved in positive activities. There is an imbalance in reporting: when we get it right, and good practices are identified, we need to be much more ready and willing to discuss and share those experiences. Positive examples need to be talked about and reported. The media are powerful tools that can be used to encourage and empower rather than just to scaremonger. The balance needs to be redressed. Four pillars have been created in the framework for dealing with antisocial behaviour, but one  seems to be missing: enforcement. We cannot ignore the fact that antisocial behaviour is happening. As MSPs, we get letters from beleaguered constituents—as a number of members have mentioned—who live in daily fear. As the Government's report points out, there is limited interest among the public in applying for sanctions because of the fear of retribution, but no one should be fearful of standing up for wanting to live in a safe and harmonious community. The further 1,000 extra police officers that the Scottish Conservatives secured in the budget are vital to all our communities. People need to regain confidence in our criminal justice system. We can start that process by having a visible deterrent force of community police officers. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice, Kenny MacAskill, stated in a previous debate on community safety that "the fundamental way of bringing about the level of community safety that our people want is to have a visible police presence that will deter crime and reassure our citizens." Alongside that, people need to know that if they carry out criminal or antisocial behaviour, their actions will have consequences. Those consequences must be swift, efficient and—most important—effective. Kenny MacAskill said during the same debate that "If someone does something, they must face the consequences of their action and understand that, frankly, we will not be satisfied with hearing some excuse about what provoked or caused it."— [ Official Report , 21 February 2007; c 32272.]  We disagree with Mr MacAskill on that—we care about the causes of such behaviour, because it is only by considering those underlying issues that we can address the problem.

How many parenting orders have been issued?

The cabinet secretary will know that many young people are considering a career in farming but are struggling to find a way into the industry. Can the cabinet secretary tell me what measures the Government is taking to support agricultural apprenticeships in the Scottish Borders?

As we have heard from a number of speakers in today's debate, excessive alcohol consumption is a major issue for Scotland. We all agree on that point and acknowledge the health concerns that the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing set out in her speech. Research has revealed that Scotland is eighth in the world for alcohol consumption per head of population. One in three men and one in four women in Scotland exceed recommended daily alcohol limits. As our motion states, we welcome the Scottish Government's U-turn on railroading its alcohol proposals through the Parliament by regulation, which was an attempt to sneak through a deeply unpopular policy in the most undemocratic manner, by avoiding proper parliamentary scrutiny. However, we remain concerned that the Government's proposals penalise responsible retailers and consumers and fail to address overconsumption. I will address a couple of issues that were raised in the debate, beginning with the minimum price proposal. The Scottish Government's plans for a minimum price for alcoholic drinks will adversely affect many of the communities and local economies that we represent. What is more, the proposal sends out confusing messages and fundamentally fails to target the problem drinks that contribute so significantly to Scotland's alcohol problem. Retailers have suggested that the cost of problem drinks such as alcopops and high-strength spirits, which are often used as shooters, would not be affected by a minimum price. J D Wetherspoon was recently criticised for selling a pint for £1, but if minimum pricing were applied to the on-sales trade, that pint could be sold at no profit for as little as 70p. The minimum price plan would primarily increase large volume cider prices; most single bottles or cans would remain unaffected. The pricing plan would have the biggest impact on wine, which is a drink that I—and many members, I am sure—occasionally enjoy responsibly. Minimum pricing would raise  the price of 19 per cent of the wine and 15 per cent of the spirits that are currently sold in Scotland.

I agree. The way forward is to tax problem drinks. Nearly half the young men who were charged with an offence in 2007 revealed that they had been drinking Buckfast immediately prior to committing the offence. Conservatives think that the Scottish Government should be working with Westminster to put forward proposals to address alcohol abuse by taxing problem drinks such as alcopops, strong beers and ciders and Buckfast, while reducing the duty on low-strength beers and ciders, to maintain cost neutrality. Blanket minimum pricing would penalise responsible drinkers and could have unintended consequences. I am concerned that the Scottish Government's proposals would create a booze-trip culture in the south of Scotland, which could hit traders in my constituency in the Borders. A trend could be started whereby responsible drinkers travelled across the border to places such as Berwick and Wooler to purchase cheaper alcohol, which would have a clear effect on traders in the Borders. I wanted to make that point during Christine Grahame's speech. Has the Scottish Government thought about the issue and would it allocate additional resources so that it could be policed? All members know that opinion polls are important bedtime reading for Alex Salmond and the SNP Government. What do opinion polls say about the Government's plans? When 10,000 people were asked what they thought of the Government's proposals for a minimum price for alcohol, 61 per cent were opposed to the idea. When they were asked what they thought of the proposal to ban three-for-two and other multibuy promotions, 67 per cent opposed the proposal. What does the Government think about the overwhelming public opinion against its proposals? There is no amendment from the Labour Party and, from what we have heard, it seems likely that Labour members will vote for the SNP amendment. It is important to record that, if that happens, Labour members will be voting to remove from the motion words that were used by Labour Prime Minister Gordon Brown. Perhaps someone from the Labour Party will tell us whether Labour members intend to vote with the SNP  because the motion expresses Gordon Brown's view in his own words.

I wonder how out of touch Gordon Brown is. He is a Scottish member of Parliament, so I would have thought that he would be fully aware of those points and would be more than happy to back Scottish Labour's proposals, although we have yet to hear what they are. Rather than pursue ineffective and unpopular proposals, we should be enforcing existing laws on licensing and the sale of alcohol, as Bill Aitken said. Police and local traders and other stakeholders should be working much more closely in community-based alcohol partnerships and we should learn from how that model is working in Cambridgeshire, London and many other parts of England. Work is needed in our communities to help to tackle alcohol abuse through education and counselling. We should not punish people who drink responsibly; we should work towards legislation that will address the problem of alcohol abuse in our communities. Conservative proposals to target problem drinks through increased taxation should be pursued. We need responsible and reasoned legislation, which will properly address alcohol abuse in Scotland. I hope that that can be achieved through further debate.

Will the member give way?

This week has been another terrible week for job losses in the Scottish Borders. Hawick  Knitwear is shedding jobs, construction firms are running on skeleton workforces and many other employers are asking their staff to take pay cuts or work reduced hours. No one knows where the axe will fall next. John Swinney has visited Hawick in my constituency on two occasions already to discuss the jobs crisis—lots of warm words, but very little concrete action so far.

What action will the Scottish Government take to ease the pain of Gordon Brown's recession in the Scottish Borders?

The debate has been useful for a number of reasons, but perhaps it is most important in again highlighting the role of the Scottish Conservatives in bringing 1,000 more police officers on to the streets of Scotland. Although we welcome Labour and the Liberal Democrats to our way of thinking, it is important to record that in government, the Labour and Liberal parties failed to recruit enough police officers to make Scotland safer. With rising crime rates during their term in office, my Conservative colleagues continually asked the Lib-Lab pact to employ more police officers. Under the Labour-led Executive, crime and offences rose by 8 per cent and, according to the Scottish crime survey in 2003, only one in four crimes was recorded by the police. Despite its best efforts during the 2007 election campaign and since then in opposition, its eight years of failure cannot be spun away.

I want to make some progress. Labour and the Lib Dems talked about how they had a record number of police officers in Scotland, but the truth was that only 147 were walking the streets of Scotland at any one time. We should also not forget that, when they had the opportunity to support extra police going into our communities in last year's budget, Labour and the Liberal Democrats sat on their hands and abstained. They had a perfect opportunity to repent, show the errors of their ways and vote for extra police, but they chose not to do so. We cannot trust Labour and the Liberal Democrats when it comes to making our communities safer. I turn to the Scottish Government. In its 2007 manifesto, the SNP proposed 1,000 more police officers. However, by the end of 2007 it had changed its mind and decided that the 1,000 new officers would be made up not only by extra recruitment but by the creation of equivalent police officers—not new additional police officers but equivalent police officers. Thank goodness for the budget process that allowed the Scottish Conservatives to pressure the Scottish Government to provide the 1,000 newly recruited police officers that it promised in its election manifesto.  It was our job as an effective Opposition party to ensure that the SNP honoured its election pledge of 1,000 extra police officers, which was set to be ditched at one point. It is the SNP's job now to ensure that those 1,000 extra officers are delivered by 2011. That is the minimum that the SNP must achieve if it is to justify the trust that it was given when its first budget was passed. We secured the additional funding to recruit those extra officers; the SNP must now deliver them. However, the SNP Government should not stop there. It must do more to ensure that our police force is freed up from paperwork to allow officers to get on to our streets and serve our communities. Thanks to eight years of Labour and the Liberal Democrats, an increasing burden of administrative and procedural bureaucracy has come to consume more and more of police officers' time, keeping them away from the front line of crime fighting. That situation is not of the SNP's making, but it must do more to set our police free to do their job, rather than setting criminals free from our jails. We need to take the handcuffs off the police and put them on to the criminals. The Scottish Conservatives are clear that more police out in our communities are needed to provide a visible deterrent and to boost public confidence. Traditionally, communities throughout Scotland would have had the reassurance of a local police officer as an integral part of their neighbourhood, building up relationships and reducing the fear of crime. The Scottish Government needs to do more to reduce crime and the fear of crime. Labour did not promise a single extra police officer during the election. The Liberal Democrats and Labour failed in government. There is only one party with any credibility on this issue: the Scottish Conservatives, with our pledge of additional police officers. That is why I urge the Parliament to support the amendment in Bill Aitken's name.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures it is taking to encourage older people to take up teaching as a profession. (S3O-6159)

The minister will be aware of the issue that is facing some of my constituents. They qualified as teachers in the 1960s and 1970s but, as they qualified in England, they are prevented from teaching in Scotland. They could, of course, work in England or in any other European Union country. Does the minister think that that is acceptable? How does that fit with the European principle of the free movement of workers?

Today's debate has again brought to the Parliament's attention the possibly horrific consequences of an asbestos-related condition. None of us would dispute the distressing and disturbing effects of an asbestos-related illness. However, as I said during the stage 1 debate on the bill, I have a lot of sympathy for the view that has been expressed by some that to make compensation available for pleural plaques when plaques themselves have no negative impact on health runs contrary to the Scots law of delict. As Bill Aitken indicated, we have serious concerns about the cost implications of passing the bill. Now more than ever, we must behave responsibly when using the public purse. We must focus on what the financial memorandum says and on the bill's possible implications for the Scottish public sector—councils, health boards and other public bodies throughout Scotland. A  local hospital or school could be closed to allow a health board or council to pay for possibly unknown claims to be settled. Despite the best efforts of the Scottish Government, which complied with the Justice Committee's request for further research, there remains considerable doubt about potential liabilities and costs to both the private and the public purse.

The key point is that estimates vary—the number of claims that may be made in the future is unquantifiable. There is no reliable way of estimating how many individuals have pleural plaques as a result of exposure to asbestos and will ultimately make a claim. There is uncertainty about how many people have been exposed to asbestos, how many of those who have been exposed will develop pleural plaques, how many of those who develop pleural plaques will be identified as having an asbestos-related condition, and how many of those who are identified will make compensation claims. There is also uncertainty about the exact value of a claim, with claims inflation being a particular issue for the insurance sector. Furthermore, with pleural plaques having a long latency period of 20 to 30 years, it is difficult to predict when the claims peak will occur. It is worth bearing in mind that there is currently a build-up of about 630 pleural plaques cases as a result of the House of Lords judgment and earlier judgments in the English courts. The best information that is available to the Scottish Government suggests that settlement costs are made up of about £8,000 for compensation, £8,000 for pursuer's costs and £6,000 for defender's costs. Those figures are based on the known 2003-04 settlement figures, which come from the period prior to the legal challenges that culminated in the House of Lords ruling.

I am not arguing that pleural plaques are or are not a good thing; the point is what they lead to. Having pleural plaques is not a medical condition; the illness that they lead to is the condition, and the law provides that compensation is payable in the case of illness.  We are concerned about the unknown and unquantifiable costs that the public sector might face. In the financial memorandum, the Scottish Government said: "a reasonable working assumption for the purposes of this memorandum is an average cost per case of £25,000." As Bill Aitken said, more than just the insurance sector could be affected by the bill. The Scottish Government is the named defender in a number of on-going cases in the Scottish courts. We should not forget about the possible costs on the NHS, as patients seek X-rays on the off-chance that they might have pleural plaques. The Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has said that it costs £115 for a computed tomography X-ray to be done to determine whether pleural plaques are present. The Scottish Government should routinely monitor how much it is costing to implement new laws—the bill will be a good example. If amendment 9, which Derek Brownlee lodged, had been agreed to, and there was a significant cost overrun, ministers would have been forced to explain why the overrun had happened. The Government has accepted the principle of post-legislative scrutiny, so there will be no hiding place for cost increases. The Conservatives voted for the bill at stage 1 after amending the motion to call on the Government "to provide the Parliament with a more detailed analysis of the likely cost implications". We have considered the analysis. Despite our sympathy with victims, we will vote against the bill, because we cannot be sure of its implications for the public purse.

To ask the Scottish Executive when communities in the Scottish Borders will be able to apply for money from the town centre regeneration fund. (S3O-6070)

I acknowledge that the exact details will not be announced for several weeks. However, I am sure that the cabinet secretary is aware that many council officials throughout Scotland are drawing up elaborate plans for how  they want to spend that new fund. Will the cabinet secretary reassure me that bids that come directly from local communities and groups will be considered, and that councils will not be given complete control over those funds?

To ask the First Minister what discussions the Scottish Government has had about the future of VisitScotland following the withdrawal of funding by the City of Edinburgh Council. (S3F-1521)

There is a widespread sense of disengagement and unease with VisitScotland among many councils and tourism providers, following the abolition of the old tourist boards by the previous Labour-Liberal Administration. Does the First Minister accept that a situation could  shortly arise in which councils such as Scottish Borders Council will effectively be subsidising the promotion of tourism in Glasgow and Edinburgh by VisitScotland, while those cities' own councils might not be paying anything towards that?

The Scottish Conservatives welcome the Justice Committee's report on community policing and we congratulate the committee members on their work in producing it. More police officers are needed in communities to provide a visible deterrent and to boost public confidence. Traditionally, communities in Scotland would have had the reassurance of a local police officer who was an integral part of their neighbourhood, building up relationships and reducing the fear of crime. In many areas, it is clear that that model does not bear much resemblance to what is happening on the ground, which is why it is important to develop a vision of what community policing means in the 21 st century. Like the Justice Committee, the Conservatives are reluctant for the Scottish Government to provide a strict definition of community policing. I therefore welcome the cabinet secretary's statement that he does not intend to micromanage what individual police forces are doing. It is important to recognise that in each police force, division, community and street, there will be a  different approach to community policing that should be adapted to meet the particular challenges and needs of that community. The needs of Glasgow are different to the needs of Shetland; equally, the needs of Hawick in my constituency are different from the needs of Gavinton, which is also in my constituency. The role of community wardens was touched on in the committee report. The Scottish Conservatives have never denied that community wardens could have a role, but they should never be used as substitutes for real police officers. I spent a shift with the community wardens in Kelso several months ago and was able to see at first hand the valuable work that they do alongside the police. The community safety wardens in the Borders, like those in many other parts of Scotland, target specifically low-level crime and antisocial behaviour such as vandalism, graffiti and littering. It undoubtedly frees up police time to deal with more serious matters that require police powers. Such has been the success of the community warden scheme in the Borders that the Conservative-led Scottish Borders Council has recently announced additional funding to extend the scheme to other parts of the Borders. However, we should be clear that our priority has always been to have more police officers walking the streets of Scotland. Although community wardens have an important role to play in making communities safer, they are not, and should not be viewed as, substitutes or an alternative to recruiting additional police officers. The Scottish Conservatives campaigned hard for additional police officers in Scotland and we won. We do not want to see officers sitting behind desks, dealing with paperwork; we want them out in our neighbourhoods making our communities safer. We cannot start to talk about the effectiveness of community policing unless police officers are on the ground to perform the duties that we expect of them. We agree with the Scottish Government that we need to retain serving officers, ensure that their time is used productively and free them up from needless paperwork, and we agree that we need to help police forces to work smarter. On top of that, we fought for additional new officers. The Scottish Government has not always been as committed to the policy as we have been. It has twice U-turned on police recruitment. The SNP originally promised 1,000 more police in its 2007 election manifesto but, by the end of 2007, it had changed its mind and decided that the 1,000 new officers would be provided not only by additional recruitment, but by the creation of the ridiculous concept of equivalent police officers. We are pleased to have influenced the Scottish  Government's policy and we are happy to work with it to achieve yet another Scottish Conservative election manifesto commitment. The other parties do not have much credibility on the issue. The previous Government had eight years to recruit the extra officers our forces desperately needed, but Labour did not promise a single extra police officer during the election campaign and the Lib Dems made just a token gesture.

I am sure that Mr Baker will acknowledge that crime rates also rose during those eight years, so we needed yet more additional police officers. The only party with any credibility on the issue is the Scottish Conservatives, who pledged to provide additional police.

We have made it clear that we expect the Scottish Government to deliver 1,000 extra police officers in the four-year parliamentary session. We will hold it to account if it does not deliver that commitment to us and to the Parliament. The Government is clear about our commitment to that. We welcome the Justice Committee's report and we look forward to listening to members' views.

The bill will update the law on rape and other sexual offences. The Scottish Conservatives agree with the general principles of the bill and will vote for the motion. The bill deals with an extremely complex area of the law. I acknowledge the Justice Committee's hard work on the bill. I am sure that the debate will be as well informed and constructive as was our previous debate on the subject. In the short time that is available for my speech, I will touch on several aspects of the bill. First, there is no doubt that reform of the law of rape is long overdue—indeed, academics and practitioners have criticised the Scots law on rape for many years. The non-gendered approach that will be taken towards rape is particularly to be welcomed. It is also important to modernise the law of rape. The old common law related the offence of rape to the possibility of conception. Changing the law to take a gender-neutral approach and to include other forms of sexual penetration is entirely appropriate. I welcome the cabinet secretary's comments on that at the start of the debate. The bill will create a new definition of consent, which has created many difficulties in the past—the McKearney case in 2004 demonstrated some of those. The bill provides a general definition of consent as free agreement and supplements that with a non-exhaustive list of factual circumstances in which free agreement is not present. In the debate on the Scottish Law Commission's report on rape and other sexual offences, I made the point that introducing a statutory definition of consent would not necessarily solve all the concerns and problems with regard to rape cases. For example, questions about whether the victim gave his or her true or valid consent will remain, because the line between true consent and mere submission is not always easy to draw. It has been suggested that it might be preferable to avoid using the word "consent" altogether and to focus instead on whether the accused had sexual intercourse with a person who did not have the  freedom or capacity to choose in the circumstances. The Justice Committee resisted the pressure to lower the age of consent from 16 and we support its approach. That view is supported by church groups and I am sure that members have received a number of representations along those lines. We must recognise that children are maturing earlier, but there is certainly no case for permitting full penetrative sex between people who are 15 or younger. It is right that the law should state clearly that sex below the age of consent is wrong and that those who do not abide by the law face legal consequences. We must continue to support the use of the children's hearings system to address offending behaviour by children in most cases. The Scottish Government's decision to retain in the bill the option of criminal prosecution for consensual penetrative sex between older children, at the Lord Advocate's discretion, is appropriate. We as legislators must ensure that nothing is done to water down that important principle or give the impression that the age of consent has been lowered or can be ignored. The Scottish Government is right to seek to amend the bill's provisions in relation to oral sex between older children who are aged between 13 and 15, to ensure that that sexual act is not legalised for that age group. The risk of sexually transmitted diseases must be borne in mind. We therefore welcome the Scottish Government's moves to address the issue. I will briefly consider the law of evidence. In the circumstances of a sexual offence or rape, it is inevitable that only two people might have been present—the complainer and the accused. Scots law has long recognised that difficulty and has departed from the standard of corroboration that is normal in serious criminal cases. That is entirely appropriate, but we do not support any change in the law of evidence to specify that corroboration is not required. It is necessary for an accused person to have a defence.

I am not sure that that addresses the point that I was making. The accused person is entitled to a defence. We must bear it in mind that sexual assault rightly attracts a high-tariff sentence, so it is only fair that the principle of the presumption of innocence should stand, as should the requirement on the Crown to prove the offence beyond reasonable doubt. I am not sure that  anything further can be done to limit that important principle. We welcome the bill, which goes a long way in clarifying the law. However, we must also be conscious that more must be done to tackle attitudes to women and men who are raped.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many new dentists would need to be deployed in Roxburgh and Berwickshire to deal with patients registered as waiting to see an NHS dentist. (S3O-5865)

As the minister will be aware, more than 6,000 adults in the Scottish Borders are waiting to see an NHS dentist. Does she agree that that number is unacceptably high? Furthermore, will she give me an undertaking that NHS Borders will be instructed significantly to reduce the waiting list in the coming 12 months?

The First Minister will be aware of the devastating job cuts that have been announced in Hawick in my constituency this week: 38 jobs lost at Slumberdown; 35 jobs lost at Emtelle; and 20 jobs lost at Thornwood Motors. With many more job cuts apparently to be announced in the next few days and weeks, Gordon Brown's recession is hitting my constituency hard. Can the First Minister tell me and my constituents what his Government is doing to address the growing jobs crisis and say what action he is taking to protect many of the skilled jobs that might be lost for ever?

To ask the Scottish Executive what support it will give to Scottish Borders Council to develop public transport in Roxburgh and Berwickshire. (S3O-5456)

Presiding Officer, "The Scottish Government wants to open a single track branch railway line to Tweedbank from Millerhill. That is as much good as a chocolate teapot if the roads around it, to feed it, are not upgraded." Those are not my words but the words of the Scottish National Party councillor for Selkirk. What plans does the Government have to work with Scottish Borders Council to improve the A7, the A68 and other local roads in my constituency so that people can actually get to the railway stations?

I, too, congratulate Jim Hume on securing this important debate. Although I support the general thrust of the motion, the issue in my constituency and throughout the Scottish Borders and the south of Scotland is about more than just the post office in Greenlaw, which is mentioned in the motion. Greenlaw is one example, but the motion could have mentioned Morebattle, Bonchester Bridge, Clovenfords or Hutton, which are all communities that have been adversely affected by decisions to close their local post office. During the consultation process, I hosted several public meetings throughout my constituency so that people could voice their concerns about the proposals. The meetings at Greenlaw and Morebattle were particularly well attended, with more than 150 residents attending each meeting. For the benefit of members who were not present at those meetings, I say that it was clear to me that the overwhelming majority of residents did not want the proposed changes. Despite that, the Post Office announced in the autumn its decision to go ahead with the closure of the Greenlaw post office and several other post offices in the Borders, despite our local campaign against the closure plans. It appears to me that the consultation process was a complete sham, in which no weight whatever was given to the views of local people. From the hundreds of people who signed the petition, wrote in individually or came to the public meeting, it was clear that the local post office branches were enormously valued and that people did not want the proposed new outreach services. However, all that weight of opinion was set aside in the name of achieving the Labour Government's  targets for closures. During the process, local people and their representatives treated the Post Office and its consultation process with respect. Unforgivably, however, the Post Office has treated them with contempt. I feel particularly sorry for the staff who are so well regarded in their communities. It is a great injustice that the post offices have been taken away from them. The Westminster and Scottish Governments need to do more. In particular, more must be done to allow the post office network to provide additional services, such as road tax and currency, in order to allow the Post Office to compete with other providers. Rather than simply close post offices, the Labour Government needs to expand the services that they can offer. Postmasters need to be free to compete in the marketplace, rather than have more and more services withdrawn from them. As Christine Grahame pointed out, the impact of the closures will be far-reaching. We should not underestimate the social impact of the changes. Post offices in rural communities are often the community's focal point, where people meet and talk. That is particularly the case for post offices that are connected to the local shop. I hope that the Scottish Government will actively work to preserve post offices in the future, so that communities in my constituency and across Scotland do not face further closures.

The debate has again highlighted the  SNP's drive with, it seems, the help of the Liberal Democrats to create a soft-touch Scotland in which people will have to be very lucky indeed to end up in jail. Yet again, the underlying thrust of Government policy is that we should use our prisons even less than we do at present. It is a great pity that the SNP Government has become completely preoccupied with cutting Scotland's rising prison population by setting prisoners free, rather than with tackling the underlying problem of high crime rates. I have said before and I will say again that we do not cut crime by cutting the prison population; instead, we cut the prison population by cutting crime.

I want to make progress. I will focus on a couple of aspects that have been discussed in the debate. The first is the Government's desire to scrap sentences of six months or less and the proposed interference with judicial independence. That is likely to have a limited impact on the total prison population. The average daily prison population in 2007-08 was 7,375, of which 570—just 8 per cent—were serving sentences of six months or less. It is therefore questionable what impact the ending of short sentences will have on the prison population. Further, it would be wrong to assume that, under the Government's proposals, all those prisoners would automatically escape prison altogether, as some might end up serving longer jail terms if the sentencing judge believed that prison was the right disposal for that offender. I believe that the Government has thought of that, which is why it intends to interfere with sentencing policy by creating a body called the Scottish sentencing council, which we are told would "develop and oversee a national system of sentencing guidelines". That is nothing more than an attempt by the Government to force the courts to comply with its ridiculous prison population target. The Government's role should be not to decide sentencing policy, but to support the courts in their sentencing policy and to ensure that adequate provision exists to allow disposals to be carried out. It is a judge's job to take into account all the circumstances of a case and to pass a suitable sentence. The Government's job is to provide sufficient resources to allow the sentence to be enforced. The independence of the judiciary must be maintained, with judges and sheriffs left in charge of sentences. That leads me to my second point, which is about how little attention is given to the victims of crime. Nothing dismays victims more or brings the  entire criminal justice system into greater disrepute than the fact that criminals almost never serve the sentence that is handed down by the court. The Government's proposals will do nothing to help deal with that perception. In the list of the Scottish Government's proposals at the back of its policy document, "Protecting Scotland's Communities", victims are mentioned only once. What does that say about the focus of the Scottish Government's policy? The Government is clearly more interested in emptying our jails than it is in protecting the public. When it comes to tackling crime, there is no doubt that the public want criminals who have been sentenced to a custodial sentence to be sent to prison.

We were not looking simply at hospitals; we were looking at a number of premises that were not being used. It is for the Government to provide the space to allow the sentences that the judiciary hands down to be accommodated. It would be very nice to live in a society where there were no prisons, just as it would be nice if there were no hospitals because there was no illness. However, until someone comes forward with a plan to make crime history, prisons are here to stay. The challenge for the Government is to create the prison space that the courts require and to create prisons that genuinely rehabilitate—prisons with a purpose. It is obvious that overcrowded prisons that are awash with drugs and a system that gives short-term prisoners limited or no supervision or support on release are almost certain to fail. However, it is simply daft to argue, as Angela Constance did, that because short-term prison sentences are not working at present, we should stop using them altogether. The case for community sentences must not be driven simply by a desire to deal with prison overcrowding. A preference for community sentences cannot be an act of faith. In their current form, such sentences are usually unsuitable alternatives to imprisonment, not least because they are insufficiently robust. Community-based penalties should have a sufficiently punitive element to command public confidence. That could involve making them much more visible—the Government has talked about that repeatedly but is yet to deliver. Those sentences should also  have a strong supervised rehabilitative element. In the absence of robust community punishments, prison is, and will remain, the only option for most of the offenders who are currently sent there.

I welcome this Government debate on drink driving. That said, like several other members, I note that the matter is reserved to Westminster, which makes it crucial that we in Scotland work with Westminster to tackle the problem of drink driving. I do not dispute the Government's good intentions in this regard; everyone knows the devastating effects of drink driving. However, I do not believe that reducing the permitted alcohol limit for drink driving would necessarily encourage people to change their drinking habits. Rather than extend the heavy hand of government, we should instead promote the culture of responsible drinking. As Cathie Craigie said, drinkers need to be made more aware of what constitutes a measure of alcohol, particularly in light of the size of glasses that many pubs and bars now use. The state can do only so much to tackle the problem by way of legislation. We must remind the citizens of Scotland that their obligation is to know the alcohol limit and when they cannot and should not drive. The Association of British Drivers has stated a belief that drivers with a blood alcohol content level of above 100mg are the real problem and that cutting the limit to 50mg is likely to be counterproductive. As the association points out, the 80mg limit was chosen in the 1960s because 80mg to 90mg per 100ml accurately marks the point at which the accident risk starts to increase. Furthermore, previous Government consultations showed that drivers in the 50mg to 80mg per 100ml range are not overrepresented in the figures for fatalities or serious injuries. At the very  least, reducing the limit may be a flawed approach to tackling drink driving. The SNP is moving to reduce the limit to 50mg because the law is more than 40 years old. However, over that time, neither the chemical formula of alcohol nor the human body has changed. If nothing else has changed since 1967, why change the law? Instead of lowering the limit, we must encourage responsible drinking and ensure that offences are punished appropriately.

There is also no evidence to suggest that, if the limit is lowered, the number of accidents will reduce. The core of the problem is education: we need to encourage responsible drinking. People need to know what is—and what is not—an acceptable amount to drink, taking account of their personal circumstances and the legal limit that is in place.

I am sorry, but I need to make progress. The cabinet secretary argued that the proposals will align Scotland more closely with the countries of Europe. However, as Bill Aitken said, it is important to note that many of the countries that have those lower limits tend to have lower penalties for drink driving. In some European countries, if someone has 50mg to 80mg per 100ml of alcohol in their blood, they receive points on their licence and a fine. If the penalties against drink driving were lowered in line with a reduction in the alcohol limit, the attitude towards drink driving may also change. A driving ban is a very strong disposal. We are concerned that, if people simply get points on their licence for drink driving, they may view that as a badge of honour. The measure would therefore have limited effect. Giving someone a complete driving ban makes them reconsider the way in which they drive in a way that fines and penalty points may never do. Although we should not necessarily move to lower the limit from 80mg to 50mg per 100ml until we have more evidence to support such a step, I have more sympathy for moves to lower the limit for drivers who are aged under 25. Has the Scottish Government considered whether it could support that measure?

I will finish the point. Investigating that measure could be a worthwhile endeavour, given that it has been shown that younger drivers are more likely to be involved in accidents in which diminished performance due to drink is a factor. There is some precedent for that already, because new drivers who have less than two years' experience and who receive six points on their licence receive a ban. Clearly, that puts the focus on younger drivers, and I encourage the Scottish Government to investigate that proposal further with the UK Government as another potential option to combat drink driving.

It is not discriminatory. It is about focusing on an area in which there is evidence of a problem. Evidence suggests that young drivers who have been involved in an accident are more likely to have been under the influence of alcohol. At present, Scottish police cannot randomly test alcohol levels in drivers. They need to have reasonable cause to suspect drinking, or the driver needs to have committed another offence. However, there might be merit in introducing targeted testing at specific times of day and in specific places, together with high-visibility policing. If people think that they will not be caught, they might be more likely to commit the offence. I welcome the introduction of roadside testing for drugs, but I wonder what limit should be set. If an acceptable drug level limit were to be set, the implication would be that the Government condones drug use in a limited way. However, if a zero-tolerance approach were to be taken, that might push people into using harder drugs. For example, cannabis can stay in the system for up to two months, but cocaine, a harder drug, stays in the system for only a couple of days. We must come together with the UK Government on that issue to find the best solution for the rapidly growing problem of drug driving. I remain sceptical about extending the heavy hand of government further than it already goes. Rather than always looking for new ways to legislate on the issue, we should emphasise the importance of drinking responsibly and being aware of alcohol abuse. If the people of Scotland take it upon themselves to prevent drink driving, that personal responsibility will do more to reduce drink-driving offences than will adding yet more legal constraints. Education and awareness, not the addition of more rules and regulations, will make the real difference in saving lives that are lost in drink-driving accidents.

Although forced marriage is thankfully very rare in Britain and in Scotland, it can have a devastating effect on its victims. I therefore welcome the debate, as it provides an important opportunity for the Parliament to send a strong message that the practice is unacceptable in modern Scotland. Like Jamie McGrigor and other members, I am pleased that the Government's motion draws a clear distinction between forced and arranged marriages. The crucial point is about consent—or, in the case of forced marriages, the lack of consent that makes them so objectionable. A study by the Home Office's working group on forced marriages clearly illustrated the devastating consequences for individuals who are forced into marriage. Many young women in such a situation become estranged from their families and suffer years of domestic violence. Even more frightening, some evidence has suggested a link between forced marriage and the particularly high self-harm and suicide rates for Asian women. I find it disturbing that something as archaic as forced marriage still infiltrates today's society and I hope that, through the efforts of our Parliament, we can move a step closer to a world without such a practice. Understanding the position of Scots law on marriage is the first crucial step in beginning our fight against forced marriage. Fortunately, Scots law states clearly the requirements for marriage and leaves no room for marriages that fail to satisfy them. The minimum age at which a person can marry is 16—parental consent is not required. It is important to note the requirement for both parties to understand the nature of a marriage ceremony and to consent to marrying. In Scotland, a marriage is deemed void if either party was  forced to marry against their will. Marriage as a result of duress, force or fear does not satisfy the requirement of consent by both parties. If a marriage is deemed void, it is regarded as never having taken place. However, a decree of nullity may be required from the Court of Session in order for the marriage to be treated as void. An important characteristic of Scots law is that a Scottish court can take jurisdiction to decide whether a marriage is void on the basis of lack of consent regardless of where the marriage was performed. Thus, Scots law is well prepared to aid individuals who are victims of forced marriage, even if it occurred in a foreign country.

I agree with the minister entirely. I have set out what Scots law currently allows for. We are trying to prevent forced marriages, rather than dealing with them after they have occurred. It is important to recognise the progress that has been made in the UK in recent years to begin to address the problem and provide support for those who have become the victims of forced marriages. The forced marriage unit, which was set up by the UK Government in 2005, does a great deal of work in helping people to escape from forced marriages, as well as gathering information that is vital for gaining an understanding of the extent of the problem and the issues involved in forced marriages. In May 2007, the Home Office and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office launched a two-year strategy to combat forced marriage. The approach suggested several activities relating to three crucial objectives: to increase education in order to raise awareness about forced marriage; to engage in more joined-up work with statutory agencies to ensure that best practice is shared effectively; and to work with the police and criminal justice system to ensure that existing legislation is used effectively in cases of forced marriage. At UK level, the Forced Marriage (Civil Protection) Act 2007, which has been mentioned already, was passed by Westminster last year. The act sets out ways to help those who face the prospect of forced marriage, as well as those who have already become the victim of a forced marriage. It aims to provide civil remedies for those who face forced marriage, but it does not create any criminal offence of forced marriage.

I am not aware of that proposal. My understanding is that we as a party supported the bill when it went through the Westminster Parliament. The Scottish Conservatives were, and still are, very supportive of the legislation and we welcome the Scottish Government's consultation to investigate the possibility of similar legislation for Scotland.

I welcome the opportunity to participate in this important debate. My speech will focus on the experiences of the Border TV region, and the challenges that ITV has faced in delivering the public service broadcasting commitment. We agree that Ofcom in Scotland should be strengthened to ensure that the people of Scotland get a fairer deal from public service broadcasting. However, I am disappointed that Ofcom did not do more to champion the interests of the consumer during the review of local news services in the Border TV area. Although we agree with Ofcom's view that ITV should focus on programmes that have been made in the UK, network news, and national and regional news services, the proposed merger between Border TV and Tyne Tees is ill-suited to delivering those objectives and to achieving the most benefit for the Border TV area. Although Ofcom has given the green light to the proposals for Border TV and Tyne Tees, it is critical that Ofcom keeps a watching brief over the PSB commitment to the Borders to ensure that PSB is not further diluted and that ITV is held to its promises on the local opt-outs. Experience in the Borders demonstrates the challenges that broadcasters, including STV, face in providing PSB. Despite being relatively successful, the continued existence of the local Borders news service could not be justified, given the economic challenges facing ITV. Border TV has provided local news and programming to the Scottish Borders, south-west Scotland, Cumbria and the Isle of Man for almost 50 years, and has the second largest geographical region in the ITV network. Despite the difficulties of catering for such a wide and diverse audience, the flagship daily news programme "Lookaround" has some of the highest ratings of any BBC or ITV regional news programme in the UK. In March 2005, a Sunday newspaper highlighted those exceptionally high ratings when it reported that while "Scotland Today" and "North Tonight" drew a 26 per cent audience share, and "London Tonight" took a 28 per cent share, "Lookaround" was watched by a whopping 42 per cent of the Border TV region's population at 6pm on weekday evenings. Although I acknowledge that those ratings might have slipped in recent years, Border TV news continues to have some of the highest ratings in the UK. Why does it have such a success rate? Why does it score so much better than the STV regions? The Sunday Herald put that question to  the then managing director of ITV Border, Paddy Merrall, who said that ITV Border news was "more relevant to people". That goes to the heart of the matter: TV should be relevant to the communities that it serves. We only need to look at the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak in 2001 to see the valuable public information service that the channel provided by giving people the latest, up-to-date news and public information on the problems as they unfolded. Similarly, in the past few hours, Border TV news has been providing a critical service to my constituents in Kelso during the gas network failure. That will be unlikely to happen when the news is coming from the north-east, with a local news opt-out. The loss of our local news service would be another example of people in rural communities being marginalised. I fully acknowledge that the broadcasting market is developing, with a wealth of new platforms and services, including digital and multi-channel television. With broadband, there is also greater use of the internet to access news services. That might be the norm 10 or 20 years from now, but for many rural parts of Scotland there is no access to adequate broadband coverage—many have no access to broadband services at all. Furthermore, many people, particularly the elderly, still do not have access to computers and so cannot hope to gain access to alternative forms of news coverage if local news disappears completely. They depend on the local television services that are currently provided by ITV Border. Ofcom must resist the agenda of urbanisation and centralisation. It must consider all the PSB options that are being proposed, and bear in mind the rural and diverse nature of parts of Scotland. The Scottish Conservatives believe that broadcasters have struggled to keep pace with the changing political environment. There has been a decline in Scottish programming and funding for Scottish programmes, which has damaged the creative industry in Scotland. Public service broadcasting must be reformed before the licences run out in 2014. I hope that the lessons of Border TV will be taken on board.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met officials from Scottish Borders Council's education department. (S3O-4956)

The minister is aware that Scottish Borders Council will shortly consider whether to adopt the recommendations contained in its "Transforming Children's Services" report, which, among other things, could see a number of schools being forced to share headteachers. I do not expect the minister to comment on specific proposals, but will he reassure me, teaching staff and parents that the Government will not allow Scottish Borders Council to implement any proposals that could adversely affect the education of young people in the Borders?

The debate has been useful in reminding us all what a complete waste of time and money ID cards will be. It has also shown us, from the way in which he has carried on this afternoon, the contempt in which Lord George Foulkes holds this Parliament. The national identity card scheme will do nothing to provide real help in Scotland as we face the economic crisis. The scheme will create a system that results in excessive amounts of information on British citizens being held. The whole scheme distracts from the important issues that we should be discussing. That is not the fault of the Scottish Parliament; it is the fault of the Labour Government at Westminster. With the Westminster Government's recent backtracking on the plan, it is clear that, even within the Labour Party, support is wavering. If the UK Government shifts policy and remains hesitant  on its own proposals, why should the people of Scotland be convinced that the policy is the right one to follow? I want to focus on a couple of aspects of the proposals that have been discussed during the debate by a number of members—their cost, and their ability to keep our country safe. There is no doubt that ID cards would come at a great cost to the entire country. The Identity Cards Act 2006 requires that the UK Government update Parliament at least every six months on the estimated public expenditure likely to be incurred to introduce the ID cards. As the minister pointed out, the latest cost estimates have been published by the UK Government. In the publication, it was revealed that the cost had risen by millions of pounds. That increase was combined with another substantial increase in providing ID cards to foreign nationals, making the total increase £60 million over the past six months. Those figures are startling. The taxpayer will forfeit huge sums of money to finance a scheme of questionable value. As Bill Aitken said, a study that was carried out independently by the London School of Economics found that, although the UK Government estimated a £4.8 billion cost for ID cards, a more accurate figure would be something closer to £20 billion. With discrepancies such as those, it is understandable why many people are worried about the implementation of such a plan. Who knows how much the cost will really be? Why pursue such an expensive scheme? Well, the UK Government is implementing its plans in the hope of creating better security for the British people against the threats of terrorism. However, the creation of ID cards will not prevent terrorist attacks—several public figures have acknowledged that fact. In an article by a consultant at GCHQ, claims that ID cards would help the fight against terrorism were completely dismissed. Even the former Home Secretary, Charles Clarke MP, admitted that the ID card scheme would not have prevented the bombings on 7 July 2005 in London. He said: "I doubt if it would have made a difference." We witnessed that in Spain, where ID cards are compulsory but did not stop the Madrid bombings in March 2004. The proposals by the UK Government will not prevent the work of terrorists. Regardless, the UK Government—with the help of Lord George Foulkes, it seems—continues with its praise and support of ID cards, despite the evidence to the contrary. Although the scheme would give the UK Government massive amounts of control over our personal information, the Government has admitted that it cannot be trusted with our data, making a security breach all the more likely with ID  cards. What is more, the agency that is to be responsible for running the ID card scheme has had its own security breached four times already. With a track record such as that, it is no wonder that people are sceptical about giving the Government even more access to such information. What is more, ID cards will not prevent identity fraud or human trafficking. In fact, it has been suggested that ID cards could "trigger massive identity fraud on a scale beyond anything we have seen before." If the purpose of ID cards is to help the British population, they certainly are far from doing their job. In fact, they increase the susceptibility of UK citizens. Furthermore, the ID cards will not prevent human trafficking, because nothing can substitute for having a proper border police force and proper checks on people entering and leaving the country. These ID cards are—put simply—an invasion of privacy. The UK Government could have almost 30 separate pieces of information on every citizen, all of which will be stored on a massive Home Office ID card database called the national register. The creation of such a register will allow anyone who can break into the system to obtain our personal information; it will also allow the Government to monitor us as it pleases. The Scottish Conservatives know that these ID cards will do nothing to improve the security of our country and that they could make it worse. The costs that would be incurred by the Scottish people are outrageous and unnecessary, and it is ludicrous of the UK Government to think that the people should pay such a ridiculous amount of money. Instead of using taxpayers' money to finance a defective scheme, the UK Government should direct the funding at more worthwhile endeavours. We would scrap the UK Government's proposals and instead call for extra police and the creation of a new border police force. Those simple measures would provide much more for the people of Scotland than anything that an ID cards scheme could possibly achieve. We are happy to support the amendment in Robert Brown's name and the amendment in Bill Aitken's name.

The First Minister will be aware of the devastating job cuts that have been announced in Hawick this week. On Monday, we were told that Hawick Knitwear Ltd would cut 15 per cent of its workforce due to the economic climate and, last night, it was announced that Hawick Cashmere would cut further jobs due to a company restructuring. That news comes on the back of the decision by Pringle of Scotland earlier this year to stop production in Hawick, which has left that proud town reeling. What action does the Scottish Government plan to take to protect the skilled workforce in the Borders and, in particular, to save the textile industry from cheap overseas imports?

I, too, congratulate Jeremy Purvis on securing this timely debate. As we have heard, tonight, the Border TV region will make history by becoming the first area in Scotland and the second in the UK to switch from an analogue television signal to a digital one. However, rather than being a proud moment for the region, it could well be one of embarrassment, because reception in the Borders is among the worst in the UK. As Jeremy Purvis said, Ofcom has reported that the Border TV region has the lowest percentage of households that can currently receive digital television through an aerial, with a figure of just 51 per cent. Nearly half of the Borders population will not know whether their preparation for the switchover has been successful until the changeover happens tomorrow. That could create further complications when the switchover occurs, with confusion among the electorate muddling the switchover even more. The changeover to digital television has been heralded as providing a wide viewing selection, with more than 40 channels available to the audience. One would think that all areas would be able to reap the benefits of such an improvement. However, although Ofcom reports that an average of 90 per cent of households in the UK will be able to receive the 40 channels after switchover, that figure does not hold true for the Borders, where barely more than 50 per cent of the population will  be able to receive the 40 channels. The figure is significantly lower than that in the second-worst-served area, Wales, where 73 per cent of households will be able to watch all 40 digital channels. The reason for the discrepancy is that main transmitters, such as the one at Selkirk in the Borders, carry all six multiplexes, whereas relay transmitters, of which there are 11 in the Borders, carry only three multiplexes. That is disappointing for the Borders region and entirely unfair to the residents in my constituency and Mr Purvis's constituency of Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale. Yet again, the Borders is being short-changed. As well as there being the obvious discrepancy in availability throughout the Borders, many unanswered questions remain about the digital switchover. For example, why can we not have local BBC Radio Selkirk news bulletins via digital audio broadcasting—DAB—radio after the switchover? That is yet another blow to the local news service. Furthermore, what is being done to protect the old bandwidth from being auctioned off to a commercial operator? I hope that Scottish Borders Council will fight for that valuable resource for the Borders—which will give more opportunity for local broadcasting, particularly local news—and will not allow the bandwidth to be sold to a large multinational company with no local interest in the Borders. The confusion from the digital switchover raises many questions that should have been answered long before now. I hope that the uncertainties will be resolved in the coming days and weeks. As the Borders is one of the first UK areas to move to digital television, we should serve as the leader for the rest of the country. However, the example for the rest of the country will be one of what to avoid and will demonstrate how necessary it is to prepare a whole region properly for such an important change. At a time when the Borders could have been at the forefront of technology for the entire United Kingdom, we find ourselves a rather ill-prepared test case and a lesson for the country in the importance of organisation and preparation before such drastic changes are implemented.

The debate has been interesting, not least because the principles behind the bill have caused me to give the issue a considerable amount of thought. As we have heard from a number of members, the bill's purpose is to deal with whether someone who has been negligently exposed to asbestos in the course of his employment can sue his employer for damages on the ground that he has developed pleural plaques. We have heard from a number of members about the awful effects that asbestos-related illnesses can cause—in particular, I note the personal experiences of Cathy Peattie's husband, which she mentioned in her speech. I do not think that any of us would dispute the distressing and disturbing effects of such diseases, but I have some concerns about what the bill might do from a legal perspective and about the considerable uncertainty surrounding its financial impact. We can say that the bill simply attempts to replicate the practice from 1980 to 2005, when damages were awarded to claimants who had developed pleural plaques. We can also say that those people who go on to develop serious illness as a result of their exposure to asbestos should have a claim in law for damages. However, like Nigel Don, I believe that we should move cautiously to overrule what the House of Lords determined in the Johnston case. The law lords gave careful consideration to the law of damages, and their judgment reversed more than 20 years of practice. I am sure that they did not take that decision lightly. They ruled that, as pleural plaques cause no symptoms, do not cause or lead to other asbestos-related diseases and do not shorten life expectancy in themselves, their mere presence in a claimant's lungs is not a material injury capable of giving rise to a claim for damages.  Mr Don asked whether the issue could be dealt with under contract law rather than under the law of delict—or tort, as it is in England. I suspect that claimants always pursue the route of tort or delict because of the level of damages available under that area of law compared with that which is available under contract law. I read with some interest the medical opinions that were submitted to the Justice Committee that pleural plaques do not, in themselves, cause any symptoms in sufferers. However, once diagnosed, they are likely to cause anxiety that something more serious may develop in future. The question is whether that should be sufficient in itself to entitle the sufferer to compensation. There were two clear views in the evidence that was submitted to the committee on that point. In the debate, members have focused predominantly on only one. Witnesses such as those from Clydeside Action on Asbestos took the view that the bill was an opportunity for sufferers to get some form of redress against those who had negligently exposed them to asbestos. The alternative view of the insurance industry and some lawyers is that compensation should not be available simply because someone has come into contact with asbestos. There was concern about the impact that the bill would have on the law of Scotland, in that it would open up the opportunity for other people who became aware that they were at a greater risk of an injury in the future to make claims. Other members focused on the reasons why we should support the bill. As devil's advocate, if nothing else, I will focus on the alternative view. I have a lot of sympathy for the view that making compensation available for pleural plaques when they have no negative effect on health runs counter to the Scots law of delict and could open the way for more widespread challenges to other longstanding legal principles on which we have relied in the past. That causes me quite a lot of nervousness.

As I said, I am simply putting forward different views from different aspects of the debate. Today's debate has focused on one side, but the Justice Committee took a much more balanced approach. I simply express reservations and concerns, from a lawyer's perspective, on the effect that the bill might have on the law of Scotland. I am not saying that the bill would necessarily have such an effect. However, we need only look at the unintended results of the introduction of the Human Rights Act 1998 by the UK Parliament to  see how the bill, if enacted, might unravel into results that we might not have intended. I want to look briefly at the financial implications, which are probably at the core of my concerns. That issue was raised by a number of members, but not by them all. The Justice Committee noted considerable differences in the estimates that were provided by the Scottish Government and by the insurance industry regarding the number of pleural plaques claims that were likely to arise in Scotland in any given year. The insurance industry and the Government—if the latter is being honest—have great difficulty in accurately predicting the number of future pleural plaques claims. There is uncertainty regarding how many people have been exposed to asbestos; of those who have been exposed, there is uncertainty regarding how many will develop pleural plaques; of those who have developed pleural plaques, there is uncertainty regarding how many will be identified as having pleural plaques; and of those so identified, it is uncertain how many would make a compensation claim. There is also uncertainty over the value of a claim, with the claim's inflation being a particular issue for the insurance industry. I agree that it will always be difficult to predict accurately the costs that are involved in implementing such bills. However, if we are simply replicating what the law was prior to 2005, surely there should be a clear indication of the likely costs. The Scottish Government should have clear and verifiable estimates, as should the insurance industry. Bill Kidd made a number of points about the insurance industry. The important point to make is that the issue is not just the insurers; there is a big issue for the Scottish Government, which is the employer in a number of cases and which will have to pay out as well. I am happy to support the motion as amended by Jackson Carlaw's amendment. However, there are financial issues that must be fully considered before the bill can be progressed.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will next meet representatives from Transport Scotland. (S3O-4576)

I draw the minister's attention again to the temporary traffic lights on the A7 at Branxholm in my constituency, which have been in place for two years. When I previously raised the issue with him, he said that reasonable progress was being made to take them down. Despite that, the traffic lights remain. What does it say about the Scottish National Party's Scotland when temporary traffic lights on a major trunk route can stay in place for more than two years?

I welcome the cross-party support that the motion has attracted from members, with the notable exception of members on the SNP benches. Two things are clear from today's debate. First is the need to tackle the problems that are associated with alcohol abuse in Scottish society, and second is that the SNP's ridiculous proposal will do little, if anything, in tackling the problems that society faces. There is some political consensus on the matter among members, and there also appears to be general agreement around Scotland that the proposal is a complete waste of time. I will make several points on the Government's plan to increase the minimum age at which it is legal to purchase off-sales alcohol from 18 to 21. Most important, I will consider the evidence from the pilot schemes that the Government is putting forward in support of the proposals. I will focus in particular on the conclusions in the Lothian and Borders Police report into the Armadale pilot. I suggest that the evidence shows that the trial was actually far from successful and certainly not something on which to base any new legislation. First, during the pilot, there was an insignificant change in alcohol-related behaviour and a rise in minor assaults.

I want to develop the point. Assaults actually increased. The average before the ban was 0.4 per week, the average during the ban was 0.5 per week, and the average since the ban ended has continued at 0.5 per week. Youth disorder was recorded in four calls per week during the ban and has remained the same, at four calls, since the ban. Secondly, the trial was too short—it lasted only six weeks. A pilot should be much longer before the Government can use it as the basis for legislative changes. Thirdly, the trial took place on only two days per week, between 5 pm and 10 pm on Friday and Saturday nights. That is not  comparable with raising the drinking age nationally, 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. Fourthly—and lastly—small pilot areas such as Armadale cannot be compared with the whole of Scotland. Results in one specific area are unlikely to be representative of how the scheme might work if it were to be rolled out throughout Scotland, and the Government is wrong to try to suggest that. Not only does the evidence fail to stack up, but the plans will create unnecessary inconsistencies in the legislation. Young people and parents rightly look to Government for leadership, but the proposals send out mixed messages to young people on where and when it is acceptable to drink alcohol. The rationale behind the plans is confusing and illogical, and they would penalise the vast majority of 18 to 21-year-olds who drink alcohol responsibly. Perhaps the Government does not understand that alcohol misuse is not a young persons' disease: adults of all ages misuse alcohol. In any case, all the plans would achieve is a messy and complicated set of rules for the purchase of alcohol. The proposals unnecessarily discriminate against certain members of our society. As a society, we recognise that young people gain additional responsibilities when they reach a certain age. By 18, they can vote, get married, drive, pay tax and even serve in the Army, but the SNP still does not trust them to buy a couple of cans of lager to take home. Those who are under 21 and live in rural areas will also be discriminated against if they want to enjoy a drink because they will no longer be able to do so in their own homes and are increasingly unlikely to have a local pub. The proposals are not necessary. Proper enforcement of the existing legislation would go a long way towards reducing the problems of underage drinking. In 2005-06, only seven people under 18 were prosecuted for buying alcohol or consuming alcohol in a bar. Either underage drinking is not a problem in Scotland or the current legislation is not properly enforced. I challenge even Kenny MacAskill to say that anything other than the latter is true.

As members have heard already this evening, the Scottish Conservatives have no difficulty supporting the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill. We believe that it is of the utmost importance that the judiciary in Scotland remains independent. As I said during the stage 2 debate, we support the principle that a free and democratic society can flourish only if the members of that society have access to an independent judicial system. Therefore, we welcome what the bill achieves in so far as it further promotes judicial independence. During the stage 1 debate, we expressed concerns about the establishment of the judicial complaints reviewer. Our primary concern was that the system for handling complaints would be unnecessarily elaborate and bureaucratic. Furthermore, although we agree that the public should be able to complain, understand the complaints process easily and feel comfortable using it, we shared the Justice Committee's concerns, which Bill Aitken repeated earlier in the debate. We remain concerned about those provisions and are interested to see how they will work in practice. The complaints system may need to be fine-tuned in future. I hope that the Scottish Government and ministers will be mindful of that. We also had reservations about the amount of time the Lord President might need to dedicate to administrative work. That issue was picked up by the Justice Committee as well as by Cathie Craigie and others during the consideration of stage 3 amendments. In particular, parts 2 and 3 appear to place significant extra responsibilities on the Lord President. However, like the cabinet secretary, we are reassured by the conclusions of the Osler review, which notes that the increase in administrative duties will be accompanied by additional resources to ensure that the administrative burden is reduced. We welcome the concessions that the Government has made today in responding to Bill Aitken, who spoke to and moved several amendments. We are sorry that some of our amendments were not agreed to but, although the bill and the various amendments to it might not be widely reported in the media tomorrow, we note that the SNP Government today suffered its first ever defeat on a piece of legislation in the Parliament. I am happy to confirm that we will support the bill.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it intends to improve access to national health service dentists in Roxburgh and Berwickshire, given that only 17 per cent of adults in the constituency are registered with an NHS dentist. (S3O-4274)

Will the minister confirm that, once the new dentists become available in Coldstream and Hawick, no patients will be waiting for an NHS dentist in Roxburgh and Berwickshire?

I welcome Robert Brown to his new role as Lib Dem justice spokesman. I should take the opportunity of telling Mr Brown how much I am  looking forward to welcoming him to my constituency when the Lib Dems come to the Borders to help with some campaigning in what I am told "may be a challenging seat". In Mr Brown's widely circulated e-mail, I believe all members were told that "Jeremy has suggested Tuesday 30th September and would arrange some food"—

I am just opening up. I tell Mr Brown that I am free and am always game for some good campaigning, but I might miss Mr Purvis's food. Now to the subject of today's debate: a report from the Scottish Prisons Commission. As we heard from several speakers, the commission was established to look at the purpose and impact of imprisonment in Scotland today. Today's debate is rightly focused on the key recommendations of that report. The first is that the Government should pursue a target of reducing the prison population to an average daily roll of 5,000 and the second is that sentences of six months or less should be scrapped in favour of a community supervision sentence. I am afraid that those recommendations and the general thrust of the report have, as stated by my colleagues Bill Aitken and Gavin Brown, confirmed our worst fears about the report. The underlying theme of the report and, it appears, Government policy, is that we should not use prisons as much as we do. One hundred years ago prisons had hard labour and treadmills. Today they have televisions, PlayStations and DVD players. Prisons have changed, but their necessity has not. We will always have a small minority of offenders who, by their behaviour, pose such a threat to the lives and property of the law-abiding majority that they must be kept apart from the rest of us.

I will deal specifically with short-term sentences in a moment. If the member listens carefully, he might just pick up on it. It would be nice to live in a society where there were no prisons, just as it would be nice if there were no hospitals because there was no illness. However, until someone steps forward with a plan  to make crime history, prisons are here to stay. The challenge is to create prisons with a purpose. It is obvious that overcrowded prisons that are awash with drugs and a system that gives short-term prisoners limited or no supervision and support on release are almost certain to fail. However, that could be used to argue, as we do, that the prison regime should be completely transformed and a system of support put in place for offenders when they are released from jail. It is daft to argue that because short-term prison sentences are not working currently, we should stop using them altogether. That leads me to the second worrying aspect of the report and the suggestions from the Government that it intends to interfere with sentencing policy. The role of Government should not be to decide sentencing policy but to support the courts in sentencing disposals and ensure that adequate provision exists to allow the disposals to be carried out. The judiciary must be allowed to maintain its independence, with judges and sheriffs left in charge of sentencing. The view that the current prison crisis is somehow caused by the volume of people receiving short sentences or failing first-time offenders is simply wrong. Prison is largely the preserve of serious, violent and persistent offenders. Contrary to popular myth, our prisons simply do not contain vast numbers of non-violent, first-time offenders doing time for licence-fee evasion and motoring offences. The case for community sentences must not be driven simply by a desire to deal with prison overcrowding, and a preference for community sentences cannot be an act of faith. In their current form, they are usually unsuitable alternatives to imprisonment, not least because they are insufficiently robust. How do we make community sentences more robust? They should have a sufficiently punitive element to command public confidence—for example, they should be made more visible. That was mentioned by several speakers and it is something that the Government and others have spoken about repeatedly but which has yet to be delivered. New technology might allow more robust semi-custodial sentences to be developed in the future, but they should be a supplement to the sentencing options available to the courts and not a substitute for custodial sentences that a court would otherwise wish to impose. In the absence of robust community punishment, prison is and will remain the only option for most of the offenders who are currently sent there. In addition, the Government should focus on how prisons are run, with far greater emphasis on education, training and work to reduce  reconviction rates. The role of community, faith and voluntary organisations in the prison system should be considered, and the scope and quality of drug, alcohol and mental health service provision in custody should be investigated. Furthermore, the Government should analyse ways of improving the support networks for released prisoners, to enhance their ability to choose productive lives after release. In reality, the commission's report is nothing more than a distraction from the pressing need to reform our prisons, which are not working. The prime duty of Government is to protect the public. The SNP is guilty of dereliction of that duty. Today, we have the tragic final proof that we are living in the SNP's soft-touch Scotland. I have said it before, and I will say it again: we do not cut crime by cutting the prison population; we cut the prison population by cutting crime.

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Government intends to support sport in schools ahead of the 2012 Olympic games in London and the 2014 Commonwealth games in Glasgow. (S3F-956)

I draw the Government's attention to the recent comments of the Olympic champion Chris Hoy on the importance of training facilities. I also draw attention to the written answers that my colleague Liz Smith has received that reveal that, in a number of critical areas, the Minister for Communities and Sport has no information on grass-roots sporting facilities and on sports in schools. Does the Deputy First Minister agree that, ahead of the next Olympic games and Commonwealth games, it is vital that the Scottish Government looks at detailed provision of grass-roots sporting facilities to identify where we need to improve facilities?

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will next meet representatives from BEAR Scotland. (S3O-3783)

I again draw to the minister's attention a serious problem that is affecting the A7 in my constituency. Due to a landslip, there have been traffic lights a few miles south of Hawick for a year and a half. The A7 is a major trunk route through the Borders and many of my constituents are concerned by the apparent lack of progress at the site and the inconvenience caused by the lights. Many drivers are simply ignoring the lights, which is causing a serious safety issue. When the minister next meets BEAR Scotland, will he ask it to accelerate the work to repair that important route through the Borders?

It is the responsibility of Government to ensure the safety of citizens in their communities and in their everyday lives. In recent years, many Scottish citizens have felt unsafe in their communities, because of the increasing problem of youth crime. That is hardly surprising: figures show that, under the previous Scottish Executive, the number of persistent young offenders increased by 19 per cent after 2003-04. The people of Scotland should not have to deal with the effects of youth crime. We should not have to deal with everyday aggression and foul language on public transport. We should not have to deal with broken glass, graffiti and litter in our town centres. We must stop the effects of youth crime and make our towns and communities safer places to live. We must find a way to change the situation and return a feeling of safety to all our citizens, young and old alike. My party and I—and, I am sure, everybody in the Parliament—are not looking to demonise the young people of Scotland. The vast majority of them are a tremendous asset to our nation, and they are helping Scotland to grow and flourish. However, it is important not to overlook those who engage in illegal, disruptive and antisocial activities.  There are two aspects to the debate. First, there are the sanctions that are available to deter and punish those who commit crime. Secondly, we must examine the circumstances that cause our young people to turn to crime in the first place. On 26 March, I lodged a question concerning the number of parenting orders that had been given out in the previous year. Much to my surprise, I was told that no parenting orders had been given out during the previous 12 months; what is more, I was told that no parenting orders had ever been given out. Parents need to be responsible for their children. If we are to reduce the occurrence of youth crime, we must provide the means for parents to help their children, as well as showing parents that they are accountable for their children's actions. It is imperative that we support parents and put responsibility back in their hands. I believe that the greater use of parenting orders will help to curb youth crime and make Scotland safer.

Police officers in my constituency, who deal with many of the issues that we have been discussing today, feel great frustration at not being able to use the powers that parenting orders might put at their disposal. That is their practical experience. If we are to stop youth crime, we must tackle its underlying causes. Only then will we be able to see real change in youth crime figures. While we must focus on the programmes that are already in place, such as parenting orders, we must also focus on and find ways to reverse the effects of social breakdown. We must focus on the family, on the environment and on the communities where our children are growing up. That point was made by a number of members, including Nigel Don and Mike Pringle. I remind the Parliament of David Cameron's recent speech on youth crime. In it, Mr Cameron stated that we must fight youth crime on three fronts: the response of the courts; the response of the police; and the response of society. We need to act lower down the scale and focus on the family. We need to curb crime and target criminals  before they start to commit crimes that deserve prison sentences. We need to focus on creating a strong family and community atmosphere in order to target at-risk youth and curb crime before it starts. That can happen only if we give the courts and children's panels the ability to punish youths in a way that will leave the biggest mark and effectively deter them from committing crimes in future. In 2000, the Westminster Government gave judges the power to disqualify youth offenders from holding or obtaining a driver's licence. That is a good example of a non-traditional sanction, and we should consider it. We must also focus on the effectiveness of our police. Robert Peel once said: "The test of police efficiency is the absence of crime and disorder, not the visible evidence of police action in dealing with it." Like Mike Pringle, I draw the Parliament's attention to the experience of New York. Between 1992 and 1996, New York city halved its murder rate by focusing on more minor crimes. When the communities saw minor crimes being prosecuted, there was a noticeable reduction in crime overall. A focus on stopping youth crime at an earlier stage will help the citizens of Scotland to feel safer in their everyday lives. Bill Butler and Mary Mulligan also made that point. We have consistently argued for more resources and disposals to be given to children's panels, enabling them to intervene more effectively—and, crucially, at the earliest possible opportunity. Those disposals could include the introduction of weekend and evening detention, community service, supervised attendance orders and drug treatment and testing orders. Restoring the family is an important step in reducing youth crime. We need to give families the necessary support and help to allow them to feel more responsible for the actions of their children. We need to continue to focus on stopping social breakdown both through social enterprise and by making it easier for voluntary organisations to obtain funding to use to help young people in the way that is needed. I believe that the youth of Scotland are a valuable asset. We want to hear what the youth have to say, but we also see the need to curb the youth crime that is caused by a very small minority. We need to focus on making Scotland a better place to raise children, ensuring that they reach their full potential. Curbing youth crime will make Scotland safer for all its citizens. I support the amendment in Bill Aitken's name.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to support public transport, in light of recent fuel price rises. (S3O-3680)

Does the minister agree that, following the massive increases in fuel prices in recent months, the time has come for a thorough and urgent review of the bus service operators grant, in an effort better to serve our hard-pressed bus companies, such as Munro’s of Jedburgh? Does he also agree that, in the light of the intense pressure that operators presently face, this is definitely not the time to attach strings to any  rebates, whether related to vehicle type, energy efficiency or other criteria?

I will ask the cabinet secretary about the barriers to the legal profession that exist, which I discussed during the debate in November. Unless we have a legal profession that can be accessed by the most able lawyers from Scotland and from around the world, we will not fulfil our ambition of allowing our legal profession to compete on the international stage. What does the Government propose to do to break down those barriers to entry?

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak on such an important topic. It is crucial that we provide health care services to people in every part of Scotland, not just to those who live in the urban central belt, so it is right that we are debating the needs of rural health services in Scotland. I believe—as I am sure most members do—that quality health care is one of the most basic services that a nation can provide. Governments, especially the most recent Scottish Executive, have failed to provide many people who live in remote and rural communities with the same quality of health care that is delivered to people in urban areas. That must change. My constituency in the Scottish Borders is an area where health services have come under severe pressure, and I will again bring some of the issues to the attention of the Parliament and the Government. The recent announcement of the closure of ward 14 at Borders general hospital has come as a shock to patients, staff and constituents alike. Although Borders general hospital is not in my constituency, it is an important resource that provides a valuable service to a large number of my constituents. On top of that news, we have been told that there will be a reduction in bed capacity in the local community hospitals. It was announced only last month that there will be summer cuts of four beds at each community hospital in my constituency, which will be implemented in the coming weeks. Yesterday, I spent time with a senior Hawick doctor who has responsibility for Hawick community hospital, so I know that there is widespread concern among staff about how quickly the decision has been taken and about the lack of consultation. There is a concern that, without the additional beds, the professionals will not have the flexibility to decide which patients need hospital treatment.  In effect, there will be a waiting list for available beds at the community hospitals. The health board wants more patients to be treated at home but, as any doctor will say, that is not always practical or feasible for patients. I will tell Parliament of the scenario that the Hawick doctor described to me yesterday. Let us imagine the case of a very elderly patient in Hawick who is in her dying days. Nothing more can be done to help her other than to make her last days as comfortable as possible. She has lived in the town all her life and her final wish is to die in the town where she was born with her family around her. It will simply not be an option for her to go to Borders general hospital, which is 20 miles away. I am told by the doctors and professionals that the proposed bed cuts will mean that such patients might well have to wait two or three weeks to get the bed that they need for their last days. Unfortunately for the lady in question, time is against her and she does not have two or three weeks to wait. Staff are also concerned that, although the proposed service reductions are described as short-term summer cuts, on numerous occasions in the past short-term cuts have turned into permanent measures. They no longer believe what they are told. Who would blame them, when it transpires that the summer cuts will continue until December? Since when has December been a summer month in Scotland? Parliament should be aware that those cuts come on the back of a number of hospital closures in the Borders. Thanks to the health policies of the previous Government, we lost Jedburgh and Coldstream hospitals, together with 40 other community hospitals across Scotland. Even though they received overwhelming support from their local communities, the Minister for Health and Community Care, Andy Kerr, and the Liberal-Labour Administration failed to support them and allowed them to be closed, so I find Mr Purvis's crocodile tears, which he has shed both in the debate and in the local press, a little rich, given his Government's record on rural health services in the Borders.

It is perhaps a reflection of how little influence the Liberal Democrats had on the previous Administration that, despite the fact that  they claimed to object to those closures, they were unable to reverse the decision. Instead of hospital cuts, I could have focused on the chronic shortage of NHS dentists in my constituency. Only 17 per cent of adults in Roxburgh and Berwickshire are registered with an NHS dentist. What an astonishing figure! Although the opening of new facilities in Coldstream and Hawick in the coming months will result in improvements to the dental care system in the Borders, accessibility remains a significant issue. Patients who do not have a car face a bus journey of several hours to get to the new dentists. I look forward to hearing from the minister how the Government intends to improve accessibility to dental care in the Borders and other rural areas. The debate has been essential, as people's inability to access health care services in remote and rural parts of Scotland and the lack of health care services in those areas are an issue of growing importance. Access to health care in remote and rural areas is becoming more of a problem. As I have demonstrated, the closure of community hospitals and wards is making it more difficult for the people of Scotland to receive the health care that they need. It is imperative that we keep local health care local and that the people of Scotland have access to health care, regardless of where they live. Improvements must be made to our remote and rural health care services. The mistakes that were made by the previous Liberal-Labour Administration must not be repeated.

Will the member give way?

I congratulate Alasdair Allan on securing this timely debate. I am sure that all members have experienced the effects of rising fuel prices. It is becoming increasingly expensive to get anywhere in Scotland and to go about our daily lives. No one has felt that burden more keenly than rural island and mainland communities. Borders farmers and Berwickshire fishermen, and hauliers and many other sectors in rural areas have found it increasingly difficult to maintain the viability of their businesses. It is becoming clear that public transportation, on which rural areas depend heavily, has been hit hard by rising fuel prices. It has been widely reported, even in the national newspapers, that the bus company Munro's of Jedburgh, in my constituency, has terminated a number of local bus routes. Munro's hopes to be successful when it retenders, but the company's drastic action is a reflection of the difficult times that it faces. I am most worried about what will happen if the company is not successful or if the uncertainty about fuel prices becomes so great that some routes become unviable and are simply dropped, which would have huge implications for people in the area. Since fuel prices skyrocketed, it has become difficult for local bus companies and other transport providers to stay in the black. Munro's of Jedburgh is the latest victim of rising fuel prices, but more bus companies will be forced to take difficult decisions and more routes will be put under pressure. Pressure on bus routes is not the only problem caused by rising fuel prices. The transportation of fuel has become increasingly expensive and has led to the closure of petrol stations. Newcastleton in my constituency recently lost its last and only petrol station because it had become too expensive to transport fuel to it. The closure has forced residents to drive many miles to fill up their cars and has put pressure on industry as well as on everyday life. I am working to establish a community-based service, but the current state of affairs is doing nothing to promote the area's attempt to become a centre for tourism. The community's problem is not just high fuel prices but access to fuel at all. The examples that I have given are not the only negative effects of rising fuel prices. It is important that we look beyond the obvious effects—the difficulties of getting around and the inconvenience of having to travel to fill up our cars—and consider the strain on the wider community. The termination of bus routes and the closure of petrol stations could lead to significant job losses and have a devastating effect on local employment, with the  loss of drivers, engineers and support staff. That is another reason why it is imperative that we help rural communities to fight the effects of rising fuel prices. I have raised the issue with the Westminster Government, but I have yet to receive a constructive response. We all know that, in effect, the Westminster Government is profit sharing from rising fuel prices, because of the fuel tax that it has imposed. It is more important than ever that the Government acts to help our rural communities. Without help from Government in Scotland and at Westminster, bus routes will continue to be terminated, petrol stations will continue to close and farmers and fishermen will continue to go out of business. Our rural communities are suffering because of rising fuel prices, and it is imperative that the Parliament finds a way to help them to deal with the crisis.

I am pleased to be leading my party's contribution to this important debate. Wildlife crime is a big issue in my constituency and throughout the Scottish Borders. As members may know, last August a golden eagle was poisoned in the Borders. The eagle was a female and was part of the only breeding pair of golden eagles in the area. That came as a huge blow to many of my constituents. Wildlife crime takes many forms. Habitat destruction, poaching, egg collecting, badger baiting and poisoning are a few examples. The most common form, and arguably the one with the highest profile, is the persecution of birds of prey by poisoning. During the 19 th and 20 th centuries, the practices of some shooting estates led to many birds of prey being wiped out in Scotland. Since then, some birds of prey have been reintroduced to the areas where they were wiped  out but with limited success. Wildlife protection is crucial to the survival of those birds, as well as to all other forms of wildlife. Birds of prey are especially vulnerable because they are long lived and slow breeding. Golden eagles, for example, will raise only one chick a year and do not start breeding until they are at least three years old. Wildlife is an important part of Scotland's economy. Thanks to television shows such as "Springwatch", visitors have been attracted to Scotland to see wildlife and its habitats. That has generated millions of pounds for Scotland. For example, the Galloway red kite trial contributes around £700,000 to the local economy, and the white-tailed eagle viewing project in Mull generates £1.4 million to £1.6 million locally. That is why I welcome any modification to the current policy that could protect birds of prey and all other threatened wildlife. My party believes that the current legislation regarding wildlife crime may need to be tightened, but we would emphasise that the enforcement of the existing legislation is the real problem when it comes to wildlife crime. RSPB Scotland said recently: "The Scottish Parliament is to be commended for enacting some of the strongest wildlife protection laws in Europe. However, these laws are not being used as effectively as possible to deter those who seek to destroy protected species." The problem seems to be the varying levels of enforcement in the regions of Scotland. There are concerns about the number of police officers who have specialist training in wildlife matters. The Tomkins report, which was published in April lays out observations on wildlife crime. That is what we are considering today; we are not specifically looking at the sanctions that may or may not be proposed. The report concludes by making a number of recommendations, which we support. I turn to the Liberal Democrat amendment. The report mentions only briefly the possible sanctions—I believe that recommendation 11 touches on sanctions. Therefore, we do not think that it is appropriate to be considering further deductions from the single farm payment, which is what the Liberal Democrat amendment might suggest. We, like the vast majority of the farming community, do not think that there should be any more deductions from the single farm payment.

No. I have had enough of Liberal Democrat incompetence today. We have great difficulty in supporting the Liberal Democrat amendment as it is drafted, because there might be additional circumstances in which  making deductions from the single farm payment might be permitted. We are happy to support the Labour amendment. The Scottish Conservatives condemn all wildlife crime and support fully the Scottish Government in its pursuit of wiping out such crime. We agree with the Government that legislation on wildlife crime might need to be tightened, but I emphasise that consistent enforcement of the current legislation is the real issue. The RSPB has said that, although our laws against wildlife crime are some of the strongest in Europe, they are not being used effectively. Our efforts should be focused on ensuring that the existing legislation is used and enforced properly. Wildlife in Scotland is an important part of our culture and economy. By protecting it, we can protect our culture, our economy and the beauty of Scotland.

I thank the Justice Committee for its work in connection with the bill and its preparation of the stage 1 report. Democracy in any country can flourish only if its citizens have access to an independent judicial system—Scotland is no different. I am pleased to contribute to the debate, because I believe that the bill will solve some of the problems with the current judicial system.  The Scottish Conservative party—and, I am sure, everyone in the Parliament—welcomes any proposals that promote judicial independence, because it is of the utmost importance that the judiciary of Scotland remains independent. As we have heard from the convener of the Justice Committee, the principal issue surrounding the bill is judicial independence. Historically, by ensuring that the pay of judges was not within the whim of the Crown and by providing security of tenure for holders of judicial office, a degree of judicial independence from the Government has always been provided. A number of other conventions within the common law have protected the independence of the judiciary. However, in more recent times, there has been a trend within the United Kingdom to provide statutory guarantees of judicial independence. The bill will continue that trend in Scotland by focusing on four main policy areas: judicial independence itself, the appointment process, the courts and the arrangements for the Scottish Court Service. I will briefly touch on each of those. Part 1 of the bill sets out the requirements to guarantee that the judiciary remains independent. It will be the duty of the First Minister, the Lord Advocate, the Scottish ministers and any other persons who have responsibility for matters that pertain to the judiciary to uphold its independence. They should not try to influence judicial decisions. They are to support the judiciary and to have regard to its needs to carry out its functions efficiently. Part 1 also provides a statutory guarantee of judicial independence. The Scottish Government concluded that "a statutory statement underlining its commitment would be a powerful and obvious reminder of the constitutional significance of judicial independence." That is to be welcomed. The guarantee is much like the guarantees in section 3 of the Constitutional Reform Act 2005 and section 1 of the Justice (Northern Ireland) Act 2002 that ensured judicial independence for England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Part 2 establishes the Lord President as the head of the Scottish judiciary, and places many responsibilities on him. Those responsibilities may be too much. We fear that they will slow down the judicial process for many cases, and will require the Lord President to dedicate much more of his time to administrative work. We therefore welcome the Cabinet Secretary for Justice's announcement that that will be looked into. More important, part 2 sets out the model for the Judicial Appointments Board for Scotland. The board is another important way to ensure that the judicial bench remains independent, and the  convener of the Justice Committee has commented already that it is a vast improvement on the current system. The board is to be completely independent of the Scottish Executive, thereby ensuring that the judiciary will remain independent. I hope that the new selection process that the bill anticipates will be made more transparent, and that judges will be selected based solely on merit, taking into account interpersonal skills and whether they are of good character. That must be welcomed. Part 2 also outlines provisions on the fitness of judges and on giving the public a means of voicing complaints of misconduct regarding the behaviour of judges and sheriffs. Although we agree that there is a need for a form of complaint, that may not be the best way to proceed. The general public might view the process in the bill as another appeal process, which it most certainly is not. The public should have the ability to complain and should easily be able to understand the complaints process and feel comfortable using it, but we share the Justice Committee convener's concern that we should not take a sledgehammer to crack a nut on that issue. Part 3 places yet more responsibilities on the Lord President—responsibilities that have so far been within the remit of judges and sheriffs. Although increasing the efficiency of the court system is an important step towards judicial freedom, the increased burdens on the Lord President could detract from the speed with which some cases are dealt. Overall, however, streamlining the court system will make it easier for the public to access it and make the judiciary more independent. The Scottish Court Service will become an entirely new body under the bill, and part 4 outlines how that will be achieved. The new SCS will be under the Scottish Administration, but it will not be part of the Scottish Government or under ministerial control, which will ensure the independence of the judiciary and should be welcomed. The new SCS will provide administrative support to the courts, the judiciary of those courts and other specified people. Its principal function will be running the court service in Scotland. However, we are concerned about such a dramatic shift of power. The switch will move all the authority away from the Scottish ministers and give it to the SCS. I urge the cabinet secretary to think carefully about such a move. Part 4 places yet more responsibilities on the Lord President. In conclusion, the Judiciary and Courts (Scotland) Bill will ensure that the judiciary in Scotland remains independent. Independence within the judicial process is essential for a free and democratic society to operate. I and my party  welcome any proposal that furthers judicial independence, and we are happy to support the Government's motion.

Like others, I welcome the cabinet secretary's statement on this important issue and I am pleased to hear of the progress that has been  made. How many times has the new procedure for taking evidence been used? What percentage of cases does that represent?

They were booted out!

On the Scottish Conservatives' behalf, I welcome the Justice Committee's report and congratulate the convener and committee members on their work on it. I will focus on a couple of points from the report. The committee's inquiry highlighted the enormous changes in the social, economic and political context in which Scotland's police forces are required to operate. The committee therefore recommended that, in this parliamentary session, the Scottish Government should initiate an independent review of the police's role and responsibilities. We support that. Of particular note to the Scottish Conservatives was the committee's view on police numbers and resources. The Scottish Conservatives have long held the view that more police officers are needed out in communities to provide a visible deterrent to crime and to boost public confidence. We have consistently campaigned for extra police officers. We do not want those officers to sit behind desks  and deal with paperwork; we want them out there in communities to make our streets safer. The committee's unanimous opinion was that, although determining the ideal funding level for policing is extremely challenging, police resources are currently inadequate to allow forces to meet all their commitments effectively. That tells us a lot about the Liberal-Labour Administration's record on police funding in its eight years in office. It is interesting to note that a report that the Scottish Police Federation commissioned from none other than Professor Arthur Midwinter said that, per head of population, spending on the police was 20 per cent higher in England than in Scotland. The federation's general secretary has said: "since devolution we have been very poorly treated". Labour did not commit to a single extra police officer in its 2007 election manifesto—not one more. In the Finance Committee, Labour proposed no amendments to increase police numbers in 2008-09. What is more, in the Justice Committee, Labour voted against Bill Aitken's proposal of 1,000 new police by 2011. Labour voted against extra police—so much for the previous Government's record on police funding to help to keep our streets and communities safe.

The evidence from the Police Federation speaks for itself. I quote again the federation's general secretary, who said: "since devolution"— under the Labour and Liberal Democrat Administration— "we have been very poorly treated". As we heard from the committee's convener at the start of the debate, the committee welcomed the promise of funding to recruit 500 additional officers during the spending review period. It also concluded that the Government's plans to retain or redeploy a further 500 officers would be very challenging to deliver. The committee, like the Scottish Conservatives, recommended that more money should be allocated for policing—enough to raise the level of recruitment to 1,000 officers. Although I appreciate the fact that the SNP Administration has inherited the problem of an underfunded police force in Scotland, that does not get the Government off the hook entirely. This was, after all, the first big U-turn by the SNP Government—in fact, it was a double U-turn by the Government on the recruitment of police. First, this time last year, during the April heat of the election campaign, it promised 1,000 new and extra police  officers in its manifesto—no ifs, no buts, no maybes. However, by the end of 2007, it made its first U-turn when it changed its mind and decided that those 1,000 new officers were to be made up not only through recruitment but by preventing early retirement and by redeploying officers. The SNP back-tracked and U-turned in a betrayal of the public and of the police. Then, in the early days of 2008, during the budget process, the Government saw the error of its ways. It was persuaded by the arguments that were put forward by the Scottish Conservatives and it amended its budget to allow the recruitment of 1,000 additional police officers. Scotland needs those extra police officers not just to put right the wrongs of eight years of Labour and the Liberal Democrats, but to deal with the SNP's soft-touch Scotland in which more and more criminals are being let out of prison even earlier. The Scottish Conservatives have fought throughout the budget process to increase the levels of police recruitment, starting from this year, and we have succeeded. Without the Scottish Conservatives, Scotland would have only 500 new police officers over the next four years. There is only one party in the Parliament with any credibility on the issue and—guess what—it is the Scottish Conservatives. We welcome the report and its findings. However, is it not a shame that we needed an inquiry to highlight the inadequacies of the funding of Scotland's police, which we all knew about? Yes, we must ensure that our police forces are adequately funded in the future, but we also need to end the SNP's soft-touch Scotland.

The debate and the review of the law on fatal accident inquiries are welcome. As others have said, Lord Cullen's wealth of experience makes him ideally equipped to conduct the review. The Fatal Accidents and Sudden Deaths Inquiry (Scotland) Act dates back to the year in which I was born—1976. It is appropriate that it should be reviewed now, so that it continues to be fit for purpose in the light of changes to other parts of the justice system. It is also important to note that, despite the fact that about 50 to 70 fatal accident inquiries are held each year, there is still a backlog of cases to be processed. Let us briefly consider the importance of such inquiries. Fatal accident inquiries are important because they consider the circumstances of deaths that have caused serious public concern. They are held in the public interest. The main function of an FAI is to address public concern and, if appropriate, make recommendations that might prevent such accidents from occurring in the future. However, there are a number of weaknesses in the current system that Christine Grahame, Karen Gillon and others have highlighted. The first weakness is the status of the recommendations that the sheriff makes at the end of the inquiry. As we have heard, the purpose of a fatal accident inquiry is to establish the time, place and cause of a death when there is public concern about the circumstances of the death. Such inquiries do not attribute blame or guilt in a criminal or a civil sense. The procurator fiscal leads evidence at the inquiry, which is held in the sheriff court. At the conclusion of the inquiry, the sheriff issues a determination that contains findings about the circumstances of the death. The sheriff may make recommendations as to how such deaths may be avoided in the future. Sheriffs make recommendations in about one third of all fatal accident inquiries. As Margaret Smith, Bill Aitken and others said, a sheriff's recommendations are not legally binding—on the basis, as I understand it, that the circumstances of a particular death may be unique and it may not be appropriate to spread the conclusions across the board. It will be interesting to see what the Cullen review decides on that  point, as I know that many people would like inquiry recommendations to be given a stronger standing in law. I was particularly interested to hear Nigel Don's views on the matter. The second weakness is the backlog. Making the current system more efficient would, I hope, reduce the backlog. One possibility would be to require inquiries to be completed within a specific time. There can be no doubt that delays are especially difficult for the families of victims. There is also an argument for enabling families to get legal support and representation if it is needed. At the very least, that would give families a better understanding of the process. That point was well made by Pauline McNeill and Michael Matheson. However, I am not sure whether it would make the system any more efficient. Indeed, the process might not be any quicker and I suspect that it would be considerably more expensive.

Indeed. If things are not dealt with in a timely manner, there is a danger that evidence becomes less good and less reliable. I agree with Christine Grahame's comments on that. The third weakness, which has attracted considerable comment, relates to Scottish persons who have died overseas, especially soldiers who have died on active service. Margaret Smith and Keith Brown articulated that point well. The current provisions do not allow fatal accident inquiries to be held into the deaths of Scottish soldiers who are killed abroad, even if their bodies are returned directly to Scotland. Scottish soldiers who are killed in action are currently flown back to an airbase in England, which gives rise to a coroner's inquest under the different jurisdictional rules that apply there. Scottish fatalities come within the scope of the coroner's inquest as soon as the bodies arrive on English soil—they are normally repatriated at RAF Brize Norton or RAF Lyneham. Due to the number of casualties in Afghanistan and Iraq, a backlog of inquests has built up. It is undoubtedly important to consider the grieving families, who do not need the inconvenience and stress of travelling to England to attend a coroner's inquest. It is important that we find a solution that allows inquiries to be held locally to the families of the victims. The debate has been useful, as it has enabled members to raise a number of important issues. I hope that Lord Cullen will give due consideration to the points that members have raised. We will be happy to support the motion as amended by Margaret Smith.

Here we are again—episode 3 of "The Great Prison Escape", hosted by none other than the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, Mr Kenny MacAskill, ably assisted—perhaps—by his Liberal  Democrat friends, who are also waving the get out of jail free card. Thank goodness that Margaret Smith is back in the driving seat of the Lib Dem justice brief, after the chaos of two weeks ago when, on Mike Pringle's watch, there was a rebellion on a scale never before seen in the Scottish Liberal Democrats. Thanks to a combination of no-shows and voting blunders, six of the 16 Lib Dem members—including, remarkably, the party leader—failed to support the party line. I am sure that this time, Margaret Smith will have inspired her colleagues at least to turn up, if not to vote. At the previous vote, I could barely hide my surprise. I thought, "Are the Liberal Democrats actually listening to the electorate? Are they listening to the victims of crime? Are they willing to stand alongside the Conservatives and oppose a ridiculous measure that will undermine the public's confidence in the criminal justice system?" Oh no, Presiding Officer, I should have known better. After all, why would they be supporting proposals to keep criminals in prison, when I know that some Liberal Democrats think that prison should be abolished altogether? It is, of course, the prerogative of the Liberal Democrats to advance barmy policy ideas every so often, and it is important that they continue to do so.

We are confident enough in our court system to know that people who are sent to prison should spend their time in prison. That is what victims of crime and the wider public tell me. We do not cut crime by cutting the prison population; we cut the prison population by cutting crime. The immediate goal should be to reduce the reconviction rate, not the prison population. I do not understand why the Government will not examine more closely the experience in England and Wales, where the chief inspector of prisons has warned consistently of the danger of allowing unsuitable prisoners to be transferred out of closed prisons early. Stuart McMillan spoke about the English experience, and I draw his attention to  the fact that, under the English version of the HDC scheme, which was introduced in 1999, more than 4,000 prisoners who were released early have reoffended, committing more than 7,000 crimes. More than 1,000 of those crimes were violent crimes, including one murder, 56 woundings and more than 700 assaults. Those crimes would not have been committed if the criminals who committed them had remained in prison serving out their sentence.

The member says "England", but surely we should learn from our neighbours across the border, rather than put our heads in the sand and make the same mistakes that they have made. Following what happened in the case of Mr Foye, I would have thought that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice would learn the lesson and not propose to release more prisoners even earlier. Nothing dismays victims more or brings the entire criminal justice system into greater disrepute than the fact that criminals almost never serve the sentence that is handed down by the court. Rather than let criminals out early, the Government needs to rethink its justice policy so that the problems of overcrowded prisons are tackled not by letting prisoners go home early but by cutting the crime figures. We need to make criminals scared of getting caught and scared of punishment, so that they will choose not to commit crime. Letting offenders home early will not achieve that. We need to make criminals pay a heavy price for their actions, so that others are scared of following their example. Letting offenders home early will not achieve that. We need to put victims first and ensure that they see justice being done. Letting offenders home early will not achieve that. We need to give the police the backing that they deserve. Letting offenders home early will not achieve that. I wonder what the Lib Dem rebels will be doing today. Will they vote with us to ensure that criminals do their time? Will they vote with us to ensure that the criminal justice system is on the side of the victims of crime rather than on the side of the offenders? Will they vote with us to ensure that dangerous criminals are kept in prison for the length of time that the courts have determined they should be locked up? Will they vote with us as we start the war against crime, so that the law-abiding majority can take back their streets, their town centres, their homes, their communities and their shops? Or will they vote with the SNP Government to set even more prisoners free even earlier? Will they vote with the Government to undermine confidence in our criminal justice system? Will they vote with the Government for a soft-touch Scotland, where four years means 18  months and the decent law-abiding citizens of Scotland have to pay the price? The choice is for the Liberal Democrats. I hope that they will not let us down. I urge Parliament to back the motion in Bill Aitken's name.

Will the implementation of the SPS report's recommendations mean that certain prisoners could be reassessed and transferred back to a closed prison? How will that impact on the apparent rights of prisoners such as Robert Foye legally to challenge such a move?

Will the member give way?

I am sure that many members have heard stories from constituents about the effect of crime on the communities we represent—I certainly have in the few months that I have been a member. I often hear stories from residents about a lone young teenage thug who has made the lives of local families a misery with his thefts, violent behaviour and vandalism. The residents have lost count of how many times he has been in and out of court, but his one-man reign of terror continues and the police can do little about it. Those law-abiding families feel that the Government is not listening to them—they feel abandoned. It is little surprise that so many people feel like that when we have proposals such as those that are before us today, which would release on to our streets even more criminals even earlier. On that issue, the Scottish National Party is completely out of touch with public opinion. Nothing dismays victims more or brings the entire criminal justice system into greater disrepute than the fact that criminals almost never serve the sentence that the court hands down.  What has been the experience of home detention curfews in Scotland? From their introduction in July 2006 until March 2007, almost 1,300 criminals were released on HDC licences, but more than 200—almost 20 per cent—needed to be recalled to custody because they had breached the term of their licence. Let us consider the longer experience in England, where HDC has been in existence since 1998. Under that scheme, tens of thousands of criminals have been released early from prison, including dozens of sex offenders and criminals who have been convicted of cruelty to children and thousands of drug dealers. According to Home Office figures, those criminals went on to commit more than 1,000 offences, including drug offences, assaults, including on police officers, and rapes. There is no doubt in my mind that those crimes would not have happened if the criminals who committed them had remained in prison and served the entirety of their sentences. The current system is failing and clearly does not work to cut crime—we need only consider the crime figures to realise that. In the past 10 years, minor assaults have risen by 28,000, acts of fire raising and vandalism have gone up by 45,000 and breaches of the peace have gone up by 20,000. We should not let criminals out of prison early. Scotland needs an alternative approach to tackling crime—we need to make criminals scared of getting caught and scared of punishments, so that they choose not to commit crime.

The minister will have his chance in a few moments.

The minister's chance will come. We must make criminals pay a heavy price for their actions so that others are scared of following their example. We need to put victims first and ensure that they see justice being done. We need to give our police force the backing and resources it deserves. Above all, we need to wage war against crime so that the law-abiding majority can take back their streets, town centres, homes, communities and shops.

That is a matter for the Scottish Prison Service. We must have confidence in our judges to send to prison those people who need to  be locked up. It is then for the Scottish Prison Service to ensure that they remain behind bars for the time that the judges require. The war on crime that I have just outlined will not happen in the SNP's soft-touch Scotland, where a four-year sentence will mean 18 months in prison. Decent, law-abiding citizens will pay the price. If the nightmare proposal becomes a reality, I hope that that the justice secretary will apologise to the communities in my constituency and throughout Scotland that will continue to be blighted by crime as a result of his ridiculous scheme. I urge Parliament to reject the proposals.

I draw the cabinet secretary's attention to the Government's gross value added figures, which show a dramatic drop in investment in the Borders during the time of the Liberal-Labour Administration. Can he assure me that the trend will be reversed?

Today's debate has been very interesting and informative, and the wider debate, particularly on the law of rape, has also been very well informed. I also welcome the clarification that the Lord Advocate has given this morning of her position, given the reports in yesterday's press that many people have expressed concern about her intervention. There is no doubt that reform in this area of law is long overdue and, given that academics and practitioners have been critical of the Scots law on rape for many years, we welcome the Scottish Law Commission's report and its conclusions. The crime figures speak for themselves; indeed, it was partly the publication of the Scottish crime statistics in 2003 that led the previous Scottish Government to order the review. In contrast with recorded crime generally, which had fallen by 5 per cent over the same period, cases of rape and attempted rape had increased by 8 per cent. Moreover, only 10 per cent of reported rapes made it as far as court and, as a number of members have pointed out, the conviction rate in such cases has been extremely low. A series of court cases at about the same time that came in for criticism from legal commentators and the media was another factor in the drive for reform. The Conservatives therefore agree that the law on sexual offences, particularly rape, needs to be examined to ensure that it is clear, gender-neutral and—to quote the Law Society of Scotland— "free of the various historical and other anomalies which have characterised this area of the law, for the benefit of both the public and those, such as lawyers, judges and juries, applying the law."  I want to pick up on a few issues, particularly consent, that have arisen out of the proposals and this debate. The fact is that redefining this crime, important though it is, will not be sufficient to tackle all the issues that have been raised about the law on, and prosecution of, sexual offences. We need to consider other factors, such as the procedures that are adopted at trial, the law of evidence and the pre-trial procedures. I would be interested to hear the Cabinet Secretary for Justice's views when he winds up. The essential element of a sexual assault, such as rape, is lack of consent. Under the current law, the consent element of the offence can either be considered as part of the actus rea of rape or as the mens rea, since the Crown must prove that the accused knew that the complainer was not consenting or was reckless about whether or not she consented. As the McKearney case in 2004 illustrated, the fact that, unfortunately, there has been no legal definition of consent in the context of rape has created a number of problems. The draft criminal code provides that any consent that has been given by a person is to be disregarded if, when consent was given, it was "induced by force or fear or was otherwise not freely given." In England, section 74 of the Sexual Offences Act 2003 defines consent such that "a person consents if he agrees by choice, and has the freedom and capacity to make that choice." Under the Law Commission's proposals, the concept of consent in rape cases would be clearly defined in statute in two parts. First, there would be a general description of the meaning of consent, or what is called "free agreement". Secondly, there would be a non-exhaustive list of situations, described by the Law Commission as "indicators", in which consent would not exist. I will not rehearse all the situations in which the complainer will not have had the freedom to choose whether to agree to intercourse, but they are broadly similar to those that operate in England and Wales. However, the commission says that they are not so much part of the law of evidence as illustrations of the key element of the offence itself. The list is to be welcomed. However, I am not convinced that the introduction of the statutory definition of consent will solve all the concerns and problems with regard to rape cases. For example, questions whether the victim has given his or her "true" or "valid" consent will remain, because the line between true consent and mere submission is not always easy to draw. It has been suggested that it might be preferable to avoid the use of the word "consent" altogether and to focus instead on whether the accused has  had sexual intercourse with a person who did not have the freedom or capacity to choose, in the circumstances. Such wording would be similar to section 74 of the 2003 act. Commentators also believe that that would shift the focus of the trial from analysis of the complainer's behaviour to the accused's behaviour. Discussion is also taking place on whether the legal burden of proof should be moved on to the accused. I am not sure whether that is the intention of the Law Commission's proposals and the issue will certainly require further thought. I am also not sure how such a proposal would fit with the European convention on human rights. Given the complexity of the problems, I welcome Pauline McNeill's amendment, which notes the need for Parliament to properly scrutinise the proposed bill. I will conclude with a few remarks about the need for better education, about which the Lord Advocate, Bill Aitken, Margaret Smith and several other members talked. The figures from a study by Rape Crisis Scotland of 700 potential rape trial jurors are startling. Forty per cent of the potential jurors felt that women contribute to an attack if they put themselves in a risky situation, such as willingly going home with a man, and 20 per cent believe that women contribute to rape by wearing revealing clothes. Given such attitudes, it is important that we support the police and anti-rape campaigners, who want to end the blame culture in which many members of the public believe that victims bring on attacks by being drunk, wearing revealing clothing or flirting. Everyone—men and women—must take on more responsibility for understanding what defines consent.

My point is that society needs to be much more widely aware of the matter. People need to understand that simply wearing a certain piece of clothing does not give people a green light. The issue is not just creating new laws or defining crimes—I agree with the Lord Advocate on that. Rather than undermine key principles of Scots law, we should consider the wider issues of education and public awareness. We are therefore happy to support the Government's motion and the amendment in Pauline McNeill's name.

I thank the minister for his statement. I express my frustration that the project is not ambitious enough for the 21 st century, in which we live. Why is there no freight capacity on the new railway? Why will the Government not give a commitment to connect the railway to Hawick, Carlisle and on to the west coast main line? Can the minister answer the questions from my constituents in the eastern Borders who will not use the railway to Galashiels? Will he give a commitment that he will consider reopening the  Reston railway station on the east coast main line?

I welcome the change in the Cabinet Secretary for Justice's approach. It appeared to me that, so far this year, Mr MacAskill has been using justice debates to pick constitutional battles with Westminster in an attempt to hype up the tension between the Labour Government in London and the SNP Administration in Edinburgh. However, when I watched the television earlier this week, I realised that the constitutional battle for this week would not be justice related but would instead be about the Scottish Government's—or, more particularly, Alex Salmond's—territorial claims to the great border town of Berwick-upon-Tweed. Although I would always warmly welcome the people of Berwick to my Berwickshire constituency, I remind the Government that it should be getting on with the job of governing Scotland rather than picking constitutional fights, seeking to push Scotland's border southwards and  promoting the First Minister's empire-building agenda. The debate has been useful for a number of reasons, not least because it has given us the opportunity to consider the failure of the previous Administration's policy on prisons and to highlight the issues that the new Government must tackle. We believe that prison should serve four functions in our society: to protect the public; to deter; to punish; and to reform criminals. I am sure that most members—at least, those of us who are Conservatives—agree that the most important of those four functions is protection of the public from the crimes that are committed by the minority. However, as Pauline McNeill, Margaret Smith and others have pointed out, the role of the Scottish Government should be not to decide sentencing policy but to support the courts in making sentencing disposals and to ensure that adequate provision exists to allow those disposals to be implemented. The judiciary must be allowed to maintain its independence, and judges and sheriffs should be left in charge of sentencing. I am concerned that that view is not necessarily shared by the SNP Government. For example, the SNP and others have stated that women do not belong in prison, but we must face up to the fact that half of the prisoners in Cornton Vale are there because they committed a violent crime. As David McLetchie said, to single them out for special, kid-glove treatment just because they are women is wrong. A crime is a crime, regardless of the sex of the offender.

I want to make some progress; I am very short of time. It is also important to remember that, according to the Government's figures, the average daily female prison population is only 5 per cent of the total average daily population of prisoners and young offenders. That is not to say that I disagree with the idea that some people should not be in prison. We have long argued that fine defaulters of either sex should not go to prison and that their fines should be deducted from their pay or the benefits that they receive. The Scottish Conservatives have a zero tolerance approach to drugs in prison, as Bill Aitken said. A proactive programme is needed in every jail, whereby agencies work with addicts both while they are in prison and when they get out. Prisoners who want to get off drugs should be given help and encouragement to do so. We welcome the Government's new policy on tackling  drugs, but we hope that it will also penetrate the misuse of drugs in our jails.

The Government's agenda appears to be focused on the criminal rather than the victim. We need to face the harsh reality that people who go into prison often come out with a drug habit or develop a worse drug habit than they had when they went in. Until the Government of the day, regardless of its political persuasion, tackles that problem, we will not address the core problem behind the rising crime rates in Scotland.

I want to make some progress; I am very short of time. We welcome the Government's new drugs policy, but we are concerned that it will not do enough to tackle drug misuse in prisons. Robust measures must be applied to everyone who supplies drugs to prisoners. Visiting privileges should be withdrawn and, in persistent cases, criminal charges brought. In short, a carrot-and-stick approach must be used to help those prisoners who wish to be helped and to deal responsibly with those who break the rules. The vital first step must be the comprehensive application of drug treatment and testing orders to every prisoner when they are admitted to prison and at regular intervals thereafter. If we do not know the extent of the problem, we cannot hope to address it. If a prisoner refuses to comply, they must be treated as if they were dependent on drugs and their privileges must be ended. The benefits to society will be great if we find the political will to take on that task. It will result in lower rates of reoffending, less crime and a safer prison environment, and—given that so much crime in Scotland is fuelled by drugs—will be good for addicts, for families and for society as a whole. It is clear that the Scottish Government is more interested in emptying Scottish jails than in protecting the public. When it comes to tackling  crime, the public want prisoners to be in prison rather than out in the community. However, the SNP seems to want prisoners to be out in the community, given its policy of ensuring that people who get sentences of six months or less receive their punishment in the community. The Government should learn lessons from the mistakes of the previous Administration. It should steer clear of sentencing policy and, if necessary, should continue to build more prisons to accommodate our criminals and to keep the people of Scotland safe. I support the motion in Bill Aitken's name.

To ask the Scottish Executive what it is doing to help the textile industry in the Scottish Borders. (S3O-2059)

The minister will be aware of the proud tradition of textiles in the Borders and of the challenges that the industry has faced in recent years. Indeed, in the past few months, there have been significant job cuts in a number of mills across the region, including at Pringle of Scotland in Hawick. What does the Scottish Government intend to do to protect Scottish textile firms from overseas firms that are often able to dramatically undercut our industry while giving the impression that they are producing Scottish goods?

To repeat comments that the majority of members who have spoken in the debate have made, we firmly believe that firearms laws should remain the responsibility of Westminster. Although I acknowledge that the cabinet secretary has made the right noises by putting a letter in the post to the Home Secretary to ask for a cross-border task force, like many members I remain concerned that that is another example of the SNP Government wanting to focus on the constitutional aspects of gun control, rather than on how it can work with the UK Government to tackle what is an important issue. In last week's debate about serious and organised crime, I questioned the cabinet secretary's attack on the British Transport Police and expressed concern that he was using that issue as part of his anti-British crusade. This week, the SNP Government seems to be using the recognised problem of air-guns in Scotland as another weapon in its anti-British battle. During a debate in 2005 on the control of firearms, the SNP, which was then in opposition, appeared to suggest that the way forward was to have a different system of gun control in Scotland from  that in the rest of the UK. However, there is no doubt in my mind that, as Bill Butler explained, having different systems throughout the UK could create loopholes that would be exploited by those with criminal intent. Scotland has not had the surge in gun crime and gang warfare that has been witnessed in parts of England, where gun crime involving banned and legal guns has doubled since 1997. However, it is important to recognise the challenges that we face in Scotland.

The cabinet secretary has confirmed my fears. I say to him that Scotland is not part of a federal United Kingdom but a United Kingdom in which this issue is most effectively controlled by being dealt with at Westminster and not at localised Parliaments. It is important to acknowledge the challenges in Scotland. We would all welcome the fact that the trend in England has not been repeated in Scotland. However, although we have not seen the same surge in gun crime as south of the border, there is no room for complacency. Firearms casualties in Scotland were up by 25 per cent. In 2006-07, the Scottish police recorded 1,245 offences in which a firearm was alleged to have been used. That was an increase of 17 per cent and the highest number of offences recorded in the past 10 years. Tragically, since 1998 hundreds of murders, attempted murders and robberies have involved pistols and revolvers. As all members know, the vast majority of such weapons have already been banned. Banning the guns did not prevent the crimes. It would be a mistake to confuse legally held firearms with the illegally held firearms that are all too often used to commit crimes. We all know about the increasing number of concerning incidents involving air-guns. However, the problem is not the legally held weapons. It is the illegally held weapons that we ought to focus on. As the figures demonstrate, bans and legislation on their own do not prevent tragedies or crimes. That point was made in the very good contribution from Nigel Don. Drink-driving is banned but we still have thousands of drink-driving offences; drugs are outlawed but we still have a growing drugs problem.

I would like to make some progress. Last year, millions of crimes and offences were committed across Scotland, despite their being outlawed. The cabinet secretary says that current legislation is not fit for purpose. However, legislation alone will not prevent individuals who are intent on breaking the law from doing so. We will also require a robust enforcement regime. The Scottish Conservatives have continuously campaigned for more police officers on Scotland's streets—walking the beat and being a visible deterrent. In our manifesto for the recent elections to this Parliament, we promised 1,500 newly recruited police officers.

I am in my final minute, almost. We agree with the Scottish Government that we need to retain serving officers and ensure that their time is being used productively. Officers must be freed from needless paperwork. We also agree that we need to help the police forces to work smarter. On top of all that, we would still provide the forces with the additional 1,500 police officers. I know that the new SNP Government is battling with the legacy inherited from the previous Administration, but how can having only 140 police officers on our streets at any one time possibly win the battle against gun crime? My conclusion is simple: what we need is not so much more law as more police officers on our streets.

To ask the First Minister what information the Scottish Government has on how many jobs will be lost in Scotland following the announcement that it will not allow any new nuclear power stations to be built in Scotland. (S3F-433)

I thank the First Minister for his answer, although I doubt whether many people in Scotland's nuclear industry will do so. The First Minister's decision to block new nuclear power stations will mean the loss of 705 core jobs at Torness and 671 at Hunterston. In addition, the decision raises concerns about Scotland's ability to meet its future energy demands. That may well jeopardise future investment in Scotland as businesses choose to invest elsewhere. How does the First Minister's decision on nuclear power tally with his objective to make Scotland wealthier?

To ask the Scottish Executive what it intends to do to help Berwickshire's fishing industry. (S3O-1848)

The cabinet secretary knows that the European fisheries fund will provide important financial help to areas in Europe that depend heavily on fishing. I understand that the UK Government will shortly propose the parts of the UK that will be fisheries-dependent areas, which will entitle them to access the additional funds. However, whether the Scottish Government has suggested that Berwickshire should be such an area is considerably uncertain. Has the Scottish Government proposed including the Berwickshire coast in the fisheries-dependent areas?

The debate has been useful as it has allowed us to consider the issues connected with serious crime and how we might tackle it. There is much in the Government motion that we can support and the debate has been generally consensual, but there is also much that we must question and consider critically in the light of the Government's recent actions. Sandra White will not like it, but there are questions to ask—I am pleased that she has left the chamber. There can be little doubt that serious organised crime is a major problem facing Scotland and that it has had a devastating impact on communities and businesses. Yes, the tackling of serious crime should be a key priority; yes, we can all support the view that serious organised crime cannot be seen to pay and we can support measures that strip criminals of the profits that they make from the misery that they have caused; and yes, we support the Scottish police and UK and European law enforcement agencies in ramping up their efforts to disrupt and destroy criminal networks, which inflict misery on law-abiding citizens. It is perhaps disappointing, therefore, that the Government's actions have shown that its commitment to the motion is less than fulsome. For example, let us consider the Government's support for the police to allow them to tackle serious crime. Before the election, we were told that the SNP would be putting an extra 1,000 police officers on the beat, but now we all know that the number will be much less than the original one. We will support the Liberal amendment, which highlights that issue. Despite what Sandra White might think, the issue is an important part of this debate. It is interesting to note in passing that  the Liberals failed to deliver the extra police numbers when they were in government, but I am pleased that they have come round to the Conservative way of thinking.

I want to make some progress. How about support for the other UK law enforcement agencies, to which the Government also refers in its motion? I am not sure how that fits with the views that the cabinet secretary expressed recently when he tried to create another battle between Holyrood and Westminster by criticising the number of stop and searches that had been carried out by the British Transport Police in the fight against terrorism. He said: "I think the public would be right to look for a clear explanation on why the British Transport Police in Scotland ... need to use these powers ... It's a genuine cause for concern." He also said: "The British Transport Police seem to be taking a diktat from London." To challenge serious organised crime, Scotland must be prepared to work with organisations throughout the world. Tackling such crime can be done successfully only if it is done by the UK as a whole. The SNP Government in its anti-British crusade has in recent weeks been using the British Transport Police to cause a constitutional row. Surely it is the job of the Scottish Government to support all the forces in Scotland, which are working to protect Scotland's people, rather than undermine them. Although I am pleased that the Government wants to talk the talk, it is important that we see actions to back up its fine words.

The important point about the British Transport Police is that it was taking action to deal with terrorism, which could be connected with serious crime.

I want to continue, if I may.  Many interesting points were made during the debate. I agree with various members that the Parliament was right to set up the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency. The cabinet secretary set out some of the work that the agency has done. However, we must also recognise where the agency can be improved. Drug enforcement work and tackling other forms of serious and organised crime represent a global challenge. The SCDEA fosters and continually builds closer working relationships with Scottish and other domestic and foreign law enforcement agencies and intelligence agencies. Indeed, as we heard from a number of members today, the increased ease and speed of international travel and trade means that it is likely that large numbers of organised crime groups in Scotland will continue to work with foreign criminals and operate on an international level. The loss of Graeme Pearson was disappointing; all the members who mentioned him would agree with that. Perhaps the most worrying aspect of the situation is the reasons that he gave for his departure. In that regard, I want to expand on the point that Pauline McNeill touched on during her speech. At the time of his departure, Mr Pearson was quoted in the press as saying: "The agency has never been fully staffed and I would say, on average, is about 10% down on what it should be." He went on to say: "some of the forces find it difficult to release staff to us because the pressures, at force level, encourage forces to keep them there." That is yet more evidence of the lack of investment in law enforcement by the previous Administration. The current Administration must address that. As we heard from Bill Aitken, the agency can no longer be viewed as a secondary part of Scottish law enforcement. It must be given the powers, finance and freedom that it requires to enable it to tackle serious crime in the way that we expect it to. The SCDEA must be put on an equal footing with Scotland's eight regional police forces. That is the only way in which we can build on its earlier successes. We agree that serious organised crime is a major problem across Scotland. It is important to bring together all agencies to share information and work together to provide the best possible results in relation to tackling that problem. However, once criminals are caught and charged, we must ensure that the punishment fits the crime. Like Margaret Smith, we believe that a much more rigorous approach is needed to confiscation orders and the seizure of assets. It might be necessary to change the law so that, where there are reasonable grounds for suspicion that the assets  of a convicted drug dealer were obtained by criminal activity, he or she should be required to prove that they have not been so obtained. In other words, in that situation, the onus of proof would be on the convicted criminal, not the Crown. The debate has been useful. Serious crime is a growing problem and has the potential to have a devastating impact on Scotland and Scotland's communities. Scotland must play its part in tackling the problem and I urge the Government to take a lead.

I welcome the opportunity to debate an issue that will have a severe impact on local news coverage not only in my constituency of Roxburgh and Berwickshire, but throughout the South of Scotland region. A number of members have expressed an interest in the issue and I hope that as many of them as possible will contribute to the debate. I note the presence of the Presiding Officer, whose constituency of Galloway and Upper Nithsdale would be affected by the proposal to abolish Border television news. I will set the scene. ITV Border has provided local news and programming to the Scottish Borders, south-west Scotland, Cumbria and the Isle of Man for almost 50 years. It has the second largest geographical region in the ITV network. Despite the difficulties with catering for such a wide and diverse audience, the flagship daily newsround programme, "Lookaround", has one of the highest ratings of any BBC or ITV regional news programme in the United Kingdom. In March 2005, the Sunday Herald highlighted those exceptionally high ratings when it reported that while "Scotland Today/North Tonight" drew a 26 per cent audience share, and "London Tonight" took a 28 per cent share, Border's "Lookaround" was watched by a whopping 42 per cent of the population at 6 pm on weekday evenings. I acknowledge that those ratings may have slipped in recent years, but Border TV news continues to have one of the highest ratings in the UK. Why does the service have such a success rate? Why, in particular, does it score much better than any of the Scottish Media Group's ITV regions? In response to that question from the Sunday Herald , the managing director of ITV  Border, Mr Paddy Merrall, stated that Border news was "more relevant to the people". He went on to say that Border TV benefits from there being no dedicated BBC television studio in the region—the nearest are in Newcastle and central Scotland. The large area that Border TV has to cover has one of the lowest populations. That said, the audience is one of the most loyal. In the recent people's millions competition for the allocation of lottery funding to local projects, the Border TV region attracted the highest number of votes—almost 52,000. That compares with 19,650 for STV Central, and perhaps most surprising of all, just less than 20,000 for London. With that background, one would have thought that the future of Border TV news would be secure. Unfortunately, the chief executive of ITV, Michael Grade, thinks differently. Shortly after his appointment, Mr Grade stated that his first priority for ITV would be to improve its programming. However, in September this year he announced a controversial five-year restructuring plan, which included a major overhaul of the regional structure of ITV. The proposals would see a consolidation of the ITV regional news programmes across the country, but for the Border region, it would involve a full merger between ITV Border and ITV Tyne Tees. What would that mean for our local news? The bulk of the local news—which is currently covered in the nightly half-hour programme—would be reduced to a 10-minute opt-out that would be expected to cover the entire Border region. That reduction in service would undoubtedly have an impact on the quality and amount of news programming for the Border region. Let us look at some of the figures, and the stories that Border TV news has been covering in the past year. Since the start of 2007, there have been more than 300 stories on Border TV from the Scottish Borders, including 35 stories from Hawick, 17 from Eyemouth and 19 from Peebles. For Dumfries and Galloway, there have been more than 500 stories on Border TV, including 109 from Dumfries and 69 from Gretna. What hope will those local news stories have in the new enlarged ITV region? What hope can our local communities, community groups, campaign groups and sports teams have of getting on to the news agenda when they will be competing with stories and issues from Newcastle, Gateshead, Middlesbrough, Sunderland and north-east England? Although I am assured that there will still be a news-gathering capacity in the Border TV region, by definition, the stories that come from the more  populated parts of the new ITV region will be of greater interest to more people and the news agenda will be adjusted accordingly. A 10-minute opt-out is simply not sufficient. The same arguments could also be made on the danger of losing out to Glasgow, Edinburgh and other major cities in the south central belt in any proposed merger with STV. In passing, it is interesting to note that there is no campaign by the staff at Tyne Tees Television against the proposals, which is perhaps an indication of how they think that they will work in practice. They clearly do not regard their news coverage as being put under threat by the proposals. Michael Grade states that he wants to reconstruct the ITV regional layout and that the existence of Border TV "no longer makes sense". Further, we are told that the move is expected to give ITV plc "greater value for money". Well, it might not make sense to a London-based metropolitan journalist like Mr Grade, but the service has, in the past, provided a crucial lifeline for thousands of people living in communities throughout the region. We need only consider the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak in 2001 to see the valuable public information service that the channel provided by giving people the latest news and public information on the problems as they unfolded. It is unlikely that that would have been the case if the news had come from the north-east of England with a 10-minute opt-out. The loss of our local news services would be another example of the marginalisation of people in rural communities. What happens now? Following my meeting with the Office of Communications in Glasgow yesterday, I can confirm that it is still waiting for formal notification from Michael Grade of what ITV proposes to do with Border TV. Once notification has been received, it will be for Ofcom to decide on the process of consultation that it will undertake to consider the proposals. My advice to Ofcom is to consult as widely as possible so that everybody in the Borders has the opportunity to express their views. The news that ITV has already appointed someone to head up news services in the Border and Tyne Tees region has given rise to a feeling that there is a done deal. People do not want a rubber-stamping exercise; they want to be engaged in the process and they want to know that Ofcom can and will say no to ITV's proposals. I intend to host a number of consultation meetings throughout my constituency so that local residents' voices can be heard. I urge other members to carry out similar exercises in their constituencies. Developing technology may well mean that people will be able to access news through their  computers in the future, but it is important to acknowledge that many people in the Borders do not have access to computer networks or adequate broadband services, so the option is not necessarily open to them. Ofcom must resist the agenda of urbanisation and centralisation. It must examine and consider all the options that ITV proposes, bearing in mind the rural and diverse area that Border TV currently serves. I look forward to hearing other MSPs' speeches. I hope that the debate will move forward across the region and that a strong argument for the retention of our local news services in the Borders and the South of Scotland will be presented to Ofcom and ITV.

In today's debate, we have heard about the UK Labour Government's attack on civil liberties, with national ID cards and the plans to extend DNA retention. Those schemes are not just a fruitless attempt by the UK Government to  propagate its political agenda—they are a direct infringement of the civil liberties of the British people. As we have heard from a number of members today, national identity cards are a waste of money and an invasion of privacy, and will not prevent terrorist attacks, identity fraud or human trafficking. Indeed, as we heard from Bill Aitken and others, a former Labour Home Secretary, Charles Clarke, admitted that ID cards would not have prevented the 2005 London bombings. As Jamie Hepburn pointed out, we need look only to Spain for further evidence of that—the Spanish Government requires national identity cards, but that did nothing to prevent the terrible bombings in Madrid in 2004. The UK Labour Government and Mr Martin have yet to produce any evidence to support the introduction of ID cards. However, there is much evidence against their introduction, and we have heard those arguments from a number of members today. Not only will the national identity card scheme prove to be useless at tackling the problems that it is supposed to address, it will also be a reckless waste of money on the part of the Labour Government—I will dwell on that point. The scheme will require a £93 fee for a combined ID card and passport package. If your card is lost or stolen, or if you change your name when you get married, a £30 fee will be imposed for the new ID card that will have to be issued.

I am sorry—I am short of time. Perhaps most shocking of all is the £1,000 fine if a relative dies and one forgets to return their national ID card to the registry. The entire scheme, as Margaret Smith pointed out, will cost up to £20 billion in total, which is confirmed by the London School of Economics. That is four times the estimate that has been put forward by the Labour Government. If that is not enough to put us off such a daft idea, let us look at the agency that has been tasked with running the ID card scheme: IPS, the identity and passport service. In the past nine years, there have been four separate security breaches at that agency. All it takes is one such occurrence, and all our national identity data could be released into the wrong hands. Such a breach of the national registry of security would have massive consequences for the British people. The Conservatives believe that, instead of spending inordinate amounts of money on a scheme for which there is no evidence that it will be a success, the ID card scheme should be scrapped and the funding reallocated to bring about four different things: the creation of more prisons, more prison drug rehabilitation facilities, more police officers and better border controls. Using those funds to build more prison facilities will greatly  reduce the overcrowding in our current prisons and improve the drug rehabilitation services. The funds could be used to create new UK border police officers to prevent and detect illegal immigration, which ID cards are supposed to do. They could be used to put more police officers on the streets, which would create a stronger police force. As we have said many times before in Parliament, increasing local police forces in Scotland would act as a powerful deterrent and would help to reduce the fear of crime. ID cards are a bad idea. They will do nothing to improve our citizens' safety. They are not the answer to the threat of terrorism or to tackling benefit fraud, illegal immigration, human trafficking or identity theft. They are a waste of money. I am pleased to confirm what Patrick Harvie said. When David Cameron leads the Conservatives back into government at Westminster, we will abolish ID cards.

I am pleased that we have an opportunity to debate the ending of domestic abuse against women, although it is sad that, in 2007, Scottish society is still wrestling with the problem despite the efforts of many people, including those in Government agencies and voluntary groups, to raise awareness of such abuse. Domestic violence is an atrocious and inexcusable crime that has been proven to have a severely negative impact on families, especially when children are involved. As Margaret Mitchell pointed out, statistics have shown that 125 incidents of domestic abuse occur every day in Scotland. The fact that 55 per cent of those occurrences concern victims who have previously been involved in recorded incidents suggests that there is a repetitive pattern in domestic violence. If we keep in mind the minister's point that three out of four crimes are never reported, we must surely find the figures concerning. Given that the rise in the number of incidents of domestic abuse has been mirrored by an increase in the incidence of serious crime, that is surely representative of a wider culture of crime that can be addressed only  through enhanced law enforcement and tougher court sanctions. As a number of members have already said, domestic abuse encompasses a wide range of victims, including children, families and males and females, and consists of various forms of violence, such as rape, indecent assault and lewd and indecent behaviour. The effects of domestic violence on children, which are the focus of the motion, are particularly concerning. According to the British Medical Association's report on domestic abuse, each year 750,000 British children and young people are witnesses to domestic abuse. On nine out of 10 occasions, the child is in the same room, or the room next door, when events of domestic violence take place. A significant amount of evidence has been gathered on the horrific toll that violence against women has taken on the physical health, emotional well-being and education of children. According to police figures, 659 incidents of domestic abuse were reported in my constituency in the Scottish Borders in 2006-07. Those alarming statistics have led to the Scottish Borders Council participating in the white ribbon campaign, which, as other members have said, is part of the largest campaign to end men's violence against women to have been developed and run by men. In the space of two weeks, the Scottish Borders community safety partnership and the domestic abuse working group aim to collect 2007 pledges from men in the Borders. The pledge includes a promise "never to condone, commit or remain silent about violence against women". As Jim Tolson said, I am sure that all members would support that, and I am pleased that a number of male members are sporting white ribbons. In recent years, various Government initiatives in Scotland have attempted to remedy the growing problem of domestic abuse. As members such as Margaret Smith and Cathy Jamieson have said, the pilot domestic abuse court in Glasgow that was launched in October 2004 had administrative success, but victims' safety remained a problem. The 1998 domestic abuse campaign sought to use the press to spread knowledge of domestic violence and to gain public opposition to such behaviour. Bill Aitken told us about the success of a particular campaign. The domestic abuse hotline that was created in June 2000 as part of the national strategy to address domestic abuse in Scotland offered support to victims of domestic abuse and provided them with the information that they needed for their recovery. Those initiatives have proven to be successful in educating the public about the widespread effects of domestic  abuse, but there remain concerns about the safety of victims and preventing repetition of incidents of domestic violence. We believe that domestic abuse is an appalling and unjustifiable crime that impacts on children and families all over Scotland. Legislation is not and cannot be the only answer to the problem; there needs to be culture shift on domestic abuse, which can be achieved by increasing public confidence in the criminal justice system. We believe in stricter enforcement of legislation and sanctions, in conjunction with the creation of a stronger criminal justice system to battle the growing problem of domestic abuse in today's society. We are happy to support the motion.

To ask the Scottish Government what the current estimated building costs are for the Waverley railway line to Galashiels. (S3O-1294)

The minister will be aware that Scottish Borders Council is to fund part of the railway project's cost and that it is doing what it can, through developers' funds, to put arrangements in place to provide that funding. However, will he give me and the council a guarantee that he will not allow council tax levels to increase or front-line services to be cut to fund the railway project?

I declare an interest as a member of the Law Society of England and Wales. I was a practising solicitor with Brodies until June 2007. Like many others who have taken part in the debate, the Scottish Conservatives congratulate the Law Society of Scotland on recognising the need for change in an increasingly competitive environment. We—as is the Government—are attracted by the idea that Scotland could market its legal services on the world stage. Scots law and Scottish lawyers have a sound international reputation, so there are definite grounds for thinking that such moves would be successful. However, we must recognise that the existing business structures would not necessarily be conducive to that in all cases. It has also been noted that smaller and, in many cases, well-established practices have no desire to go down that particular route. Any legislation would need to recognise that a one-cap-fits-all approach would be doomed to failure. The Scottish Conservatives support the existence of an independent Scottish legal profession that is effectively regulated and which provides good-quality and effective services to clients throughout Scotland. As Rhoda Grant and others do, we support the principle that a free democratic society can flourish only if its members have access to independent legal advice, especially on issues involving Government or that require Government procedures or decisions to be  challenged. That will not happen if people have restricted access to such advice or if the providers of the advice are under the control of the Government. As we heard from Bill Aitken, the legal sector is an important part of the Scottish economy—it contributes £1.2 billion to the national economy. There is also great variation in the characteristics of the legal market: for example, some areas—financial services and tax sectors, residential conveyancing and commercial law, for example—demonstrate a high level of competition, while other areas, such as family law, welfare debt and housing matters, demonstrate a low level of competition. The focus of today's debate has been on alternative business structures as a means of freeing up the Scottish legal market. However, there are other controls that restrict the legal market in Scotland, notably the restrictions on individuals who want to enter the profession on which I will touch briefly. As Clementi noted in his report on the regulatory framework in England and Wales, setting of entry standards requires a careful judgement between setting the standard too high and restricting entry and setting the standard too low and not maintaining proper levels of competency. That is the challenge to the legal profession and the Government, and it must be a concern with the prospect of Tesco law. In Scotland, as in England, the legal profession has grown substantially in recent decades. That has been most evident in the dramatic rise in the number of law school places. The normal route to becoming a Scottish solicitor is to complete a bachelor of law degree, followed by a diploma in legal practice. There is then a two-year training contract that includes further competency courses. Advocates go through a similar process, requiring the diploma, a five-week foundation course and a six-month pupillage. Minimum standards of quality are enforced during that training process, but there are no specific statutory or other regulatory barriers to entry. However, as anyone who has been through the system will know, there are bottlenecks in the system that work in a similar way to barriers to entry. Whether it be in gaining a place at university, a place on the diploma course or a training contract, at every stage potential solicitors and advocates have difficulty in getting into the profession. Another barrier that I have come across is that which restricts the ability of solicitors who are not qualified in Scots law to come to Scotland to practise. Despite the fact that I held a University of Glasgow law degree and qualified in London, I had to sit several meaty examinations to become a qualified solicitor in Scotland. It felt as though it would have been easier for me to become  qualified in New York state than in my home country. That differs greatly from the situation in England, where Scots-law qualified solicitors do not face the same barriers to becoming qualified as English solicitors. I urge the Government, as part of its reform package and review, to examine such barriers to entry to the Scottish legal profession. Unless our legal profession can be accessed by the most able lawyers from throughout Scotland and around the world, we will not fulfil our ambition to enable our legal profession to compete on the international stage. A number of members, including Aileen Campbell, talked about business structures. There are several restrictions on the ways in which Scottish legal firms can organise themselves. Advocates must be sole practitioners: they cannot form partnerships with anyone, not even other advocates. The justification for that—a point that was made by Nigel Don—is that it allows advocates to focus entirely on the work of advocacy and frees them from other demands. However, there could surely be significant advantages, through economies of scale, if that restriction were relaxed. Removal of the restriction would enable advocates to spread risks more efficiently and, potentially, to take advantage of economies of scale by meeting a range of clients' legal needs within one firm. In relation to solicitors' practices, non-lawyers are not allowed to own legal firms and employed solicitors are not allowed to act for any third party. That is justified on the ground that it avoids any conflict of interests, maintains lawyers' independence and continues to respect client confidentiality. Although reform is required in that area, there must be some concern—as we heard from Paul Martin—that big businesses would muscle their way on to our high streets and cherry pick the most profitable legal work. We have heard throughout the debate that smaller local law firms that offer a wide range of services are vital in many communities. In the light of recent initiatives, the Scottish Conservatives acknowledge the need for a change in the legal services profession in an increasingly competitive environment—the idea of marketing Scotland's legal services internationally, for example, is definitely appealing. In addition, although Scots law and Scottish lawyers have a respectable international reputation, it is important to note that existing business structures are not in all cases conducive to that. In order for Scotland to maintain its international reputation, the legal services market must recognise that a one-cap-fits-all approach will not be attractive. The Scottish Conservatives support the existence of an independent Scottish legal profession that is effectively regulated and which provides quality services to all clients throughout Scotland. We are  happy to support the Government's motion and the Labour Party's amendment.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will make efforts to find a permanent public home for the "Making the Act of Union" exhibition after it leaves the Parliament. (S3O-1090)

Does the minister agree that, given the great economic and cultural benefits that Scotland has enjoyed by being part of the United Kingdom, the subject should be promoted more in our schools? Does she therefore agree that the Act of Union exhibition should remain in Scotland and could be toured around some of our schools to demonstrate the importance of Scotland remaining part of the United Kingdom?

As Gavin Brown did, I start by declaring a slight interest in that, as a former practising solicitor, I am still on the roll for England and Wales. I started life as a solicitor at Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer in London before I graduated to Brodies in Edinburgh. Both were tremendous firms for court work—I am probably here as a result of that.

Indeed. The debate has reminded me of all the reasons why I was not a court lawyer. I focused on commercial property, which in my opinion was much more interesting. Alternative dispute resolution such as mediation, conciliation, arbitration and the use of ombudsmen can be a more cost-effective, more rapid and less stressful form of civil justice. It can resolve minor conflicts—especially relating to family problems—personal injury cases, problems at work and  disagreements between companies and trade associations. One important point, which has not really come through in the debate, is that such schemes are not intended to take the function of the court system. However, use of the schemes as an initial means of sorting out differences should be encouraged. Another important point is that this is about civil justice and not criminal justice. That is certainly my understanding of the area at which the motion is aimed. In November 2005, the Scottish Consumer Council investigated the civil justice system in Scotland. Its findings became the foundation for the civil justice reform debate in the Scottish Parliament in April 2006. I am pleased to hear that the cabinet secretary has restated his belief in Scotland's international reputation in finance and law. That reputation places Scotland in an ideal position to offer world-class arbitration services to its citizens. My party has always supported the view that some issues might be better resolved by mediation or ADR without resorting to court. In such cases, skilled advice will still be required, but a court may not necessarily be the appropriate forum. Alternative dispute resolution offers various methods of mediation and negotiation as a primary level of reconciling differences. We have heard about a number of them during today's debate. Alternative dispute resolution can, depending on the situations of the parties to the dispute, have various advantages over going to court, including greater flexibility, faster solving of problems and less stress, and it can potentially cost less. However, it is also important to remember and emphasise that alternative dispute resolution schemes are not meant to replace the courts in all cases. Whether a case should attempt to settle via an alternative dispute resolution mechanism is completely dependent on the result that the parties to it want to achieve, the importance of the dilemma, how a party wants to go about solving it and how willing the other party is to seek an agreement. The desired outcome is often what drives a party to pursue ADR rather than the traditional court route. If the party wanted an order that something be done or stopped, compensation or a judgment from a court about what is right and who is wrong, they would take the matter through the civil courts system. If what is wanted, however, is a result such as a change in how a person or organisation behaves, a promise that a person or company will not do something, an apology or explanation, a mistake to be corrected, money that is owed to be paid or something to be fixed or replaced, parties will benefit from ADR.  An all-encompassing review of Scotland's civil courts system is under way—we can expect it to report in 2009. Although I do not suggest that we copy wholesale the recent reforms to the civil courts system in England following Lord Woolf's recommendations, I am pleased that the cabinet secretary has said that the Government is willing at least to consider those reforms, about which I know a little. Lord Woolf's approach to reform in England and Wales was to encourage early settlement of disputes through a combination of pre-action protocols, active case management by the courts and cost penalties for parties who unreasonably refused attempts to negotiate or to consider ADR. Evidence indicates that the Woolf reforms are working to the extent that pre-action protocols are promoting settlement before applications are made to court, most cases are being heard earlier and fewer cases are settling at the door of the court. In fact, most cases are now settled without a hearing ever taking place. However, costs have increased or have at least been front-loaded. In particular, costs are clearly higher for the parties involved in cases in which mediation has been attempted but agreement has not been reached. Despite the encouragement of pre-action protocols, civil procedure rules and the funding code, the use of ADR in England has not increased as much as was anticipated. The voluntary pilot mediation scheme at central London county court had a take-up rate of around only 4 per cent before 1999. Between 1999 and 2003, when the effects of the Woolf reforms were beginning to be felt, there was an increase in the take-up rate for the scheme but a decrease in the settlement rates from 62 per cent to 40 per cent. It has been suggested that the Woolf reforms have led parties to mediate to avoid the cost penalties and to appear to co-operate with judicial direction but be half-hearted in their attempts to negotiate settlements. The reasons that are given by lawyers and parties involved support that theory. The Scottish Conservatives support the view that there are methods to resolve disputes that involve the use of skilled advice but not necessarily in a court environment. We would be considerably interested if the Scottish Government were to extend the system of alternative dispute resolution schemes to cover commercial matters. People who are confronted with an issue on which they need advice should be able to access that advice as locally as possible. One method of ensuring such local access is to provide advice through the CABx, which advise on a range of topics, such as financial problems, family disputes, individual guidance and protecting consumers against incompetence by companies and other groups.  The Scottish Conservatives believe that what is most important is improvement in delivery of civil justice in Scotland. It should be evident beyond doubt how any changes that are made to the justice system will better serve the consumer. Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am sorry that I have not filled up more of the time, but I have done my best.

Excessive alcohol consumption is a growing problem throughout Scotland, including in my constituency in the Borders. Lifestyles and the way in which alcohol is presented have changed. Increasingly, alcohol is used simply as a means to get drunk as quickly as possible rather than as a means to relax and socialise. Recent statistics show that alcohol abuse is extending its harmful effects to include increases in crime, death, disease and the consumption of alcohol among underage children. We believe that the problem deserves immediate attention and effective laws, not only to address the problem and find solutions but to raise public awareness and prevent the future growth of alcohol abuse in Scotland. The excessive alcohol consumption in Scotland in recent years has been highlighted in a number of studies. Some suggest that alcohol consumption in Scotland has risen by 23 per cent in the past 10 years. In 2002-03, the economic cost of alcohol misuse in Scotland was estimated to be £1.1 billion per annum. In 2003-04, more than 26,000 people were admitted to hospital with alcohol-related illnesses, and in 2005 there were 2,372 deaths with alcohol as an underlying factor.

Indeed. I agree. Men and women in Scotland drink more frequently than men and women in England. Men and women in Scotland are also more likely to exceed the daily benchmarks. Scotland has one of the highest rates of alcohol consumption in the United Kingdom, and we rank among the top 15 countries in the world on this issue. Excessive alcohol consumption has also contributed a significant amount of crime—something that was all too apparent to me during my night shift with the Hawick police service. It was reported in 2001 that one in six road accident deaths in Scotland was due to drunk driving, and that one in three accidents in which adult pedestrians were killed on the road was due to a drunk driver. In addition, alcohol is a factor in over half the deaths caused by fire in Scotland. A recent survey reported that 93 per cent of those surveyed believed that crime was a problem in Scotland; the only issue that was considered more problematic was drug and alcohol abuse. The survey also reported that, among respondents who were able to say anything about the person or people who had committed a crime, 45 per cent said that the person or at least one of the people was under the influence of alcohol at the time. The increase in the abusing of alcohol consumption has also proven to have severe effects on health. It has contributed to a number of liver diseases and other alcohol-related diseases. The national health service alcohol briefing in 2003 reported that 42,000 people had visited their GP with an alcohol-related problem. In addition, one in 10 accident and emergency admissions in Scotland can be attributed to alcohol. The number of patients discharged from hospital with alcohol-related liver disease has more than doubled in the past 10 years. The growing problem of the abusing of alcohol consumption has had the most shocking effects on children. A significant part of the problem of the increased consumption of alcohol by children in recent years—which also adds to underage drinking—is the alcohol obtained in off-sales. According to the "Alcohol Statistics Scotland 2007" survey, between 1990 and 2004 there was an increase in the percentage of alcohol sales made through off-trade premises and a decline in on-trade sales. The second most common way for children to buy alcohol was through an off-licence shop, with 7 per cent of 13-year-olds and 19 per  cent of 15-year-olds obtaining alcohol in that manner. The Licensing (Scotland) Act 2005 introduced measures to simplify the licensing regime, but it failed to introduce any measures to curb underage drinking. Instead, it targeted the majority of Scots who use alcohol sensibly, and it passed the costs of policing on to premises that are not responsible for bad behaviour. Although Scotland's problem of excessive alcohol consumption has grown significantly in recent years, it is a problem that can be resolved with increased awareness of the harmful effects of alcohol and with more effective legislation. Education on those harmful effects is imperative, especially for young children. Policing of licensed premises is necessary, and stricter enforcement will involve co-operation between the police and, importantly, the licensing boards. Businesses that conduct themselves irresponsibly should lose their licences, but responsible sections of the trade should not be penalised. We welcomed the recent partnership announcement between the previous Scottish Executive and the alcohol industry—especially the suggestion that there should be a crackdown on owners of licensed premises that sell alcohol to underage drinkers. Scottish Conservatives have called for that before; we have also called for businesses to become more involved with those initiatives. Excessive alcohol consumption is a problem that not only can be prevented from growing but can be eliminated. With increased education and stricter legislation aimed solely at the irresponsible licensees, that can be achieved.

I thank members for participating in this Conservative party debate. It must be rare to have a debate in which so many of the speeches are so one-sided and so condemning of Government policy. In the May 2007 elections, the SNP recognised the dwindling number of police officers in Scotland, which has resulted in a lack of community trust in the justice system, and pledged to spend extra money to secure 1,000 more police officers on the streets and to encourage police constables to use new resources for community policing. The SNP prioritised its budget to allocate money to education, health and policing, with £78 million being allocated specifically to achieving the goal of increased police numbers. Fergus Ewing says that he is not prepared to write a blank cheque to fund that, but the reality is that it is the SNP's cheque, the SNP's commitment and the SNP's promise. In the First Minister's speech to Parliament on 23 May, he said: "The Conservatives focused on law and order, and flagged up the urgent need for police numbers to rise—they will rise. The only difference between the Government and the Conservative party on that policy was how far and how fast it could be managed."— [ Official Report , 23 May 2007; c 59.]  It is clear now that the Government will go nowhere fast unless it gets out of neutral gear. It has been almost six months since the election, but no progress has been made on the promise of 1,000 new police officers, although there has been skirting round the issue and shirking of responsibility by the SNP Administration.

I could not agree more. What is the point of voting SNP if, six months later, the pledges are all in the bin? A further issue with the police force is the loss of officers to retirement, which Nigel Don mentioned. ACPOS reports a continued rise in officers retiring and a significant loss of talent and expertise. It has also highlighted the importance of recruiting and maintaining officers, which it states is essential to achieving justice in local communities and the continuing presence of local officers. Once officers are recruited, it takes 18 to 20 weeks until they are out on the streets. The process is time consuming and should begin immediately if we are to solve the urgent and pressing problem. A report prepared for the Scottish Police Federation by Professor Arthur Midwinter compares police spending in Scotland with that in the rest of the United Kingdom and with spending on other major public services in Scotland. The report reveals that police expenditure per capita is significantly lower in Scotland than it is in the rest of the United Kingdom—the expenditure is 20 per cent higher in England and 12 per cent higher in Wales. With other major public spending, Scottish spending levels are much higher than the UK spending average, which reflects Scotland's higher levels of social need, as shown in the measures of poverty, deprivation and poor health. The report shows that the need factors drive police expenditure, which begs the question why Scotland has such a low level of funding for its police forces. In addition, the report notes that funding is not dependent on the comprehensive spending review or the budget. Professor Midwinter concludes that that is a direct result of the Government's decisions. Police funding in local budgets has grown in line with other services, but the rate of growth is below the average, because of the Scottish Government's political priorities. As we heard from Bill Aitken, in the SNP election campaign in April, at the Scottish Police Federation conference, Alex Salmond promised to allocate an SNP Government's funds to health, education and policing and said that, if need be, more funds would be allocated to achieve the commitment to increase police numbers. He went further by adding that £78 million would be allocated specifically for the addition of the promised 1,000 police officers. In May 2007, Alex Salmond again promised the additional officers and compared the SNP's approach favourably with Conservative party strategy. The Conservative party is the only party that has any credibility on the issue. The Scottish Conservatives have campaigned consistently for 1,500 extra police officers in Scotland, and for them to be out on the streets, not stuck in their  offices doing desk work. The Scottish Conservatives believe that an increased number of police officers—1,500 on the street—would be a visible deterrent to crime and would build trust in the local community, while reducing the fear of crime in neighbourhoods.

I am in my last minute—sorry. The Scottish Conservatives have devised a strategy for achieving that goal, which consists of retaining serving officers, ensuring that time is used more productively and providing enough funding for the extra 1,500 officers. We have campaigned consistently for 1,500 additional police officers in Scotland and created a strategy with which to achieve that attainable goal. The SNP has promised an increase of 1,000 police officers but, in nearly six months since the election, it has provided nothing to achieve that—the strategy has been shirked and ignored. The Government must act now to deliver its election promise and make Scotland's streets safer. It is time for the Government to produce the extra police officers.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to improve the east coast main line and, in particular, to reopen a station at Reston. (S3O-714)

As the minister knows, the reopening of a station at Reston is of particular importance to Berwickshire. I am concerned that there appears to be doubt about who should progress the issue. Scottish Borders Council believes that it is a matter for the Scottish Government, but the Government thinks that it is a  matter for the council. I would be grateful if he could clear that up for us.

The debate is about health; it is about ensuring that the people of Scotland get the health care that they deserve; and it is about ensuring that they get health care as quickly as possible. Although I acknowledge that the debate is perhaps more to do with the quality and speed of service and treatment, there is a comment in the motion about investment in primary health care facilities. Therefore, I want to speak briefly about the provision of health services, particularly in rural areas such as the Scottish Borders. The issue is not so much about the quality of service as the withdrawal, centralisation and downgrading of primary health care services. There is no point debating waiting times if patients who live in rural Scotland have limited access to any services at all.  For many patients, the lack of a service will have a detrimental impact on the quality of treatment in the first place. Thanks to the failed health policies of the previous Lib-Lab Administration, Scotland lost 45 cottage and community hospitals during the past eight years. In my constituency, we lost our cottage hospitals at Coldstream and Jedburgh. Both hospitals provided excellent, long-standing service to both communities. Despite overwhelming local support from residents in both towns and more widely throughout the region, the former Labour Minister for Health and Community Care under the Lib-Lab pact ratified the decision to close the hospitals. Therefore, what a surprise I had when I read the Lib Dem health motion, which calls for more investment in primary health care facilities. The Lib Dems were in power during the past eight years—the previous Government's failings are their failings and they must take responsibility for them.

I apologise to Mr Purvis—I have only four minutes. There is a new threat in the Borders—rural surgeries might be closed or downgraded. That threat has come to light in my constituency only in the past 10 days with the news that the Kelso medical practice proposes to close its surgeries in the villages of Yetholm and Morebattle in Roxburghshire. Those two neighbouring villages, although undoubtedly rural in nature, have a population of more than 1,000. With the main town of Kelso more than 7 miles away, and with extremely limited bus and other public transport options, the residents are completely dependent on services provided in the villages. Those services include local shops that struggle to keep open, the post office, which is fighting to survive the Labour Government's post office closure programme, and the local GP surgeries, which we now know could close on 21 December. Our rural communities, and our rural health services in particular, are under attack. What quality of service will an 84-year-old Yetholm resident who cannot drive receive when her local GP surgery is closed? I ask the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing whether the proposed patients' rights bill will be extended to include not only patients waiting for hospital treatment, but patients in rural Scotland who do not have access to a GP. The local NHS board will make the ultimate decision about whether the Yetholm and Morebattle surgeries are to survive. However, the Kelso practice has made it clear to me that it will need additional financial support from the health board if it decides that the surgeries are to remain open. I therefore welcome the reference in the  motion to investment in primary health care. Every member will know about the severe financial constraints under which health boards operate. I urge the new Administration to take action to save rural GP surgeries throughout Scotland by providing health boards that operate in the rural parts of our country with the necessary additional funding to save those surgeries. Rural services took a hammering under the previous Administration; I ask the new Government not to make the same mistake.

The debate has made for some interesting listening as people have addressed the issue that penal policy needs to move forward to ensure that it fulfils its duties to society. Prison has four functions: to protect the public and to deter, punish and reform criminals. The removal of dangerous and violent people into a prison for the purpose of public safety is the most important function of prison. Public safety is paramount. If our prisons are full, the Administration should not contemplate the early release of prisoners who have served only part of their custodial sentence, but should pursue even more vigorously the building of another prison. Those with a custodial sentence should serve the full term: the public want those who have been convicted of a crime to spend their whole sentence in prison. I echo Jackson Carlaw's comments that the proper use of prison will eventually lead to a reduction in prisoner numbers, but that will happen only when more police are in our communities. We should properly end the scandal of early release, adopt a zero-tolerance approach to drugs and put in place effective services to ensure that criminals do not reoffend. There has been a dramatic and worrying rise in the number of prisoners recalled from licence or supervision, proving that early release has been an unmitigated disaster, that too many prisoners do not leave prison seeing the error of their ways and that they remain on the conveyor belt of crime. Until those dangerous individuals have been removed from contact with the public and have been punished for their crimes, prison will not have served its fourth purpose—to act as a deterrent—and there will be no dramatic decrease in crime figures. Although it is necessary to send to prison those who pose a risk to the public, options for those who commit other crimes exist. As Bill Aitken suggested, those who default on paying fines should not face imprisonment at the taxpayer's expense. Instead, the fine should be deducted directly from their wages or benefits.

The member is making a point about community service orders, of which we should make better use. If we need to put someone in prison to remove them from the public, we should not be afraid of doing that. At present, community service orders are seen as a soft option. The fact that in 2005-06 a quarter of such orders were breached and many were not completed is evidence that the system needs serious review and toughening up. Those subject to community service orders must be visible—the public must be able to see that they are facing punishment—and complete compliance must be enforced. Until non-custodial sentences are no longer seen as an easy option, short jail sentences remain inevitable. The Scottish Conservatives are not against reducing the number of people in prison, but we are not prepared to do that if it means not protecting the public. First and foremost, we must fulfil our duty to protect the public and to ensure that all those who pose a threat are in our prisons. The proper use of prison is fundamental to ensuring that we put an end to the growth in crime figures.

No. Early release must become a thing of the past. Tougher non-custodial sentences must be introduced and more must be done to reform criminals, to enable punishment to be effective and to deter offenders from reoffending. We must also ensure that more police are available to patrol our streets and to keep our communities safe. Only then will the Scottish penal system offer the correct punishments and act as a deterrent to those who have previously led a life of crime. It is interesting that the motion mentions reducing reoffending, but that will not be possible until the Administration realises that early release continues to pose the threat of reoffending; for that reason, it should be abolished. The motion also mentions improving public safety. If we are to do that, more criminals must be taken off the streets and put into our prisons, which means building another prison to accommodate those offenders and the introduction of more police on our streets. Although we welcome this debate, the current Administration must acknowledge that developing a progressive penal policy alone will not cut crime. We must also examine existing legislation to  ensure that we give our penal and prison systems the best chance of reforming and deterring criminals whenever possible. We will support the Government's motion tonight.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is aware of the role of community first responders in the Scottish Borders. (S3O-621)

Given that the nearest ambulance service is many miles away, people in the village of Newcastleton in my constituency often have to rely on community first responders to provide emergency ambulance service cover. The group, which is entirely voluntary and self-funded,  is in desperate need of financial support to ensure continuation of the vital service that it provides. Will the minister confirm that funding will be made available?

A couple of weeks ago, I served a night shift with the local police force down in my constituency in the Borders. I was able to see at first hand what the police encounter every day and to discuss their concerns about how we can improve general policing and safety records in the Borders. It is clear—as it is throughout the United Kingdom—that drug abuse and crimes connected to drug use take up a lot of police time. It is often assumed that drug abuse is a problem of the big cities of Glasgow and Edinburgh. However, as Christine Grahame stated earlier, it is as much a blight on the streets of the towns and villages across the Borders as it is elsewhere. Indeed, in some league tables on drug crime, the Scottish Borders area comes ahead of West Lothian and Falkirk and is on a par with Edinburgh. The drug dependency figures for young people in the Scottish Borders show a worrying trend. In a recent survey, a staggering 20 per cent of 15-year-olds had used drugs, which is higher than the average for Scotland. What is more, the number of drug-related deaths of people in their early 20s is disproportionately higher in the Scottish Borders. Drug use is clearly becoming a problem at an earlier age in the Scottish Borders, and there is no clear evidence as to why. The decision of the previous Scottish Government to replace the just say no campaign with the much weaker know the score programme was perhaps not the wisest decision. We need to make children much more aware of the dangers of drugs from an earlier age. I note the SNP's election pledge to ensure £10 million investment in classroom-based drug education. I hope that the new Administration can fulfil that election promise. We must consider the provision of services to tackle drugs misuse from a rural perspective. The health service has been increasingly centralised in the big towns and cities. In rural areas a home visit can sometimes take up most of the day. For safety reasons, such visits often have to be carried out by more than one person. Such issues have to be given greater consideration. An extra £15,000 of funding might go a long way in Glasgow or  Dundee, but it will not even pay the cost of an extra member of staff in somewhere like the Borders. The downgrading of the Borders local treatment centres has had an adverse consequence. It is only right that the Government should reflect on that in future funding plans. Social responsibility and social entrepreneurs have an important role to play in dealing with social problems. It is therefore important not to forget the role that the voluntary and charitable sectors, as well as social entrepreneurs, can play in tackling problems. I would like that to be recognised more, and those sectors to be included in public policy reviews to a much greater extent. Government does not always know best and it does not always have the right answers—sometimes it is better for it to stand aside and let others take over. I am waiting eagerly to see how the new Administration will approach that aspect of the drugs challenge. I am proud of the work that my Conservative party colleagues have done in pursuing drug abuse. Annabel Goldie has highlighted the issue consistently, often when it was not fashionable to do so. The damage that drug abuse does to our communities is immeasurable. Annabel Goldie and the Scottish Conservatives should be congratulated on the work that they did in the previous session to push the issue to the top of the agenda. My Conservative colleagues and I intend in this session to ensure that that work continues. I am pleased that so far the new Administration has been prepared to co-operate on the matter. I am sure that there are many areas on which we will disagree, but there is great potential for us to work together on drug abuse to bring about positive change.

What will the minister do to ensure the greater use of parenting orders, given that not one has been issued to date?

I echo Roseanna Cunningham's remarks. The first duty of society must be to protect the public, especially children. Sex offenders are a danger to children and recent high-profile examples have served to fuel the fear of that danger. If sex offenders are freed from prison and, quite rightly, subjected to monitoring and supervision, it must be as effective as possible. We must not be afraid to embrace any technology that will help us to protect the most vulnerable group of people in our communities. The Scottish Conservatives have taken a strong lead in this debate over many months and I look forward to our contributing fully to future policy direction in this area with the new Administration. The Angelika Kluk murder case highlighted flaws in the existing system. Peter Tobin, the convicted, had previously disappeared and could not be traced for 11 months. He failed to meet his statutory obligation to register with the police following his conviction on two charges of rape. When police called to interview him after an incident in Paisley involving another young woman, he effectively went underground. He broke his registration requirements and reoffended in Glasgow, only a few miles away. I therefore fully understand why the fear of predatory sex offenders is growing in Scotland. We just have to look at the recent events in Portugal to see the strength of public feeling. For every step that we consider, it is essential that we ask whether it will increase the level of protection for society. Some have called for a Sarah's law to be introduced in Scotland. Giving parents the right to know details of the sex offenders living in their areas might provide some comfort, but I echo Jeremy Purvis's concern that that comfort might be false. In America, where there is such a law, the level of registration among sex offenders is 17 per cent lower than it is in the United Kingdom. Unfortunately, such a scheme only has the effect of allowing individuals to drop out of the monitoring system altogether. I want to ensure that the greatest number of sex offenders remains under scrutiny, and a Sarah's law would not achieve that. As Margaret Mitchell said, we will clearly have to ensure that a strong tracking and monitoring scheme is put in place; that has been a key theme of Scottish Conservative policy over recent years. First, we agree with the minister that we will have to make use of polygraph tests to monitor sex offenders. That idea has been supported by the leading children's charity, Barnardo's. Secondly, if released offenders abscond from the system, it is important that we take immediate action. Alarm  bells should ring at that point, but that does not seem to happen at present. Lastly—and here I disagree with Gil Paterson—names and photos should be published when sex offenders have broken their registration requirements. There needs to be greater communication between different authorities, and global positioning satellite tracking should be put in place to track those people down. There is no one-size-fits-all solution to the monitoring of sex offenders. Some individuals will not pose a continued threat and can be monitored perfectly effectively under the current system. Others pose a greater risk to the community and should be treated differently. Too many people are slipping through the net, and the safety and security of society must not be allowed to be threatened continually.

I welcome the change of atmosphere and the new Executive's approach: issues can now be discussed and opinions sought from outside the ruling political parties. I am pleased that the  Parliament has this opportunity to discuss how we will make Scotland a safer and stronger country. As we heard from Jackson Carlaw, the previous Administration had a disappointing record on tackling crime. Now, after eight years of the Liberal-Labour Administration, a crime or offence is committed in Scotland every 30 seconds. Estimates suggest that about 80 per cent of crime is drug related.

I have only five minutes. It is easy to see where the problem lay: neither crime nor the causes of crime were properly tackled. The challenge for the new Administration is clear: it needs to tackle crime and the causes of crime now—and the first step in cutting crime is defeating drugs. According to the Government's own figures, for every £1 that is spent on drug treatment, almost £10 is saved on criminal justice and health costs. The proposals to increase spending on drug rehabilitation should therefore be welcomed, although we do not accept that that should be tied to having more community-based punishments. We would like there to be more investment in drug rehabilitation schemes. The SNP's manifesto contained a commitment to reinstate the Airborne Initiative, which the Liberal Democrats and Labour voted to abolish. We will support any proposals by the new Government to reintroduce the scheme. We strongly believe that early intervention schemes play an important part in the wider battle against antisocial behaviour. That point was made by Michael Matheson.  The first duty of a Government is to protect society from those who seek to destroy it. Contrary to the views of Labour members, there was an erosion of our criminal justice system under the Lib-Lab pact, with fewer police on the beat, easier access to bail, ineffective community sentences, a cancer of repeat offences—which caused mayhem and misery—an increase in crime and offences and an increase in the number of methadone prescriptions. We were pleased to hear that the SNP wants an increase in the number of police officers, which Margaret Smith also mentioned. As there are only 147 police officers on the beat at any one time—again thanks to the Labour-Liberal Administration of the past eight years—the Conservatives can support that priority, but we would like more to be done to cut the red tape and bureaucracy that keep our police officers sitting behind desks, to allow them to get out on the streets so that they  can act as a visible deterrent to crime and disorder.  Several members have mentioned prison and early release. Prisons serve four functions in society: first, to protect the public; secondly, to rehabilitate; thirdly, to punish; and, lastly, to deter. The most important of those is the protection of the public. The SNP proposes to use more community sentences. Although they may have a role, they must never be a soft option; nor should they be favoured because of a lack of space in our jails. The challenge to the SNP Government is clear. It must tidy up Scotland's justice system so that people feel safe in their homes and are not in constant fear of crime. I hope that the Government will consider working closely with the Conservative party on this subject, as there is much that we can achieve by working together.

As this is my maiden speech, I want to express my grateful thanks to my constituents for returning me as their MSP. It is an honour and a privilege to be elected to represent the historic constituency of Roxburgh and Berwickshire, which I and other members often refer to as R and B. However, I must say that the abbreviation can give rise to some confusion among some of my younger constituents, who think that I represent American soul or hip-hop music in the Scottish Parliament. My constituency is as diverse as it is beautiful, stretching from the North sea coast, where the Berwickshire fishing industry is based, down through the Berwickshire merse and the historic Borders towns of Duns, Coldstream, Kelso and Jedburgh, through the central Borders villages around St Boswells and southwards to Hawick and Newcastleton. I am proud to be the standard-bearer for my home area in the Scottish  Parliament and I will work as hard as I can to represent the views of all my constituents, however they voted. I also thank my predecessor, Euan Robson, for his service in the Scottish Parliament on behalf of the constituency. I wish him and his family well for the future. The Borders has a fine tradition of parliamentary representation and political upset. At Westminster, we were represented for many years by Lord Steel of Aikwood, who became the first Presiding Officer of this Parliament, and latterly by Lord Kirkwood of Kirkhope. As members will no doubt know, neither of these noble men is of my political persuasion. To find someone who is, we need to go back to 1974, when Michael Ancram was briefly the Conservative MP for Berwickshire, and then further back, to 1965—42 years ago—to when Commander Donaldson was the last Conservative MP for the county of Roxburghshire. I am sure that some of my Liberal MSP colleagues sitting on my left hope that I will not last 42 years, but as I am the third youngest member of this Parliament and the youngest in the Conservative group, I think that time might be on my side. I want to discuss the issue under debate—the creation of wealth—in the context of the rural economy, which is, of course, relevant to my constituency. In today's relatively comfortable urban world, it is all too easy to forget that nearly 90 per cent of Scotland's land mass is rural. Indeed, it is particularly easy to do so if one works in the central belt, where the increasing absence of green fields gives the opposite impression. However, if we think carefully about it, we can clearly see that the famous symbols of Scotland—our whisky, our salmon, Scotch beef, our tartans and wool, bagpipes and haggis—have a strong identity with traditional rural areas. Whole communities have grown up behind the celebrated status of such products and, if we do not support them, we are in danger of destroying rural communities and livelihoods. In the Borders, the traditional industries of farming and textiles have been in decline for many years. The wages are among the lowest in Scotland, there are empty shops on every high street and economic growth is lower than average. We have been unable to attract and retain new businesses and investment. As many rural communities, including the Borders, have poor trunk roads, inadequate bus services and no direct rail links to the major financial and industrial centres of Scotland, I look forward to hearing that the new Administration will prioritise plans to upgrade the A7, the A68 and the A1, all of which are major routes through my constituency. We also need to offer young families the services that they would expect in urban Scotland:  good schools, dentists, hospitals and local shops. That is why it is unacceptable that so many people in the Borders have been unable to find a national health service dentist and that so many of our cottage and community hospitals were closed by the previous Administration. It is also why we must oppose the Westminster Government's plans to close more rural post offices. Without proper infrastructure investment in roads, schools, hospitals, post offices and water resources—and without thinking of the basics that communities need in order to flourish—we are in danger of breaking rural communities so that they have no sense of community at all. Overall, we need a business environment that encourages new enterprise and productivity. We welcome the SNP's manifesto commitment to improve the business environment in Scotland. We welcome especially the proposals to work with us in cutting business rates. I was pleased to hear that the new Executive will follow through on its manifesto commitments to reduce regulations and conduct a thorough review of Scottish Enterprise. My constituents and I hope that the new SNP Administration will put the rural economy at the top of its agenda for the next four years. Again I express my thanks and gratitude to my constituents for sending me here. I promise to do everything in my power to be of service to them.