6. To ask the Scottish Government what economic growth opportunities the canal network in Glasgow Anniesland offers local communities. (S4O-02892)

Can the minister expand on the plans to work with the Scottish Waterways Trust and any other partner organisations to develop the recreational and commercial opportunities that could produce job opportunities on the Forth and Clyde canal, as it passes through Glasgow Anniesland at considerable length?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what trading and co-operation opportunities there are for Scotland arising from its participation in the recent Abu Dhabi international petroleum exhibition and conference. (S4O-02618)

I thank the minister for that comprehensive reply. It does not leave me an awful lot to follow up on, although I know that he has much more information in the pipeline. What future design and engineering work opportunities will there be for companies based in areas such as my Glasgow Anniesland constituency? Are we looking to training opportunities specifically as a consequence of the minister’s ADIPEC visit?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to promote the reduction of food waste. (S4O-02519)

In the light of recent reports that supermarket chains scrap up to 70 per cent of salad products and 50 per cent of bakery produce at a time when some of my constituents in Glasgow Anniesland are having to attend food banks, does the cabinet secretary have any talks planned with supermarket management to find a way of avoiding that astonishing level of waste?

As a regular visitor to Dunfermline, I ask the cabinet secretary how the Forth replacement crossing is benefiting Fife.

13. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the findings of the second report of the fiscal commission working group. (S4O-02484)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his very full response. Has any thought been given as to how to ensure that the establishment of a fund to benefit future generations of the Scottish people—along the lines of the one that has been established in Norway—will actually deliver to people in the whole of Scotland?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what the educational benefits are of learning a second language. (S4O-02443)

I thank the minister for that very full reply. Mindful of the fact that a large body of evidence demonstrates that the benefits of a second language extend to subjects across the curriculum, I wonder whether the minister can give me further detail on the Scottish Government’s plans to increase the provision of second-language learning in our schools.

9. To ask the Scottish Government, in light of it providing assistance to non-governmental organisations supporting humanitarian projects in Syria, whether it shares growing concerns at the mounting humanitarian crisis in the country. (S4O-02420)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that response. Can the cabinet secretary tell the chamber whether any further information has been forthcoming from the Westminster Government about whether the United Kingdom will aid relief of the refugee situation in Syria by allowing people requiring medical treatment, and other refugees who are under distress, into the UK and Scotland?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what impact Ministry of Defence rules for procurement of naval vessels will have on jobs in Scotland. (S4O-02260)

As the MOD currently procures equipment from overseas, including France—where Thales, which is a company with a significant presence in Glasgow and which is a major supplier to the British Navy, is located—may I suggest that a fear factor is being thrown into the equation in order to suggest that leading companies with highly skilled workers in Scotland would be barred from bidding for and receiving orders from the MOD following independence?

13. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the provision of outdoor sports facilities with all-weather surfaces in the grounds of secondary schools. (S4O-02147)

Does the minister agree that the lack of all-weather surfaces at all three local authority secondary schools in my Glasgow Anniesland constituency—Knightswood secondary, St Thomas Aquinas and Drumchapel high—although two of those schools were built under the previous Administration’s private finance initiative and public-private partnership system is an outdated scenario for our young people to be landed with? Will he suggest how the situation might be addressed to improve that scenario?

I congratulate John Pentland on securing this important members’ business debate. I also thank him for his kind efforts in helping with the potential postponement of the debate—which, happily, we did not have to do—to aid the SNP group’s tribute meeting to our colleague Brian Adam. John Pentland put in a great effort on that, which is much appreciated. I also appreciate his gift of a purple memorial ribbon, which demonstrates our support for international workers memorial day to the world. I want to put on record our friend Brian Adam’s dedication to ensuring that workers on the rigs and vessels that serve the oil and gas industry in the North Sea were represented whenever health and safety issues were raised. As a long-time trade union activist, Brian Adam knew the value and necessity of the work of unions and of the Scottish hazards campaign in keeping such issues to the fore. On 2 December 1984, the Bhopal gas disaster at the Union Carbide site in India killed thousands of people. It continues to affect the lives of many hundreds more in that area who are still campaigning for redress for what took place in that disgraceful episode when business was more important than workers. The Governments of both India and the United States of America have been shown to have collaborated in allowing Dow Chemical, which now owns Union Carbide, to escape facing up to the liabilities that have affected the individuals and community of Bhopal. We have all heard about the recent explosion at a Texas fertiliser plant: a full 29 years after Bhopal, we are still seeing a failure on an international scale to address safety issues. The Texas factory was last inspected in 1985—just after the Bhopal disaster—by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the United States. That is a full 28 years without a health and safety inspection. As a result of that failing, 14 people died and almost 200 were injured. What is the UK Government’s reaction to the lessons? It has cut the Health and Safety Executive’s budget by 35 per cent and announced an end to proactive unannounced visits by the Health and Safety Executive to factories and other industrial sites. That is an utterly unacceptable slap in the face to all workers in the industries that are affected by a slap-dash charge to increase profits at the risk of workers’ lives and limbs. For the past three years, the Scottish Government has ordered that flags on public buildings be flown at half-mast as a sign of respect for those who have been killed at work. Meanwhile, the minister in Westminster, Chris Grayling, is failing in his duty to show respect to the living. I encourage everyone, as Drew Smith said, to stop by the Scottish hazards campaign’s families against corporate killing exhibit that I am sponsoring this week outside the members’ block. I and the people who are staffing the stall are delighted by the response so far, but let us all make a final push, please, to give it all the support that we can in support of international workers memorial day.

12. To ask the Scottish Government what guidelines are in place to ensure that schools are properly maintained, including with regard to their heating and ventilation. (S4O-01996)

I have particular constituency concerns, as the standard of the fabric of the buildings of a number of primary schools in Anniesland is below that which parents and staff find acceptable. Indeed, in one school, the central heating system broke down this winter, and was replaced with mobile gas fires, which I think were potentially unsafe in that circumstance.

I wish to note that I am a co-president of parliamentarians for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, which has more than 800 members from more than 80 Parliaments around the world. I am also a member of the global council of abolition 2000 and Scottish CND. The Norwegian Government invited me to an international conference that was held in Oslo two weeks ago, whose remit was to discuss the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons. Some 127 Governments were represented, and there were more than 500 delegates from non-governmental organisations around the world. We heard from the Red Cross about how just one 1-megatonne bomb would create such a level of death, injury and civil damage that no country could possibly cope with it. Even countries that co-operated with one another would have difficulty in bringing any succour to those that had had that unfortunate occurrence happen to them. I said “unfortunate occurrence” but, obviously, an unfortunate occurrence is getting hit by a car when crossing the road or falling seriously ill. Somebody would have had to have dropped that 1-megatonne bomb on the country—they would have taken that choice, and they would have had that choice because they had a nuclear arsenal. Only those countries with a nuclear arsenal present a danger to the world that this will come about. It is therefore incumbent on the countries that have these weapons to take their humanitarian impact seriously. However, the P5—the permanent five members of the United Nations Security Council, all of which are nuclear weapons states—refused to take up their invitations to speak at the conference alongside the other 127 nations that deigned to speak on such a serious issue. The pretext of the P5’s refusal of these invitations was that the conference, which was addressed by the International Committee of the Red Cross, scientists, physicians and survivors of nuclear test explosions, was a distraction from the nuclear disarmament in which the P5 are engaged. For all we know, they might be engaged in it for another 50 years—after all, that is the plan for Trident. To my mind, that was just arrogant, patronising tosh. Of course, such tosh comes from the likes of the Westminster Government, which has committed us all in the UK to £100 billion of present and future expenditure on a weapon that can never be used because it is too dangerous and threatens mass destruction and environmental devastation from which the world might never be able to recover. The P5’s remarks did not go over well with a great majority of the world’s nations that had attended the conference. That said, I note that, although the conference was a one-off, there was a vote for a follow-up conference, to which the P5 will again be invited to explain their position on the humanitarian effects of nuclear weapons. I have spoken at many international conferences to put forward my view that the wish of most people is for a world without nuclear weapons; I believe that the same is the case in this chamber. However, that is not going to happen simply because we wish it to happen. Someone has got to do something about it. The proposal from members on these benches is that, in an independent Scotland, there be no place for Trident or any other nuclear weapons system. That would leave Westminster having to find another home for its weapons of mass destruction. However, such a place could not be in England or Wales because, as some might be surprised to learn—although they should not be surprised, because this is well-known expert opinion—there is nowhere else for Trident to go on these islands other than where they are at the moment. In some people’s minds, that means Scotland will have to remain the repository of these weapons on behalf of the UK. I do not find that acceptable and will campaign and argue against such a view. When Trident leaves Scotland, it will be heading for the knacker’s yard. We are not threatening to put it in Merseyside, Devonport or indeed Milford Haven in Wales. I note that the last was another option that was discussed but, once people noticed that there were three petrochemical facilities in the area, they thought that it might be a bit too dangerous to put Trident there and went against the idea. As for the jobs at Faslane and Coulport, there are, according to the MOD, 564 jobs that are directly linked to Trident, while the conventional naval base accounts for the employment of all other staff. It is the intention of SNP members that the conventional naval base will take up the staff who are employed on Trident. Moreover, the loss of so many conventional military jobs under the Westminster Government—we remember the disgraceful redundancy notices that were handed out to our front-line troops while on duty in Afghanistan—is another example of how money is being wasted on Trident and is therefore not available to maintain our useful conventional forces.

Internationally, nuclear weapons-free zones are a growing phenomenon and the way forward for more and more nations and regions in our world. That is how I want our country to go forward. Trident is wrong and I want us to support Ban Ki-moon’s call for a nuclear weapons convention that leads to a nuclear weapons-free world.

13. To ask the Scottish Government what lessons have been learned from Glasgow’s equally well testing programme. (S4O-01781)

What plans does the Scottish Government have to implement Scotland-wide the lessons on the integration of health issues into city planning?

4. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on the recent report in The Scotsman that Scotland is receiving less than its population share of defence spending. (S4F-01144)

The First Minister will be aware that the Ministry of Defence announced earlier this week that up to 5,000 job losses are expected as a result of further Army redundancies. Will the Scottish Government raise that issue with the United Kingdom Government and seek clarity on how Scotland might be affected by those redundancies? Does the First Minister think that instead of wasting billions of pounds on the obscenity of nuclear weapons, the money would be better spent on maintaining the front line?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to ensure that court attendance by police officers does not affect front-line policing in their area. (S4O-01294)

Does the Lord Advocate agree that it would be efficient to allow officers to continue in their own patrol areas in Glasgow until around an hour before the time that they are due in court, given that nowhere in Glasgow is more than an hour from the city courts?

I thank my friend and colleague, Clare Adamson, for bringing this timely debate to the chamber. Industrial Scotland was built on steel and coal. With the advent of the industrial revolution, coal and iron ore—the raw materials of industry, which were found in plentiful supply in many areas of the country—were turned into the steel that ensured a solid base for the population growth of many communities that we all know today. The countless thousands of workers whose sweat oiled the businesses that made riches for some in the land are to be held in the highest regard. They are, after all, our own recent and distant ancestors, so we do well to honour them through support for the Scottish steelworkers memorial fund. My memories of the fight to save steel production and thousands of jobs in Scotland revolve greatly around what we called the steel camp, which I and a number of friends established at the gates of Gartcosh in early 1986. I have probably aged less well than Elaine Smith since that time—I see that she is hiding her shyness, having left the chamber. Gartcosh was a major campaign. For the people who worked there, it was more than that—it was their lives and their families’ lives. We were happy to stand alongside them. It snowed, of course, but we had four tents and a camp stove and took two or three-day shifts at the camp, trying to show our support for the steelworkers and to provide our own focal point for protest at the threatened closure. We had the television, radio and newspapers visit us, as well as many well-wishers who brought supplies. However, it was the kindness of the staff and regulars at the nearby Gartcosh social club that sticks in my memory. They gave us a place to wash in the mornings and the occasional proper meal—because, although we tried, it is impossible to live on Mars bars for a month—and showed solidarity with us, much as we were trying to do with them. My family background is in shipbuilding and engineering and, as is obvious, those required a constant supply of top-quality steel. The links between communities across Scotland are greatly shaped by the steel that was produced in the great mills of Ravenscraig and the other production sites that have been mentioned. My dad suffered from industrial deafness from working in engineering—at least, that is what he told us when we asked for a couple of pounds on a Friday night. That is the kind of person who showed support for the steelworkers, and the steelworkers were strong in showing their support for other people across the country, which was always welcome during the industrial disputes of the 1970s and 1980s. The coal mining communities worked in tandem with their industrial cousins, and we should mention them, too. The jobs were always dangerous and, as I have spoken at conferences that were organised by the STUC and the Scottish hazards campaign, I am well aware of the sad sacrifices of the many who suffered injury and death at their workplace in the course of steel manufacturing. It is fitting that those sacrifices should be marked by a permanent memorial. It is with heartfelt pride that I speak here today to thank the generations of steelworkers and their families, who have contributed so much to the Scotland of today. I fully support the Scottish steelworkers memorial fund and the efforts of those who are in the public gallery tonight and others who are involved in marking the contributions of those who worked in the steel production that made our country what it is today and all those who were, sadly, injured or killed in that work.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made on the programme of school building and refurbishment using the Scottish Futures Trust. (S4O-01234)

Does the minister share my concern at Glasgow City Council’s failure to make any significant bids for additional school rebuilding or refurbishment projects, despite its being invited to do so in February? Furthermore, does he agree that that represents a lost opportunity for children in my Glasgow Anniesland constituency who attend schools, including Broomhill primary school and Blairdardie primary school, that are in great need of such work?

Congratulations to Jamie Hepburn on getting this important debate. As some will know, my usual line in matters to do with armaments is in opposition to nuclear weapons and in favour of non-proliferation and eventual disarmament. In the debate on conventional weaponry, I tend towards the non-proliferation element of the argument as I feel that pursuing achievable major reductions in the small-arms trade in particular will make a major difference to the lives of millions of people across the world. I have spoken to the former UN High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Sergio Duarte, about the issue on a number of occasions and I know that his comments on the suffering of so many from the effects of both the legal and the illegal arms trade come from his in-depth discussions with politicians and non-governmental organisations over many years. For many people, the threat of crime, violence and Government repression is a big part of their everyday lives. That is helped along no end by the extreme availability of weapons. For instance, despite a review of its arms transfer policies in 2011 following the Arab spring, the USA remains a major supplier of arms to both Tunisia and Egypt. Last year, the Americans delivered 45 M1A1 tanks to Egypt and it has an agreement to deliver another 125. On the other side of the coin is Russia, which supplied 78 per cent of Syria’s arms imports from 2007 until 2011. Such deliveries continue despite the political repression going on there. With surface-to-air and coastal defence missile systems and an order for 36 Yak-130 combat aircraft accounting for a 580 per cent increase in the volume of Syrian arms imports over a five-year period, the large countries in the world that manufacture most of those weapons have nothing to sit on their laurels about. In sub-Saharan Africa the blight of the small-arms trade goes on, unhindered by the humanitarian catastrophes of drought and starvation. There, as Ghana’s national commission on small arms and light weapons stated just yesterday, the result of the unregulated trade in those guns accounts for the diversion of arms into illegal markets and thence into the hands of criminals, gangsters, drug barons, warlords and terrorists. The Ghana national commission wants sanctions, an arms embargo and other international obligations aimed at preventing armed conflict, the displacement of peoples and transnational crime. It also wants a major international effort put into victim assistance for those affected by that untrammelled trade in misery. This truly is an international problem that, to the greatest extent, affects women and children. Highlighting that, earlier this week in the Philippines around 80 women dressed in black gathered in front of the Department of Foreign Affairs in Manila to call on the Philippine Government to support a strong gender-responsive arms trade treaty. In support of their case they handed in not only a letter to President Aquino but, as was pointed out earlier, a bunch of bananas in order to highlight the fact that as there are global rules regulating the trade in bananas there must also be a treaty regulating the trade in weapons that at present sees 2,000 people die from armed violence in both conflict and non-conflict situations every day. Guns and other weapons will not disappear from our world any time soon, but we need all developed and under-developed nations to sign up to regulation and to halting the cynical manufacture of such weapons without adequate concern for where they end up and the carnage that they cause. It is time for a bullet-proof arms trade treaty.

8. I thank the chamber for its applause as I rise to speak. To ask the Scottish Government whether it can confirm that the Scottish police service will not face the reductions in numbers and pay and conditions being experienced in England and Wales and will welcome transfer applications from officers in those countries. (S4O-01146)

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s response and especially welcome the 7.9 per cent increase in the Strathclyde force, which covers my Glasgow Anniesland constituency. I congratulate the cabinet secretary on the excellent reception that he received at the Scottish Police Federation conference, which stands in direct contrast with the slow hand-clap that Theresa May got south of the border.

Will the cabinet secretary comment on the difference in the relationship between the two federations and their respective Governments?

8. To ask the Scottish Government whether it provides guidelines on the implementation of health and safety policies in primary schools. (S4O-01076)

In some primary schools in my constituency of Glasgow Anniesland, I have seen evidence of many years of neglect of the fabric of buildings in which teachers have to teach and children are expected to learn. Irrespective of the weather, windows are bolted and painted shut; classes are held in corridors and cloakrooms, with consequent overcrowding and trip hazards; and walls, skirting and ceilings are cracked and unsightly. Can the Scottish Government pursue the Westminster Government to ensure that the Health and Safety Executive will take up such issues in Scottish schools?

15. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made with using vitamin D supplements or additives to tackle long-term health issues. (S4O-00873)

I asked the question because it has been shown that greater levels of vitamin D intake may prove beneficial in relation to the incidence of a number of illnesses and diseases, in particular multiple sclerosis, which is a scourge in Scotland. The shine on Scotland campaign has been successful in focusing attention on that.

I join others in congratulating Jim Eadie on securing the debate. Sadly, the state violence in Syria against its own people is not an isolated instance and certainly not only a middle eastern phenomenon. However, it is symptomatic of events that have occurred at regular intervals over the past 90 years or so following the collapse of the European empires. Whether they were French, British or Italian, such empires of the late 18th and 19th centuries left something behind that has caused many lives to be lost long after the empires ceased. Many of the countries to have emerged following that period have unfeasibly straight borders between themselves and their neighbours. That is a result of the cobbling together of client states for the economic and trading benefit of their former colonial masters. The modern Syrian state is just such a fairly recent construct, arising out of the Arab Levant on the fall of the Ottoman empire. That followed the first world war, when Syria and Lebanon were established as French mandates. Independence was at last gained in April 1946, although that was followed by a number of military coups, the last of which, in 1961, brought to an end the short-lived union with Egypt as the United Arab Republic. This is not just a history lesson. The fact is that the Syria that we now see grew out of that tumultuous history. It has not always been thus, and it need not always be thus. From 1963 to the present day, however, the country has existed in a state of emergency law that has suspended most constitutional protections for its citizens, with Hafez al-Assad ruling for 30 years and his son Bashar in effect inheriting that role in 2000. Although the constitution limits the holding of the presidency to Sunni Muslims, who make up 74 per cent of Syrians, in practice it is the Assad family who hold all of the real political power. Significantly, they are of the minority Alawi sect, which makes up only 12 per cent of the population, although the state is nominally secular. It is true that Hafez al-Assad instituted modernisation, with a guarantee of women’s equal status in society and an attempt at industrialisation and by using Syria’s oil wealth to invest in growth in education, medicine, literacy and infrastructure. However, the cost came not only in oil but in the repression of free speech, summed up in the 1982 Hama massacre, which has been described as “the single deadliest act by any Arab government ... in the modern Middle East.” When Bashar Assad assumed the presidency in 2000, popular feeling had become rife with festering dissent waiting to bubble up. With the Arab spring of 2011, the stage was set for an outpouring of protest and calls for the establishment of a democratic Syria. The result has been approaching civil war. The people of Syria need the support of outside intervention, but not through bombing or invasion. Instead, Russia and China, in particular, need to come into the 21st century and to start to use their international influence in a positive way, as is suggested by their belated support for the Kofi Annan six-point plan. As the states with the ear of their client—the Assad Government—they can cause the Government guns to fall silent and allow all parties to come to the table of diplomacy. Proxy wars should be consigned to the history books of the 20th century; the people of Syria do not deserve it. In that way, Russia and China may find that they have a loyal friend in those who form the democratic state that emerges from a negotiated peace.

I will shock no one if I say straight out that Scotland is part of Europe. That is a geological, cultural and political fact; indeed, as a kingdom, Scotland is Europe’s oldest nation state and its trading relations with the low countries and the Baltic states in particular go back many hundreds of years. As a result, it is a point of satisfaction for me that the European and External Relations Committee’s first report in 2012 is on the Scottish Parliament’s EU priorities for 2012. It is vital that Parliament take seriously its responsibilities as a constituent body of a member state of the EU, given the levels of trade between us and our neighbours and estimates that suggest that between 60 and 80 per cent of legislation that is passed in Scotland originates from the EU. Whatever Scotland’s constitutional status, we will have close connections with all our neighbours. That is notable in the context of the common agricultural policy and the common fisheries policy. Scotland has much to gain from playing an active role. It has been acknowledged by members of all parties that all our MEPs work hard and well—we could probably do with having more of them. Members also acknowledged that our Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, Richard Lochhead, represents the Scottish Parliament well in negotiations. Given that 70 per cent of UK fish landings are made by Scottish vessels, we must ensure that we have direct representation at the agriculture and fisheries council when the final proposals on the CFP are decided in December. The EU is not all about fish suppers. The European social fund, for example, has a continuing role to play in supporting our voluntary organisations and in delivering our social inclusion policy through community planning partnerships. Priority 5 funding can be provided for projects that will get people into work and help them to improve their career prospects when they are employed. Such elements are particularly relevant to parts of Scotland like my constituency of Glasgow Anniesland. It is incumbent on the Scottish Parliament as a whole, and on parliamentary committees and individual MSPs, to consider those and other EU programmes, and to consider how we can best serve our communities by accessing the appropriate funding streams. In doing so, we should acknowledge that the current programmes involve access to structural funds through co-financing, in concert with public bodies. Tenders are invited from organisations for projects that align closely with the co-financing organisations’ strategic priorities. The advantage of the approach is that the limited funds—as we know, funds could become even more limited—can be used more strategically and project providers will no longer be required to find match funding. Other areas, including the EU budget or multi-annual financial framework, cohesion policy, Europe-wide reform of criminal proceedings, horizon 2020—the programme for research and innovation—and proposals for public procurement, which Helen Eadie mentioned and which are increasingly important for Scotland, impact on all our constituents. It is therefore hugely important that the Scottish Parliament play a full role in Europe and that, whichever party is in control in Parliament, we all support ministers in their efforts to get the best possible deal from the EU for the people of Scotland.

I will speak quite quickly because there is a lot to say and very little time to say it in. I congratulate my colleague Sandra White on securing tonight’s members’ business debate. I share the concerns of many members that these wholly unnecessary cuts will have a negative impact on the news and current affairs outputs in Scotland. I was frankly amazed to learn that the proposed cuts are larger than any cuts that have been proposed for the rest of the United Kingdom, which is simply unacceptable. We need to know why Scotland is being singled out in such a manner. It will mean a loss of the quality jobs that are being done expertly, and a loss of quality programming for the population of this country. Since its foundation on 18 October 1922, the BBC has, overall, done a great job in the past century, which has seen huge political, cultural and technological change. If the BBC could handle those changes, why is it that, in the 21st century, it is said to be unable to respond to the changes in the political makeup of the UK? The advent of devolution in Scotland and Wales has undoubtedly thrown up challenges for the BBC in the way that it reports news and current affairs from Scotland and from outwith Scotland but, again and again, it has shown itself to be unable to respond, to evolve and, ultimately, to represent effectively those who pay the widely reported licence fee. That is not the fault of the people who work at the BBC, but the fault of the board. As Aesop said, it is better to bend than to break. I agree with that wise man. The BBC board should bend to the will of the Scottish people before the BBC’s commitment to the service that it provides to the people is broken. Perhaps a halfway house could have been found. The Calman commission, the mother of the Scotland Bill that is currently snaking its way through the Westminster Parliament, proposed just that in recommendation 5.4: “The responsibility for the appointment of the Scottish member of the BBC Trust should be exercised by Scottish Ministers, subject to the normal public appointments process.” Let us remind ourselves that the commission was, in the words of its founders, set up to find a way to make devolution work better for the people of Scotland. The Scottish Parliament’s Scotland Bill Committee recommended that powers that are broadly in line with those suggested by the Calman commission should be devolved to the Scottish Parliament to regulate public service broadcasting aims. Has Westminster taken up those recommendations? The simple answer is no. What does that leave us with? A public service broadcaster that is not responsible to the people to whom it broadcasts and is totally out of touch with what is required in modern-day Scotland. Ms White picked up on evidence that was given to the Scottish Parliament’s Education and Culture Committee. In the same meeting, Iain Macwhirter went on to say that the setup is no longer acceptable. He said: “We will have a referendum. We will have either independence or a move further towards a federal arrangement. Either way, we will have a different political and constitutional environment. I see no evidence that the BBC in the UK is even beginning to recognise that.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 24 January 2012; c 654.] Even the former BBC chief, Jeremy Peat, has added his backing to the calls for Scotland to have more broadcasting powers. He said that the “case for more and more production out of London remains and the pressure for increased devolution of programming must continue”. Everyone seems to get the message and most of us seem to agree that the BBC needs to adapt to the changing political climate at this juncture in Scotland’s history and, even more than that, it needs to serve its listeners and viewers in Scotland. Lord Reith, the first director general of the BBC, was born and raised in my constituency of Glasgow Anniesland. To paraphrase him, if nation shall speak unto nation, they should first and foremost have a functioning broadcasting service. It is time for the BBC in Scotland to get with the programme.

I. too, congratulate Stewart Maxwell on securing this debate on an issue that is of great importance to all humanity. Those who were born in the 1950s, as I was, will remember that the second world war was a regular topic of conversation throughout their childhoods, and that television programmes such as the historical series, “All Our Yesterdays”, and dramas such as “A Family at War” were frequently on the television screen. However, we did not see much at all about what happened in the concentration camps, possibly because it was too close to the time when those events took place to screen programmes about them. Although my generation was spared the rigours and sacrifices of the war, people we knew who lived through it had experiences that they often related—although, as Jackson Carlaw mentioned, perhaps not those who had been in Auschwitz or Treblinka. Since then, however, even the cold war and the then ever-present threat of the mushroom cloud seem—I emphasise the word, “seem”—to have faded from people’s everyday consciousness. Now, schoolchildren and young people in Scotland are, thankfully, even further in time from such a conflagration. However, because of that, it is imperative that we do not take our eye off the ball that is war and “man’s inhumanity to man”. War is the responsibility of all of us, as are the effects that it has on our fellow human beings. Therefore, to enter into a war for reasons of political expediency, dogma, philosophy or a twisted religious faith leaves us open to responsibility for giving support to the gross excesses of the behaviour of the combatants. Six million Jews, 200,000 Roma, 200,000 mentally and physically disabled people, Poles, Russians, socialists, communists, Christians, Jehovah’s Witnesses and homosexuals—all were the direct victims of the Nazis’ hate and sectarianism, and many millions more died in the war for Hitler’s imperial expansionism. Those human beings were killed not by monsters or aliens but by other human beings. Civilians were also killed around the world because they were in the wrong place at the wrong time. The atomic bombs that were dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki killed 430,000 civilians and created the hibakusha—the survivors and their children who were affected by the radioactive fallout. Also among the dead are the unknown numbers of people who died in Japanese forced labour camps in the far east. All those people are victims of what Studs Terkel, in his wonderfully sad book of witness statements, called “the good war”. It is for those reasons that I believe that I have been privileged to attend Garnethill synagogue in Glasgow for a remembrance of Kristallnacht. It is also for those reasons that we need to keep alive the memory of Jane Haining, the Church of Scotland missionary who refused to abandon the 400 Jewish orphan girls who were in her care in Budapest, and who died with them in Auschwitz two months later. We need the Holocaust survivors and the hibakusha to continue to speak to the children of today. We need the Holocaust Educational Trust’s lessons from Auschwitz project to impart first-hand knowledge to our young people. We all need to remember that bigotry is not a joke and war is not a fun adventure, because its impact on people lasts longer than a lifetime.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to identify young carers and how this is resourced. (S4O-00573)

I thank the minister for that full reply. He will be aware that young carers often have specific issues that relate to school work. The extra pressures in dealing with both school and caring responsibilities can be both isolating and exhausting for young carers. What resources are targeted specifically at that area?

16. To ask the Scottish Government what the expected impact on employment and economic growth is of the finance that it has committed to renewables projects. (S4O-00504)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the long history of engineering in my constituency of Glasgow Anniesland and the essential role that apprenticeships play in the sector. How will future investment in renewables benefit Clydeside?

I, too, congratulate my colleague Sandra White on securing tonight’s debate. Too often, we hear doom-and-gloom stories about further and higher education, so it is pleasing to have a good-news story to tell, and the survey is certainly one of those. When I was at the University of Glasgow—yes, they let the locals into the student bar—one of the things that I particularly enjoyed was the great mix of people and the vibrant atmosphere, which is brought to the whole community, as Ruth Davidson said. As someone who lives in Glasgow, close to the uni, I can say that it is great to see so many different people coming together, and it helps to make Glasgow a great place to be. That is why I am not too surprised that the international student barometer found that 96 per cent of international students found Scotland is a good place to be. That is a testament to the friendly, outgoing nature of people in Glasgow and the warm welcome that they give people who visit the city, and it is something that we should be proud of. It is also a testament to the fantastic work that is done by the staff of the University of Glasgow—and indeed all our universities—to encourage and attract international students to Glasgow and to Scotland. We must also give credit to the Scottish Government for the support that it gives universities to bring foreign students here. Its strategic investment fund is an excellent example of what a joined-up approach can deliver for Scotland. Through enhancing Scotland’s profile in key international markets, increasing college and university engagement in international education, supporting postgraduate employment of international students and improving the experience of such students while they are here, the fund aims to build on the excellent international reputation that our further and higher education sectors have built up, in order to make them even more successful. The projects that the fund supports include a campaign to promote higher education in India and China, and the students without borders initiative of the National Union of Students, which aims to integrate international students and encourage outward mobility of Scottish students. To my mind, the students without borders initiative has been a great success. Much of the information that has been gathered on the issues that international students face has been included in the core work of the NUS, and staff and student officers have received training and advice on those issues. Another key piece of work of the students without borders initiative was its response to the UK Border Agency’s immigration proposals. It gathered a large amount of evidence and case studies on the points-based immigration system in Scotland and the implications of the changes for international students and Scottish institutions. Unfortunately, as Sandra White pointed out, much of that hard work is under threat from the changes to student visas that are being implemented under the short-sighted and xenophobic approach of the Westminster Government, which is once again applying a knee-jerk reaction to pacify its baying back benchers. As always with the UK Government, it is managing to act in an incompetent and ill-thought-out way. I hope that our minister will tell us the direction that the Scottish Government is taking in order to alleviate some of the problems. I, for one, do not want to be a part of that situation. I want international students to come to this country and bring the great range of benefits that they have shown they can bring; in return, Scotland has a great deal to offer them. I would go so far as to say that, if Scotland is to continue to be regarded as one of the best places in the world in which to study, and if it is to have the freedom to promote itself internationally and grow successfully, it needs powers over immigration to ensure that we have access to fresh talent. That can only benefit the whole of Scotland.

I congratulate Sandra White on bringing this timely motion before the Parliament. Although it is a long time since she was young, I know that she remains passionate about the issues facing our youngsters today. Too often, young people are demonised and seen as layabouts or as trouble, hanging about on street corners. They are seen as folk to be avoided or ignored, but is that the truth about what young folk are doing and what they are like, or is it just a bit too convenient to look at them in that way? If we ignore them, or pigeonhole them as trouble, perhaps we feel that we do not need to bother with the issues that they are facing or to listen to what they are saying. I contend that to do that is a big mistake, because it risks alienating young people and engendering fear of them among older people. That just cannot be right. That is why I think that the truth about youth project is an excellent initiative; it is one that I fully support. I want to give members an idea of its success so far. The project has brought together more than 3,000 young people and 1,000 adults, which is no mean feat. It has also teamed up with The Sunday Mail to produce a truth about youth supplement featuring positive stories about young people, more than 200,000 copies of which have been distributed throughout Glasgow. When I cast my mind back—not to when I was young; I am not a miracle worker—but to January 2009, I remember securing a members’ business debate congratulating Knightswood youth theatre on, among other things, its work on bringing together young asylum seekers and refugees with young people from the local area to talk and share feelings. That helps them to realise that they are all the same, and to gain a better understanding of young people’s views and aspirations on a wide range of issues. I went to secondary school with the minister who replied to that debate, Linda Fabiani, although she was the janitor—[Laughter.] I used that joke because I thought that she was going to stay behind and listen to this debate but, unfortunately, she has gone. She said then that the “efforts ... made by the young people involved and those who have taken the time to organise, teach and support the group” are “a great example of community spirit.”—[Official Report, 28 January 2009; c 14469.] That community spirit extends across Scotland. In my constituency of Glasgow Anniesland, there are a number of groups who are to be commended for the work that they do in bringing the community together and in tackling stereotypes, wherever they might be. G15 in Drumchapel, which Liz Smith mentioned, and the Dumbarton Road corridor youth project in particular have grown to become organisations that now encompass the aspirations of a great number of the residents, young and old, in Drumchapel, Yoker, Scotstoun and Whiteinch. Their ambitious plans for those areas are a credit to the dedication and passion of all those who are involved in the various projects being taken forward, particularly in peer education on the issues of drink and drugs. Young people listen to other young people first and foremost. One of the main aspirations frequently voiced in those areas is the need for more employment, particularly for young people. As Sandra White mentioned, we debated that issue last week, and I hope that some of the initiatives that the Scottish Government has brought forward, such as the 25,000 modern apprenticeship places a year for the next five years, the opportunities for all programme and the announcement of a dedicated minister for youth employment, will help young people as they strive to realise their hopes and dreams. Although no one is denying that much needs to be done, I am confident that those initiatives and initiatives such as the truth about youth project will deliver for young people.

First, I declare an interest as co-convener of the current cross-party group on carers, having been a deputy convener of the group in session 3 of the Parliament. During this period, I have learned a great deal about the range of people who carry out the role of carer and the range of caring that they perform. I have also been very impressed by the genuine concern across the parties in the chamber on the issue of carers. It is not just something that we debate every six months or year; it is something that members make an effort to promote as an issue of concern. I have learned a great deal more about the range of people who are carers, because there are around 657,000 carers in Scotland and we all know at least one person, friend or relative who carries out this vital role—we may live next door to these people. However, how often do we take the time to think about the carers we know, who are part of a large, generally hidden army of decent, caring Scots who are obviously not in it for the money? Do we just, unthinkingly, say, “Ach, that is just your mother looking after your father between visits from the district nurse”? Although it is that, it is an awful lot more than that as well. Carers range from the more than 100,000 children and young people who provide emotional, physical and practical support to a relative at the same time as coping with all the normal and everyday issues surrounding growing up that we have all had to manage; to the more than 250,000 people who balance necessary paid work—very necessary paid work in most cases—with being an unpaid carer for a loved one; and on to the pensioners caring for adult children and grannies caring for grandas. The role of carer falls mostly—although by no means exclusively—to women, which results in low incomes and limited career prospects for them. Four weeks ago, we had the latest meeting of the cross-party group here in the Parliament. I am pleased to say that the minister was in attendance—it was the first time that a health minister had appeared as a guest at the cross-party group. The minister spoke about the Government programme and the carers and young carers strategy and answered a range of questions from a varied group of carers and carer organisations. He was roundly welcomed as he addressed the issues raised and listened seriously to those gathered there. The 10,600 extra respite weeks and the commitment to a guarantee of 20 per cent from the change fund to support carers were very much welcomed by all in attendance at the group, as was the commitment to continue to consult carers organisations in the on-going development of the carers strategy. However, let us remember that, at the moment, we in this Parliament can deliver only part of the solution. It is my belief that in this place we should stand together to campaign for an urgent review of carers allowance, which is the lowest of the earnings-related benefits as it is paid at less than jobseekers allowance. I was on jobseekers allowance a number of years back and I know that it was low enough. Anything lower than that is barely worth claiming, except that people have to claim it if they are stuck in the position of being a carer with no other opportunity for income. If Westminster continues its intransigence over the situation, we will need to have the powers over benefits brought to the Scottish Parliament to enable us to make the decisions here, instead of constantly fighting a rearguard action against carer poverty in Scotland. In the meantime, however, we must ensure that the commitments made on delivery through local authorities are evaluated. I ask the minister to tell us in his summing-up how the Scottish Government can ensure that the third sector, in its attempts to deliver on the rights under the carers and young carers strategies, is not stymied by some of the councils in this country. The minister mentioned that in his opening speech; I would like him to do so again in his closing speech. I know that this is not in the minister’s gift, but I just thought that I would throw it in anyway: I would like penalties to be considered for councils that receive money that is intended for carers but redirect it to other council priorities, which is a real shame. I am very pleased by the steps towards carer proofing change fund resources, which is very much to be welcomed. It has been said before, but it bears saying again: who cares for the carers? Let it not be said that this Parliament fails to answer that question. Let us support the full implementation of the Scottish Government’s carers and young carers strategy. Let this Parliament stand together on the side of carers.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what its strategic management plans are for British Waterways Scotland regarding waterfront development and public safety. (S4O-00364)

What plans are there to encourage further developments along canals such as the Forth and Clyde canal, which runs through my constituency of Glasgow Anniesland, and what community involvement could be encouraged from those who live alongside the canals?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to increase support for the rejuvenation of local communities in cities. (S4O-00328)

Given her background, the cabinet secretary will be aware of the situation faced by the community of Drumchapel in my consistency. After a long period of decline, there is a severe lack of amenity in an area that is already experiencing high multiple deprivation. Previous plans for regeneration have come to little, although local housing associations do the best that they can. I invite the cabinet secretary to come to Glasgow Anniesland to see how Drumchapel might benefit from future community rejuvenation.

The debate about the international legality of nuclear weapons has been rehearsed in the chamber on a number of occasions, but it bears repeating that the United Nations nuclear non-proliferation treaty prohibits the signatory nations from selling or transferring nuclear warheads to other nuclear weapons states or non-nuclear weapons states. The state of Israel would have it that it is neither a nuclear weapons state nor a non-nuclear weapons state and that as it is not a signatory to the NPT, it is nobody’s business whether it has such weapons of mass murder in its arsenal—or, indeed, how it may have acquired them. However, let us suppose that Israel does have those weapons. Picture the scene: an Israeli citizen whistleblows on the programme and is later lured to Rome where he is swooped on by Mossad agents, spirited back to Israel to face treason charges and sentenced to 18 years in jail in deplorable conditions. His crime? He revealed that Israel has hundreds of nuclear warheads when the Israeli Government denies—or does not deny—that that is the case. The reaction of the international community is complicity through silence. Now let us imagine that Mordechai Vanunu had been an Iranian whistleblower who had revealed that that particular rogue state had a nuclear weapons programme. I am not alone in thinking that, in those circumstances, the man would have been hailed an international hero, with possible sanctions being taken against the state that jailed him on such invidious charges. If some people in this world did not have double standards they would have no standards at all. Why does the jailing of one man matter on an international scale? It matters because next year there is to be a major UN conference on peace in the middle east, focusing on creating a middle east nuclear weapons-free zone. In that area of seemingly perpetual conflict there is hope for an area free from the Damoclesean threat of the nuclear warhead suspended over the populations of the world. Yet Israel stands out as the mote in the eye of that vision of peace. Israel holds nuclear weapons. There—I said it. However, none of us could say it in Haifa or Tel Aviv. No Israeli citizen would go on a platform in their own country—or in another country where their words would be reported on back home—and state outright that their homeland holds hundreds of nuclear warheads that are pointed in the direction of neighbouring states. In the face of that intransigence, how will the UN conference succeed? How will the achievement of a middle east nuclear weapons-free zone be negotiated when the only nuclear weapons state in the region is a state of denial? Mordechai Vanunu, in talking openly of his country’s opaque policy of nuclear weapons doublespeak, performed an act of humanity, bravery and, sadly, self-sacrifice. He is a hero in the mould of Gandhi and Mandela, who has put the safety of others and the future of mankind ahead of his own comfort and freedom. The name of Mordechai Vanunu must continue to echo around the world, until the nuclear menace has been faced down and peace and freedom exist in the middle east.

What plans are in place for cultural activities to be brought to Scotland by participant nations during the Commonwealth games in 2014?

I am asking the question because many people in my constituency have family backgrounds in the Commonwealth and they would be keen to observe and/or to contribute to any cultural activities that originate from the participant countries. Does the cabinet secretary think that that will be possible?

Like other members, I congratulate James Dornan on bringing this important debate to the chamber. The World Health Organization’s European charter on alcohol proposes that each member state should “Promote health by controlling the availability” of alcohol “for example for young people, and influencing the price of alcoholic beverages, for instance by taxation.” That was signed up to by all the member states of the European Union, including the Westminster Government, so we should, I hope, be able to look for no short measure of support from it. [Laughter.] Thank you. At the moment, we do not have taxation powers as a means to control the availability of alcohol, so perhaps minimum pricing has a place.

I presume, of course, that the Labour Party will support the public health levy. We should all try to be positive. We are the legislature, and we should be responsible and introduce what we are able to introduce. It would have been useful if we had been able to introduce minimum pricing during the previous session to find out whether it was a worthwhile measure. Richard Simpson mentioned that. Politicians across the parties are coming round to the idea of trying minimum pricing, which would not be a silver bullet, but would be an extra weapon in the armoury against regular excessive alcohol consumption. Malcolm Chisholm’s support was thoughtful, and Liam McArthur was sensible and thoughtful in speaking about his support. Patrick Harvie was quite right to say that it is not about excessive alcohol consumption alone; rather, it is about how we encourage responsible drinking. Drink will not disappear from our society, so we have to think about how to encourage responsible drinking. Every year in Scotland, there are 1,500 alcohol-related preventable deaths. It has been said that liver cirrhosis rates in Europe have steadily declined since the 1980s, but they have soared in Scotland. Indeed, since 1995-96, alcohol-related hospitalisations have increased. I used to work in admissions in Glasgow’s Western infirmary accident and emergency department, and I witnessed the regular carnage of drink-related damage. I witnessed bodies staggering or being carried into the waiting areas and innocent bystanders attending who had suffered violence at the hands, feet and knives of drunks. Since the 1980s, alcohol has become more affordable, and there has been a noticeable and recorded shift from pub drinking to even cheaper private drinking at home. The domestic abuse figures shamefully mirror that. Supermarkets have moved into the mass alcohol sales market and made it their own. The supermarket chains have often used alcohol as a loss-leader, and they have driven many of the specialist off-sales and licensed grocers out of business through selling crates of booze so cheap that even bottled water fails to compete with them. That is an outrage that is an even worse face of capitalism than Tiny Rowland’s. Why should we not use the powers of this Parliament to try to address this scurrilous state of affairs? Many studies on the issue, from Sheffield to Canada, have referred to a formula that demonstrates that an increase in price equates to a decrease in alcohol consumption. Whether it is by education, taxation or pricing policy, we should get together and ensure that Scotland has a better future with an alcohol culture that is not the shame of Europe.

I would like us to use every possible opportunity to change the drinking habits of Scotland. I would welcome the Labour Party lodging amendments to the next alcohol bill, so that Parliament can judge its suggestions.

15. To ask the Scottish Government what support is available to those at risk from the subsidence or potential collapse of disused mineshafts. (S4O-00198)

In the Knightswood area of my constituency, there has been a collapse of long-disused mineshafts, which has resulted in two houses having to be demolished. Fortunately, no one was injured in the collapse and disappearance of a kitchen in one of those houses. That has had a detrimental effect on my constituents, who worry about subsidence and the possible collapse of their homes, as well as the potential effect on the value of their properties. Will the minister visit the area with me to look into what is a concerning matter and forward his views to the Coal Authority?

I thank members who are unable to stay but have told me that that is the case or have passed me a note, in particular Patrick Harvie and Neil Findlay. It was very kind of them. It gives me great pleasure to bring to the chamber of the Scottish Parliament a debate on the 30th anniversary of the United Nations international day of peace. Today, President Barack Obama and many other heads of state will address the United Nations General Assembly. Among them will be Laura Chinchilla Miranda, which is not a name that we often hear in here. I met her once and she is a very nice person. She is the President of Costa Rica—the country that introduced the original resolution that created this day. At this point we should remember that practically the first four words of article 1 of the “Charter of the United Nations” are “To maintain international peace”. There can be no more dignified or pressing aim than that. We join in peace today with countries as diverse as Argentina, Australia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Uganda and the United States, and with organisations including Amnesty International, the Arab League and the Global Partnership for the Prevention of Armed Conflict, which is based in The Hague—all of which recognise, promote and celebrate peace day. Thousands of organisations and millions of people across the world are united in calling for peace in a world in which so many suffer the terror, hardship and pain of warfare and the indiscriminate use of weapons of all kinds. We know that here in Scotland there are weapons stationed on the Clyde that have the capacity to bring about the destruction of communities, cities, countries, civilisations and, potentially, our whole planet. Trident nuclear missiles have been condemned as being immoral by church leaders and as illegal by the chief judges of the International Court of Justice. They have been called useless by senior military chiefs of staff—but guess what? They are deemed to be indispensable for our protection and safety by politicians at Westminster who have a taste for sitting at the top table. The Trident system, whose upgrade and replacement are earmarked to last for another 50 to 60 years, is a drain on scarce resources at a time of severe recession. The system is also an environmental disaster waiting to happen: it has experienced more than 100 leaks and on-board fires in which radioactive material has been discharged into the waters around our coasts. What is more is that if Trident were ever fired in anger or through a systems error, it would prove to be an abomination on a monumental scale. Even in a full-scale war, the military sees nuclear weapons as an outrage, as we know from General Eisenhower, who said in his autobiography that when he was informed of the decision to use the bomb in 1945, he thought that “it was an unnecessary and inexcusable move to destroy the lives of countless thousands of innocent women and children in Hiroshima and Nagasaki when Japan was on the brink of collapse and surrender.” General Eisenhower said that the real reason for using the bomb was to send a message to the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union, the evil empire, had not fired its weapon, but America, the land of the free, had fired its weapon. We must remember that politicians on both sides are to blame for the fear in which we lived throughout the 1940s, 50s, 60s and 70s, and which continues today. Why should we have weapons of mass murder stationed on our land? No plan exists to have nuclear capability in Scotland beyond successive Westminster Governments’ insistence on maintaining such a presence here. When the Vanguard and Trafalgar nuclear-armed and powered submarines go, so too will the Astute vessels that are being insinuated into the Faslane site. At the moment, we can do nothing to remove those hulks and their warheads but protest against their presence in our midst. We must at all times be prepared to protest. However, only with political power can we ensure that they go lock, stock and barrel. In their place can be conventional defence forces but—most important—use can and will be made of the transferable engineering skills of the workforce that remains, as Scotland develops its unique resources to become the green powerhouse of Europe. With the benefit of the planned subsea interconnector and the North Sea grid, which are passing through the European Commission, we can be the fulcrum of a secure and affordable source of energy for Europe into the 21st century and beyond. That requires the engineering skills of the workforce at Faslane, in conjunction with our world-class university research facilities and development operations, which can put us at the forefront of that exciting development. The transformation of Faslane and Coulport from military bases to peaceful developments that enable the production of clean energy would be fitting. The achievement of peace is never truly a passive process. Even the non-violent civil disobedience movements of Gandhi and Martin Luther King Jnr required thought, organisation, logistics and—most important of all—the channelling of bravery in the right direction. None of that happens in a vacuum. As we know, it takes more bravery to be seen standing shoulder to shoulder with other nations and peoples around the world in the cause of peace than it does to hide behind massive military force or the threat of doomsday weapons—even those that must never be used, as the cost of using them would lead to the annihilation of life on earth. In line with that stand against such weapons, I was honoured to attend the “Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons” review conference 2010 at the United Nations in New York and to present to the conference’s president, Ambassador Libran Cabactulan, a signed statement on behalf of First Minister Alex Salmond in support of a nuclear weapons convention. The significance of an NWC is that it would achieve what the conventions on biological and chemical weapons did in declaring such weapons to be illegal under international humanitarian law. Actions in themselves do not speak louder than words, but words without the intention to act are less than worthless. If we mean to achieve peace among the peoples of the earth and a future that is fit for all humanity, we must demand an end to destructive weaponry in our midst and take the necessary political actions to achieve that. After the debate, I am holding an event in room P1.02, which anyone is welcome to attend.

1. To ask the Scottish Government whether the newly created cities strategy responsibility will have a specific focus on urban regeneration and, if so, what this will be. (S4O-00011)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that helpful answer. Is she aware of the almost derelict state of Drumchapel town centre, which is a cause of great concern to many of my constituents, who are without even a local supermarket? Might her strategic role see new hope of drawing together the local authority and developers, with a view to regenerating that much-needed facility?

I am pleased to take part in this debate on the Equal Opportunities Committee’s report on migration and trafficking because I was a member of the committee when the issue was first considered. I am pleased that the report has been produced. It was a long and complex inquiry and it has proven to be worth while. Migration is a natural human trend. If it were not, we would all be living in a congested great rift valley in Africa. It is important that migration is not looked on as some sort of bogeyman, as much of the red-top populist press and outrageous media present it. Of course consideration must be given to available resources in every country, and there should be serious consideration of integration issues with local communities and migrants, but if the starting point is one of rabid negativity, the outlook for humanity and dignity is very poor, as is the outlook for the potential benefits that we in Scotland, as a host community, can accrue from migrants. Some of the issues relate to matters that are presently reserved to Westminster. One of those, which is well documented in the report, is the failure to collect viable and accurate data on migration. Improved data would enable resources to be better focused for the benefit of agencies and migrant groups. However, the provision of some local services is within the remit of the Scottish Government and its delivery agencies, such as those in health, education and policing. An obvious concern about the services that are devolved to Scotland is that migrants frequently fail to register with a general practitioner and thereby fail to receive the full benefits of the national health service. Similarly, schooling and housing services are often less well used by migrant individuals and their families, as they do not have a support group or signposting to services. I am glad, therefore, that the Scottish Government has committed additional funding in 2011 for the teaching of English to speakers of other languages and that, through COSLA, resources have been made available for the local authority toolkit and the development of the relocation advisory service. I attended the Glasgow evidence-taking session that has been mentioned a few times and came away with some cases. I found local authorities supportive in helping with those cases. Trafficking is a disgusting 21st century slave trade. It is often hard to identify because of the violent criminal nature of the beast and its international tentacles but, given the cross-border co-operation between the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency and Europol and the work of TARA here in Scotland, there are signs that we are probably heading in the right direction, even if we have not quite got there yet. As the report says, TARA must be strongly commended for its hard work in helping the victims of trafficking to come forward and speak about traffickers and at the same time to receive help in recovering from their various ordeals. I say “various” because trafficking is not always about sex slavery and forced prostitution; there are other forms of serfdom to be found—in factories, farms and even private households. It would be extremely useful if the Gangmasters Licensing Authority could operate more successfully and more widely in Scotland—I think that it is not legally allowed to do that at the moment. I congratulate the continuing members of the Equal Opportunities Committee on their hard work—without me—and on their dogged persistence in following through this important report. It is a credit to the Scottish Parliament that the report has been produced. I look forward to hearing the minister’s response.

On the back of the very sad fire deaths over Christmas and the new year—many, unfortunately, due to excess alcohol  consumption—will the minister say how many more rescues were carried out over the festive period by our fire and rescue services?

To ask the First Minister what progress the Scottish Government is making on reducing the homicide rate. (S3F-2788)

Will the First Minister commit to maintaining the increase in the number of police officers that has been brought about since the Scottish Government came to power and which has resulted in the record low figures for homicide in Scotland's homes and streets?

I fully understand the need for the Scottish Parliament to have a debate on winter resilience, and I very much welcome this morning's debate. I believe that we should have had such a debate a long time ago, as winter is hardly new to us. It is a bit ripe of some people to charge on and suggest that the issue is one that just the Scottish Government is responsible for, and that no else has ever had any responsibility for it. However, it is better that the issue is dealt with now than not dealt with at all. Let us put things in perspective. This is no ordinary winter. Countries across Europe are experiencing their worst winter in decades. There is a reason for that, and a bit of, shall we say, cool and rational thought might help as we prepare for more of the same, which is likely to come our way. I hope that members will not mind if I provide a wee bit of Open University stuff because, to paraphrase our American cousins, snow happens. It happens as a result of scientific reactions. A large area of high pressure has developed in the Atlantic, which has caused a block to the usual westerlies—the westerly winds—that tend to keep Scotland a bit milder than our latitude would suggest. That has allowed very cold Arctic air to move south across mainland Europe. At this time of year, during the long nights over the European land mass, there is a rapid cool-down from daytime temperatures, with the result that the Arctic blast remains bitterly cold. When that air crosses the relatively warm North Sea before reaching us, evaporation means that it picks up moisture, which then condenses as snow when it reaches the colder temperatures on land. The weather cycle that Scotland normally experiences does not cause a great deal of problems, but the phenomenon of Arctic oscillation, which happens when opposing atmospheric pressure patterns surrounding the north pole shift back and forth, disrupts the standard weather patterns in the northern  hemisphere. Members have got to stay with me here.

It is a while since some of us were at school, so it will not do any harm for us to remember this. Since the 1960s, in general, a ring of high pressure has surrounded the relatively low pressure over the pole, thereby keeping the cold air where it should be—on top of the world. However, we have been subjected to a reversal of that situation, whereby high pressure over the north pole has been surrounded by a low pressure system, which has resulted in the cold blast of air that has recently moved down over us and our neighbours, both near and far. Members will be happy to hear that that is the end of the science. It is necessary to be able to respond to changing weather patterns rather than just react to them in the short term. Now is the time to take a long view of equipment planning and to mobilise resources in readiness for any part of Scotland being as badly affected as has been the case over the past few weeks. I have been hearing calls for that to happen for decades—I know that I do not look old enough—and we have all heard that for many years, but no one has yet delivered, so I welcome the Opposition parties' positive proposals that members of the Parliament will work together constructively to prepare for future extreme weather events. Scotland has seen exceptional weather, as have countries that are expected to suffer worse winter weather than we normally get. Paris had its heaviest snowfall for 23 years, and Charles de Gaulle airport was closed. I do not think that people are slagging off the French Government for that situation; it was the snow. Sadly, 18 homeless people were reported to have frozen to death and another 12 were killed in snow-related accidents in Poland, which is not a warm country. A record -18°C was reported in parts of Germany, which is not a warm country. A state of emergency has been declared in Bosnia, Serbia and Montenegro, where schools have been closed, power and heating have been lost and water supplies have been left contaminated. Minneapolis in the mid-west of the US has seen its heaviest snowfall in 19 years. Nashville in Tennessee is experiencing its coldest winter since 1942. It is no fun playing country and western music when your ukulele is frozen to your leg—I have tried. We all have lessons to learn. However, we are not alone in being hit by a force of nature that is beyond the control of mankind in this country or in any other. With co-operation and good sense on  all sides, we can plan for the best of outcomes. We know that we have to do our best for Scotland's people, and at the same time we know that we are not in control of the climate, even with the best of legislation. However, we must all continue to try, and we welcome the Opposition parties' proposals.

I do not know whether I can follow Jock Stein’s team, but I will do my best. I am here as a member of the European and External Relations Committee, although I was not a member of the committee when it looked into the important issues of how the Lisbon treaty will affect Scotland’s role in the EU decision-making process and how the Scottish Parliament can take advantage of the new powers for sub-national Parliaments that are contained in the treaty. Although the SNP was wary of the treaty at its inception, realpolitik dictates that, for the greater benefit of the people of Scotland, we must make its provisions work in the best interests of our country. The Parliament should use all the opportunities that are provided to scrutinise proposed European legislation to best effect. In particular, we must look positively on the treaty because it provides the committee with an active scrutiny role and possibilities to assess any possible breach of subsidiarity. My late friend and SNP colleague Professor Neil MacCormick, who has been mentioned by a number of members, was a strong supporter of the treaty and led the debate on its likely effects in Scotland. I believe that his role deserves recognition, because he put the Scottish stamp on the Lisbon treaty. The protocol on application of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality provides an opportunity for the Scottish Parliament to take part in the scrutiny process for legislative proposals from the European Commission. That opportunity to address the democratic deficit that we have all heard of is, of course, to be welcomed, and the extension of qualified majority voting in the Council will add to the efficiency of the processes. I particularly welcome the introduction of the charter  of fundamental rights to European primary law. Protocol 30 clarifies the application of the EU charter of fundamental rights, which reconfirms existing rights. That is to be welcomed. I must also mention that the recognition of the possibility of a state’s withdrawal from the EU—I think that Ted Brocklebank will be fully in favour of that—is a sign of political maturity that has been sadly lacking in the past. Turning to how we can make our influence felt, I am pleased that the Minister for Culture and External Affairs has provided summaries following each joint ministerial committee meeting and I look forward to the further discussions among the Administrations that are involved in the JMC process as they move towards greater openness in those discussions. I hope that the European and External Relations Committee will lead the Scottish Parliament towards greater and more influential involvement at the EU level of governance. With more and more legislative influence from Brussels becoming evident each year, the Lisbon treaty gives us an opportunity to directly intervene in European legislative proposals up to the point of objecting to any proposals that do not conform with the principles of subsidiarity. That is where the Scottish Parliament’s European strategy, which was developed to ensure that we can engage with, scrutinise and monitor EU legislation, must be used to best advantage. We cannot afford to find ourselves at the fag end of processes that affect the day-to-day lives of Scotland’s citizens. That would leave us as mere administrators of the decisions of others. Let us therefore ensure that our Scottish Parliament is as proactive as possible in the implementation of the treaty, to the benefit of Scotland.

I thank the members who are present who kindly signed my motion to allow this members’ business debate to take place. I also thank those who have come here to observe the debate, including my parliamentarians for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament colleague Rob van Riet, who has travelled up from London especially for that purpose. Nuclear weapons-free zones are now in existence across the world, from single-state nuclear weapons-free zones such as New Zealand and Mongolia to whole continents such as the entirety of central and South America, and from nations such as South Africa, which once harboured nuclear programmes, to countries closer to home such as our western European neighbours, from whose lands America’s tactical nuclear weapons will soon be removed and whose citizenry aims to keep things that way. The great majority of countries around the world are looking to unburden themselves of the 20th century legacy of nuclear weapons, which has affected them either directly or has made them live in the shadow of those weapons of mass murder. Sadly, all of us know of the countries that are termed rogue states, such as Iran and North Korea, which occasionally embark on brinkmanship against the existing nuclear states that hold permanent seats on the United Nations Security Council. That causes all of us concern. We are also aware of nations such as India, which has pretensions to a place at the top table, and its neighbour Pakistan, whose nuclear capability sits cheek by jowl with a Taliban insurgency in its northern marches. Then there are countries such as the United Kingdom and France, which cling to the idea of a post-imperialist importance through the maintenance of costly and unsustainable nuclear programmes, under the guise of deterrence. However, we in Scotland could follow the example of New Zealand, where a nuclear weapons-free movement took root in the 1960s and grew to be a national statement of intent when, in 1997, the New Zealand Government declared its nation to be a nuclear weapons-free zone. Like New Zealand, Scotland can and should campaign via a popular organic movement led by the civic population of our nation, for the establishment of a nuclear weapons-free zone Scotland. That should be done by means of a straightforward non-Government education programme, through which the Scottish people can debate the issues around the pros and cons of the Trident and nuclear weapons issue. I believe that, home by home, classroom by classroom, workspace by workspace, our land will become a coherent series of nuclear weapons-free zones. In that way, Scotland can join the majority view of countries at the United Nations that have signed the non-proliferation treaty in good faith—and not as a smokescreen for ill intentions. To that end, NWFZ Scotland has written to schools, colleges, universities, faith groups, trade unions and businesses. It has produced cards such as the one that I am holding now, which allow individuals and groups to make contact to obtain further informative and display materials. Lest anyone doubt that we are pushing at an open door, let me quote a recent YouGov poll, in which 67 per cent of respondents said that the UK Government should not buy a replacement for Trident, but should instead secure conventional defences. Only 13 per cent supported Trident replacement. To say it might seem pointless—no, it does not, because fortunately, Jackson Carlaw has been good enough to stay in the chamber for the debate—but Tory voters are 56 per cent against replacement of Trident and only 28 per cent are for it. The proposal for the NWFZ Scotland campaign grew from an event in the Parliament that I sponsored in October to celebrate the UN international day of peace. Senior figures in the disarmament movement spoke about nuclear weapons, about how we can free our country and about how we can stop those weapons spreading across the world. Among the guests was Marian Hobbs, former Minister for Disarmament and Arms Control in the New Zealand Government. I have with me a recently received message of support from her to NWFZ Scotland.  “Dear Bill, I am so impressed to read your Parliamentary Motion advocating for Scotland to develop a network of nuclear weapons-free zones leading to NWFZ Scotland. A nuclear weapon-free zone in Motherwell, in Pitlochry, in Kirkwall, in Ullapool, in Aberdeen has two effects. The first is education. When the local authority proposes such a nuclear weapon-free zone ... there is a public debate within the community, and having that debate is very important. People become too used to the threat of nuclear war, it seems so remote”. Once a nationwide grass-roots movement develops in small towns, suburbs, schools, churches or wherever, the nuclear weapons-free mentality becomes strong. That is what happened in New Zealand. The second effect is national. It is that “the nation’s politicians can defend its nuclear weapon free status, because behind them are thousands of small communities who have thought about, argued about and finally adopted that status.” That chimes perfectly with the recent message from the UN secretary-general, Ban Ki-moon, to last month’s Dublin seminar that was held by Pax Christi in honour of Bruce Kent. The secretary-general restated that positive advances such as a new strategic arms reduction treaty—START—and further advances at the 2010 non-proliferation of nuclear weapons review should be built on, so as to outlaw the nuclear weapons that curse our world. They should be eliminated, and the risks that they pose should be removed. They offer mankind nothing but a threat of no future whatsoever. I hope that the Parliament will lend its support to the aims of such a campaign as our contribution to the secretary-general’s vision, through which the people of Scotland can become fully informed on the issues around the nuclear weapons that are in their midst, and can decide on having a nuclear weapons free-zone Scotland.

I congratulate Jamie Hepburn on securing this important debate. It is another sign that the Parliament can and should talk about the major issues in the world and not dodge them. Why do young men and women join the armed forces? There might be a number of reasons. It might be a natural progression from being a member of the cadets at school, a sense of adventure, a sense of duty to family or nation, or a need for a feeling of belonging. Whatever the reason, I do not believe that it will be to fight in a  war for which, after nine long and bloody years, there is no sense of the direction in which the conflict should be heading. Nor will it be to fight in a war in which a myriad of aims supersede each other almost monthly as politicians try to carry a sceptical population along, either on a tide of overt, tub-thumping patriotism or a wave of apparently altruistic humanitarianism. They most assuredly do not join the armed forces to lose their young lives or end up physically or mentally mutilated when there was no direct threat to their homeland or even the end result of an improved situation for those in the country of conflict.

I will come to that. It is extremely important to places such as Aberdeen and Glasgow—as well as right across Scotland and the western world—that the drugs issue is addressed, and that the war is not the way to do it. Let us remember clearly that Afghanistan has been a land of constant conflict over the centuries, where the armies of Alexander the Great, the Mogul emperors, the British imperial army of the 19th century, the might of the Soviet Union and now the combined strength of NATO's forces have all become hopelessly embroiled in the tribal warfare of a medieval state. To what end? The capture of Osama Bin Laden? Failed. The imposition of a democratic Government? How so? By replacing one group of gun-toting despots with another, who wear nice clothes? The emancipation of women? Yes, in some areas, but for how long, and how supported is that? The ending of the poppy crop and the flood of heroin on to our streets? Failed again. What has it all been about in Afghanistan? Why could long-term negotiations with tribal leaders not have taken place? That way, the Taliban could have been isolated from the mainstream. An agricultural programme could have been developed, and small industrial units in the cities and town established. Long-term education systems could have been introduced with the co-operation of the local people. Remember—as Bill Wilson said earlier—that the west introduced a Mad Max lawlessness through the mujahideen during the Soviet occupation. Inevitably, the mujahideen mutated into the Taliban. When we then invaded on the pretext of hunting down the mastermind of 9/11, we made it much, much worse. It has to stop now. The troops must be brought home from this quagmire, this 21st century Vietnam.  The long process of changing a medieval society into one approaching the levels of human rights and freedom from oppression that Afghanistan's neighbours are working towards developing cannot be imposed by armed force; it can happen only through negotiation and good faith on both sides.

To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to develop and expand the impact of the community empowerment action plan. (S3O-11799)

Most members put increased community participation and empowerment at the core of Scottish politics. In the context of invigorating democracy, I am sure that the minister is aware of the upcoming national event in Govan, which aims to highlight the success of community-based projects. What further plans does the Scottish Government have to build on the current successes of community asset ownership?

To ask the Scottish Government what steps it has taken to encourage better use of underdeveloped commercial and industrial land in urban areas. (S3O-11629)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his very full reply. Is he aware of the desolate situation at Drumchapel shopping centre in Glasgow? Apart from a small supermarket, the centre now has only one limited row of shops for a population of more than 9,000. That requires local residents to make bus journeys to get to any sizeable shopping centre; in an area of generally low average incomes, that is a considerable financial strain. Will the Scottish Government look into helping facilitate partnership development with the current owners of the site?

I, too, thank Lewis Macdonald for bringing this important debate to the chamber. We all agree that, at times of economic difficulty, vulnerable sections of society are in even more danger than usual of being marginalised, as the mainstream population is more prone to pulling up the equality ladder behind itself. It is incumbent on all of us to keep at the front of our minds the fact that we have an inclusive nation in which everyone counts and in which everyone must be treated as equally as possible. Mainstreaming equalities is important. Lewis Macdonald said that mainstreaming should sometimes be put to the side and we should take more positive action on behalf of some sections of society, but I would like everyone to be considered to be in the main stream in the not-too-distant future. Unfortunately, that is not the case at the moment. Of the general population in Scotland, 80 per cent work. That is not enough in itself, but only 37 per cent of people with disabilities have work, despite years of worthy talk from politicians of all parties and all Governments. Everyone has paid lip service to the idea that citizens with disabilities should be treated in a more befitting manner; it has taken a wee while to deliver on that. As other members have done, I welcome the opportunity to discuss the future of Scotland's supported employment workplaces and to discuss people with disabilities who are looking for employment outside such workplaces. Helen Eadie sometimes becomes slightly aerated about the issue, but I know that that is because of her commitment. The welcome disability report that was issued four years ago shows that she has a genuine case. It is important to talk about the whole range of people with disabilities who are looking for employment and for access to ordinary employment. As the Equal Opportunities Committee's disability reporter, I am—obviously—interested in the issue. It is a self-evident truth that paid employment offers the best route out of the poverty trap in which many people with disabilities find themselves. A variety of inclusive policies has been developed over the years with the aim of removing barriers to employment for those who are furthest from the labour market. The obstacles to employment for people with disabilities should—sadly—be familiar to us all. As I said, less than half the disabled people in Scotland are in  employment, in comparison with more than three quarters of the general population. It is our duty as a society to overcome that. All too often, disabled people are held back by low expectations. Those are sometimes their own, because society has led them to think that they cannot contribute fully, and they are sometimes the low expectations of the rest of us, who believe that people with disabilities cannot contribute to the same degree as we can. Of course, that is nonsense, as everybody in the chamber knows. That mindset has never had a place in Scotland and certainly has no place today. It is important to recognise that many supported employment workplaces have been successful. Members might not know that Blindcraft Glasgow, in the region that I come from, began as a workshop for visually impaired people and has expanded to employ workers with other disabilities. The workforce consists of 125 employees who are registered disabled. It is important that public bodies support such workplaces. It is unlike me to do so, but I congratulate Glasgow City Council on its support for Blindcraft Glasgow, which has provided an example that I wish that many other local authorities and public bodies would follow. Outside the debate about supported workplaces, I very much welcome the minister's list of examples of good practice that the Scottish Government has initiated. I am pleased that Glasgow Housing Association has been a big winner in the programme and has provided 1,500 places for disabled people in recent years. I am also pleased that 10 per cent of the workforce in the construction phases for the 2014 Commonwealth games is guaranteed to be for disabled people. Those big-ticket issues point all public bodies in the direction of ensuring that people with disabilities are not at the bottom of the list for employment and are included in employment programmes. As Mike Pringle said, for the foreseeable future supported workplaces will be specifically required to employ disabled people. The demand for positions in those workplaces exists, so we need a demand for their products. It is of great importance that article 19 is promoted as widely as possible and that the first-class products of Scotland's supported workplaces are put at the top of procurement agendas. I will make a suggestion, even though I have been told that I may be flying a kite that will not go anywhere. One intervention by the Scottish Government might be to encourage Scottish Enterprise to deliver product diversification advice to supported workplaces, so that they may benefit in the same way as private industry does. Scottish Enterprise may be reluctant to involve itself in  social enterprise businesses, but it should be encouraged to do so, as it has the expertise to help supported workplaces to ensure that there is a market for their products. As the world changes, product development is always important, but it is no more important than social responsibility. The progress that the minister and his colleagues have made through community benefit clauses shows the Scottish Government's commitment to supporting disability employment. However, the minister will agree that article 19 must be delivered to ensure that supported workplaces achieve the position in society that they deserve and that people with disabilities are seen as full and equal partners in society.

To ask the Scottish Government what its response is to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development report, "Education at a Glance 2010". (S3O-11336)

How will the results that have been published in "Education at a Glance 2010" be used to inform the Scottish Government's development of education delivery, in the context of comparators with other nations that are listed in the report?

We all talk about human rights to things such as safety from violence, education and legal representation, but among all those must be ranked the human right to a house, to shelter and to somewhere to live. I have a fairly important quotation from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which was agreed on behalf of the peoples of the United Nations in 1948. Nothing has changed since then, and unfortunately this right has not been delivered in every situation since it was expressed. The declaration states: "Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services". Housing was recognised as a human right in 1948, but it is still not enjoyed by everyone in society. That is why I welcome the document "Housing: Fresh Thinking, New Ideas", which looks to address the fact that we all have the right to a home. I remember the clearance of tenemental property when I lived by the Clyde in Partick. Everybody else has mentioned where they come from, so I thought that I might as well slip that in. Back then, we still had enough shipyards to go round. The housing was not in the best condition, though, and we were moved to a four-in-a-block in Knightswood. It was all very nice. It was next to a canal and we could look across the canal and see the coos in the field. It was really pleasant. We  were cleared from an area of a multiple deprivation. That was a success for us, but many of our neighbours in Partick moved from slums that were nevertheless communities that held jobs, shopping and transport into town, to deserts wi windaes, as Billy Connolly said. Out of the frying pan and into the fire. I am happy that community housing associations in Glasgow and throughout Scotland have become the way forward and that they are continuing to develop mixed tenure with good-quality social rented homes and affordable owner-occupier properties. It is important that communities can remain together. Aspirational or not, people like to live in communities, and it is important to have a range of tenure within them. That is the way forward.

I know that Alex Johnstone likes to make that point. In fact, he is beating it to death today. I understand the right to buy. I know that many people took up the offer, but I also know that, if we were clearing slums anywhere in Glasgow today, the people would not be able to move to Knightswood as we did, because most of those nice houses have been bought over and only the poorer properties are left behind. We need to have mixed tenure housing developed and built and we need to ensure that there is a future for people to have proper, decent rented accommodation if that is what they choose or what they can afford. I appreciate that people had the right to buy and that it afforded many people on low incomes an opportunity to own their homes. I will not deny that, because I know a lot of people who did exactly that, but it is still important that people who need a registered social home can access one. The progression of second-stage transfer from the monolithic Glasgow Housing Association to community housing association control will see, at last, the re-establishment of viable communities in the city of Glasgow. That is the way forward these days. The GHA had 70,000 to 80,000 properties. It is not viable for such an organisation to be set up and to last forever when it was supposed to bring homes closer to communities. It is therefore important that the second-stage transfer is carried through. Des McNulty mentioned that he was greatly involved in that. That is recognised, but it was extremely important that it came to fruition, and that took place under the present Government, with the minister who is sitting in front of us today. I thank him for ensuring that the process is, at long last, under way, but we must remember that there is still a long way to go. A  number of housing associations and communities in Glasgow are looking for the roll-out. I am grateful that the minister indicated to us recently that that will be carried through. With the changing demographic of the Scottish population, there is an increasing need for local flexibility in housing provision. There are more single-person households than at any time in the past, including not only young people who have left home—although many young people cannot afford to do that these days—but those in the growing elderly population in Scotland. Many of those older people are living in homes that are not suitable for them and they will require something else in order to see out their days in the community that they have lived in. However, with the growing financial constraints, less money is available to build specialist housing for the elderly and those with disabilities. We need support for independent living and the development of new ways to provide support through the best use of new and existing technologies, as well as updates on standard adaptations. We must ensure that local authorities act on their new duty to provide support for disabled adaptations.

I did not realise that I had taken so long. Organisations such as Bield Housing Association provide remote support centrally to allow people to continue living in their homes, often with the help of aids and adaptations. I welcome the Scottish Government's "Housing: Fresh Thinking, New Ideas" and look forward to its implementation for the benefit of all our people.

The IBR report suggests proposals for Government expenditure and how public spending can be planned on the basis of the restricted finances that we will have available to use on behalf of Scotland's people. To me, and to many other members throughout the chamber—although there are not as many members in the chamber as I thought there might be for such an important debate—that means looking at how best we can serve all of society and be inclusive of those who are most vulnerable to the vagaries of the capitalist system because they live on the financial margins. I therefore choose to highlight the quote in the report from Korpi and Palme, which relates to the arguments vis-à-vis means testing versus universalism. They state: "universal policies may increase the preference for redistribution"— which should please some people, if they would like to follow it— "by generating a more cohesive group identity. Thus, for example, Scandinavian countries have highly redistributive tax systems that are based around universal rather than means-tested benefits." Along those lines, I have been happy that the Scottish Government has, when possible, chosen to go down that route. However, this Parliament obviously does not currently have control over the levers of the finances of state, which would allow for full implementation of such a programme.

Yes, they have a higher tax rate than Scotland, and when Scotland has the opportunity to decide for itself, the Scottish people will vote for whom they would like to represent them. That could be for a Government such as there is in Norway or it could be for a Government such as we have in the UK. I find the latter unlikely, but it is possible. It is down to the people to vote for what they want. That is what the Scottish National Party stands for. However, we do not have full control over the levers of the finances of state, which would allow us to have full implementation of such a programme, if that was chosen and if the people decided that that was what they would like to see. Other routes therefore have to be assessed, such as eligibility through passporting, which is very important to carers. I would like to mention the role of the Scottish Government and, indeed, the Scottish Parliament in the delivery of services to a large and vital group in our society: the  600,000 or so carers in Scotland. "Caring Together"—the carers strategy that was announced this summer by the Minister for Public Health and Sport, Shona Robison—is a welcome £5 million commitment from the Government for a 10-point carers strategy supporting a new deal for the voluntary sector in supporting respite for carers of all ages. In conjunction with COSLA, health boards, NGOs and third sector organisations, the Scottish Government has, in the face of what is expected to be a drastic reduction in public spending, committed to helping to support carers through increasingly difficult times. The strategy, which has been developed with carers, will make a valuable contribution not only to their everyday lives but to the lives of cared-for people across Scotland. That is vital, given that successive Westminster Governments have maintained the carer's allowance at the lowest possible level. In fact, at just £53.90 a week—up a paltry 80p since last year—it is the lowest of all state benefits. The previous Labour Government and the current Conservative-Liberal Democrat Government have maintained the allowance at that level, but I believe that whatever Government we had in an independent Scotland would ensure that carers were better treated and not left to survive on such a ridiculously small amount of money. As a result, I was delighted to hear the cabinet secretary's statement this morning that equality will be one of the checks and balances that the Scottish Government will ensure that departments use in compiling their budgets. Although every element of Government will look to ensure continued delivery of services, it is essential that those at the bottom of the economic heap who are always the most vulnerable at times of economic stringency are protected from getting into even worse financial straits. I know—as anyone who has been in the chamber today knows—that there will be differences of opinion over how the forthcoming Scottish budget should be divvied up, and that there will be competing claims on the smaller cake that will be available. There will be plenty of yah-boo politicking, but that is only to be expected both in this place and in that other place down the road. However, when it comes to groups such as carers, we should all be singing from the same hymn sheet and looking to ensure that they are not affected disproportionately by budget cuts.

I am sorry—I have finished.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In light of the statement by the Lord Chancellor that was reported in The Daily Telegraph today, have you been made aware whether there will be a forthcoming statement from Westminster on his ideas on prisons and sentencing? [ Interruption .]

We had no idea that the respect agenda extended to the Scottish Government's proposals on short sentences.

It is an honour for me to present this members' business debate in the lead-up to deaf awareness week. My inspiration for lodging the motion that has brought us here this evening is a young woman who is sitting in the public gallery, Julie McElroy. Julie was born with cerebral palsy and with deafness in both ears, but has worked tirelessly to prove that the human spirit can overcome any physical obstacles—and she does so with a healthy dose of good humour. As I said, it was Julie who caused me to think more about deafness and living with a disability that everyone knows about but, unless they are directly affected by it, does not really seem to give a second thought to. It is therefore important that the theme of deaf awareness week this year is "look at me", which of course has at its base a number of connotations. Overall, it is about the need to improve understanding of deafness by highlighting the range of communication methods that are used by deaf people and their families. That is obviously of real importance when children are involved, in order to maximise their life opportunities through the development of language skills, with sign language, lip-reading and speech development. Hearing aids are also of great significance, of course, and Julie has benefited tremendously through her practitioner at the Hearing Company, as have countless thousands of others through high street practitioners and national health service audiology departments. Hearing aid dispensers have recently transferred to the register of the Health Professions Council, which  assures professionalism on the part of high street practitioners. It has been suggested that we should have the voucher system that is in use in Ireland and other European countries, which is similar to the system that opticians use, so that hearing impaired people can have a wider range of services for the basic provision of hearing aids than they have at present. Might the minister look at that proposal? I will forward him some details, if he likes. On the general situation with deafness, 90 per cent of deaf children are born to hearing parents who have little or no prior experience or knowledge of deafness and will require support from medical professionals and charitable organisations such as the National Deaf Children's Society in Scotland. The NDCS estimates that there are around 3,500 deaf children in Scotland, and many more who will experience temporary deafness at pre-school or primary age caused by what is known as glue ear. The NDCS also reports that the majority of deaf children are educated in mainstream schools, where they require additional educational support, which we have discussed in the Parliament. Further, there are older people who become deaf through physical deterioration of the ear, diseases of the inner ear or exposure to regular and continued loud noise. My father suffered hearing loss through his job working in a foundry, and his was certainly not an isolated example. Generations of older people who worked in heavy industry still carry that burden, having lost their hearing while contributing to society. Deafness is all around us, but many of us choose not to notice it until we come face to face with it—a good phrase to use in relation to lip-reading. That is something from which many of us could benefit but, as my colleague Christine Grahame has said to me, it is possibly not something to teach politicians, as they might misuse it. It is, however, important in general. Julie is a great example of someone who refuses to be fazed by her deafness and whose communication skills are second to none. As long as people are willing to see beyond the disability, Julie is perfectly capable, as are most people with hearing impairments. As with her cerebral palsy, Julie does not let her deafness get in her way. A couple of years ago, she took part in "Beyond Boundaries" on the BBC, in which a group of 10 young people crossed the Andes and travelled through dense tropical jungle, showing that, with the right motivation and support, they are as capable as anyone else in society. She has just achieved a first-class honours degree from the University of the West of Scotland and is launching herself—if that is the right word—on the catwalk as a model for young people with disabilities who have an interest in fashion.  Julie McElroy is a young woman of whom not only her family but all of Scotland can be proud. She is aware of her deafness and wants us to be as well. As it stands, she will not let anything hold her back in life and we should see her capabilities, not just her disability.

What impact have the Government's shared-equity schemes had on housing provision?

To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to enhance the cultural links between Scotland and the EUA8 nations, from where many of the migrant workers who contribute to the Scottish economy and society come. (S3O-11011)

My hope is that we in Scotland can benefit as much as possible from our migrant communities and that they can do the same from us. Are any specific links or bonds being developed with the Governments of the A8 nations of the EU, from which many members of our migrant communities come and where they maintain good family relations?

We all know that alcohol is an intrinsic part of Scottish culture. From christenings to weddings to funerals, and at every point in between, drink forms not so much a social cement as a synovial fluid that is used to allow Scots to adopt bonhomie, sentimentality, joviality, aggression and faux self-confidence in equal measure. Indeed, it sometimes provides all those personality traits at the one time. The booze can bring people together to celebrate and commiserate and, just as easily, it can rip them apart in anger and recrimination. Do not get me wrong. It is not only the Scots who fall out over drink, but it seems that only we can fall out over how we get drink out of our culture, which it pervades at the moment. When ChildLine, Children 1st, the BMA and the churches all tell us that the issue of the excess consumption of alcohol is too important for party politicking, I believe that it is incumbent on us to listen to them and to do the business on behalf of our young people in particular. When I was young and at school or college, drinking was hardly unknown but it was much less available and the price was proportionately much higher than it is today. Back then, no alcohol  advertising was aimed directly at young people. Drinks were not deliberately priced at pocket-money levels. No sober-minded person thinks that alcohol being sold at less than the price of bottled water is acceptable. The Reverend Ian Galloway, who is convener of the Church of Scotland's church and society council and a man for whose opinion I have the highest regard, has said: "We urge you to step back from the debate about details and support the principle that addressing the affordability of alcohol through minimum pricing is a crucial part of the solution to our problems with alcohol."

That is what the debate has been about. There might be a question over what the minimum price should be, but the cabinet secretary has already told us that that information is coming and will be central to how the bill progresses. At stage 1, we need to discuss why in principle we should advance proposals to cut the devastation that alcohol causes across Scottish society. I for one take note of the opinion of Ian Galloway and others that the debate should not be about the SNP against Labour or Tory or Lib Dem along what might be called 40 proof ideological lines. The debate should be about what the Parliament can do for the betterment of everyone in our society and the future of our young people. Therefore, I ask for steady heads and clear vision on the part of those who, for party-political reasons, intend to oppose the bill at stage 1. We should take Scotland's problem with drink seriously enough to work together to address the social ills that excess alcohol consumption can cause.

I thank Hugh O'Donnell for bringing this important debate to the chamber. The employment and support allowance came into force from Westminster in October 2008 and replaced incapacity benefit. On the basis of a work-capability assessment, a person who is placed in the support group where there is no requirement to take part in work-related activity will receive £96.85 per week. In the work-related activity group, which is almost self-explanatory, the amount is £91.40. If someone is deemed to be fit for work by Atos Healthcare, the company that is hired to make the assessments on behalf of the DWP, they are transferred on to jobseekers allowance. As Hugh O'Donnell mentioned, there is widespread concern from, among others, Citizens Advice Scotland, Macmillan Cancer Support and the Scottish Association for Mental Health about the high number of people—almost 70 per cent— who are being refused outright any entitlement to ESA. Benefits are for people who require support in order to meet the costs of everyday life when they are unable to do so from any other source of income. When people are disabled or ill to the point that they cannot work to support themselves, it is a duty that is incumbent on society to provide such benefits as will alleviate pressing financial need. It is unacceptable in a civilised society to pressure people off benefits and towards work for which they are unfit, purely in order to cut the number of benefits recipients. However, that is what the Department for Work and Pensions is doing, in conjunction with its partner business, Atos Healthcare. Citizens Advice Scotland has highlighted the 68 per cent of claimants who have been rejected for the employment and support allowance. It points out that two fifths of its ESA case load is made up purely of those rejections. Macmillan Cancer Support points to the cancer sufferers—including terminally ill patients—who have been told that they are fit for work. SAMH points out that Atos has made recommendations of fitness for work for people with serious mental health problems without giving consideration to reports from their general practitioners, community psychiatric nurses or psychiatrists. We have heard of one case in which a man with serious mental health problems was passed as being fit for work by Atos, without any reference to his GP. He then took an overdose of pills, as his evidence had been denied and his benefits removed. That is not by any means an isolated incident, but it is utterly intolerable. The Daily Mail today described all those who were rejected for ESA as "scroungers". That is front-page news for the Daily Mail . It contained no analysis of the evidence, which is nothing new for that newspaper. The ESA system was launched through Westminster by Labour. Today Iain Duncan Smith announced on BBC breakfast news that the new Conservative-Lib Dem coalition intends to press ahead with reassessing everyone who is on incapacity benefit, under the new ESA rules. We all agree that those who can work must be encouraged to do so. However, when people are genuinely unable to work through ill health or disability, we must ensure that support is available. It is the duty of the Westminster Administration to address the distressing inadequacies of the present ESA assessments and to ensure that the watchwords in applying the benefit procedures are consistency, accuracy and fairness. It is our duty in the Scottish Parliament to  ensure that the voices of our constituents who should qualify for the benefit are, in assessment, treated according to those words.

Like all members, I welcome the fact that Hugh Henry has brought the issue of the protection of workers back to the chamber. Offences against workers are usually opportunist and are always cowardly. Cultural change is required in Scotland. It has been mentioned that the numbers of such offences in Scotland are different from the numbers for the rest of the UK. There are several reasons for that, which are not hidden. A major reason is alcohol, to which I will return later. Some in our society seem to believe that those who serve the public are somehow fair game as targets for aggression. Initiatives such as medics against violence and the safer streets programme are important. I believe that they are helping to educate our population away from shameful behaviour towards public sector workers and people in private sector jobs who deal with the public. I have worked in face-to-face public service roles in hospitals, shops and bars, and in Buchanan Street bus station, so I have experienced the problem in a range of settings. I have, unfortunately, often seen at first hand how a small number of maladjusted individuals behave towards people who are simply doing a job and trying to help the general public. I have observed verbal and physical abuse, bullying and the attempted intimidation of shop and transport workers, hospital and administrative staff and emergency workers. Having worked in administration in the accident and emergency department in the Western infirmary, I know that pain, discomfort and even fear can lead some people to act irrationally—and even abusively—on occasions. However, as I witnessed, such behaviour is often associated with the consumption of too much alcohol. Drink is never an excuse for violent behaviour, but sadly it can be a reason for it. That includes situations in which infantile group bravado leads to confrontation with people whom those youths seem to think have some kind of authority over them and therefore must be  challenged. The ease of availability of alcohol to young and inexperienced people must be examined. That includes pricing and sales point practices. However, it most certainly is not only youngsters who are violent in drink. There should be full sanctions on anyone of any age who is violent, including to shopkeepers who refuse to sell them drink when their behaviour or age is inappropriate. On Sunday I was walking down Byres Road, and I saw a woman, who was no younger than 30, trying to put in the window of a cafe because she had been refused alcohol. It was about 5 o'clock in the evening, and a crowd had gathered. The woman seemed to get a great deal of comfort from the idea that she was being taken seriously. She made four or five attempts to break the window with chairs and was eventually restrained. People were afraid of restraining her, including the cafe staff, who were trying their best to get her away from their place. Alcohol was involved in that case, but it is not an excuse. The person's behaviour had very little to do with the fact that she had had a wee bit to drink. She thought that she had a right to be served again by the cafe staff, and since they had done their duty in refusing her, they were at risk of violence. That is the type of thing that Hugh Henry's proposed bill would address. We must all stand alongside him in saying that such behaviour is totally unacceptable. I welcome the debate, and I share with the representative trade unions the desire to add whatever protection might be possible—on top of what already exists—for shop workers and others who deal face to face with the public to that which already exists for all of us under the common law. The previous Administration should have considered the issue when the Emergency Workers (Scotland) Act 2005 was introduced. Members in all parties should regret that it was not considered, because there have been seven years of wasted opportunities to protect workers. Although violent crime levels have fallen year on year due to increased police numbers, which we should welcome, a number of individuals—mostly drunken, but not always—still think that it is okay to carry out assaults on shop workers and others who provide face-to-face service to the public. That must be addressed so that those workers can feel that we in the Parliament are fully taking into account their concerns and safety. I ask the Scottish Government to consider carefully the proposals in Hugh Henry's proposed bill, and to consider where it can improve the current legal framework on the safety and assurance of those who serve the general public  face to face, in whichever working environment they operate.

I thank Charlie Gordon, a fellow Partickonian, for securing this members' business debate on the Scottish Football Museum. Scotland has a long and colourful footballing history, and if there is one place that should mark the social and cultural impact of football with such a museum, it surely has to be Glasgow. That history ranges from the historic Queen's Park and the other iconic teams of the 19th century, whose names still resonate in their local communities, through the world's first international football match, which was played in Partick in 1872 between Scotland and England, and ended in a thrilling 0-0 draw, to Andrew Watson, the black Scotsman who captained Scotland to a historic 6-1 victory over England in 1881, and Willie Angus, the first world war Victoria Cross winner and player with Celtic, to more than a century of the Hampden roar and the generations of Scots who have made their support heard at internationals and cup games, which include two great European cup finals, one of which I can remember and the other of which Charlie Gordon tells me was a great game in 1961.

Liam McArthur makes a good point about the museum being a Scottish football museum that does fantastic work across the country. I am glad that Orkney benefited from that. The Scottish Football Museum has a right and proper place in our culture and highlights the importance of the national game in the everyday lives of many Scots down through the years. It is fitting that Glasgow is home to the first national football museum, as it is the city that held the first international football match, as I said, and had in Hampden what was the world's largest capacity football stadium, which held 183,724 for the cup final of 1937—which, I believe, was between Celtic and Aberdeen, not an old firm game, so there is no reason for most people to think that such numbers are present only when Rangers and Celtic play. Also, for the Scottish Football Museum to be in the top 3 per cent of tourist attractions in Scotland, holding a five-star award from VisitScotland, puts it up there alongside Edinburgh castle and the Kelvingrove art gallery as a place that benefits  Scotland and helps to ensure visitor numbers. It says a great deal about the presence of mind of those who established the museum in 1994, and I congratulate them, the Scottish Football Association Museum Trust and people such as Robert Craig and Ged O'Brien. It is important to remember that Scotland has been at the forefront of developments in football throughout the history of the modern game, from the first football club—Edinburgh—in 1824, to the invention of the passing game and the innovation of the pitch and goalpost removal service in 1967. Therefore, it is entirely fitting for Scotland to lead the way in marking the history of the game in such innovative and educational ways as those established at the Scottish Football Museum. The 14 galleries and 2,500 exhibits provide for a fascinating visit or 10, and I think that the teachers' notes and worksheets, which bring school visits to life, will stick in the memories of young people until they are too old to play themselves and can take their grandchildren along to visit what by then will no doubt be hologram suites, in which people will be able to play keepie-uppie in the company of Jim Baxter and Jimmy Johnstone. I am all in favour of Charlie Gordon's proposal to have free entry to the museum. I am a regular at Firhill to follow the vagaries of Partick Thistle—although I was not there when Bill Aitken played—and I am heartened by the number of young boys and girls who take advantage of free entry to go along regularly in groups or with their parents to enjoy seeing their favourites. If the Scottish Football Association Museum Trust thinks that it can encourage future generations to keep visiting into adulthood by removing entry charges, it will have my full support. I thank the trust for all its hard work and wish it all the best for continuing success in marking and promoting football.

It is worth stating that Scottish tourism is nationwide. It is not blowing our own trumpet to say that we have  some of the most beautiful scenery in the world on our doorsteps, because millions of visitors have been here and told us that year after year. That beauty is on Glasgow's doorstep as much as on the doorstep of any other town or village in the Highlands or the Borders. I like to think that all members would give the city its due as an attractive and dynamic place to live and visit. Glasgow has 2.8 million visitors a year, generating £700 million for the local economy, and it is the gateway to Loch Lomondside and the west Highlands, as well as Ayrshire and Burns country. The city serves as a hub for surrounding areas of great natural beauty and the tourism industry in those areas. If we include the full range of hotels, bed and breakfasts, guest houses and university accommodation, the total number of rooms in metropolitan Glasgow is well over 17,000, and those businesses employ some 17 per cent of the total tourism workforce in Scotland. That figure will grow as we move out of recession and look forward to holding the 2014 Commonwealth games.

The Liberals have been pounding away at that point since the debate started, so I was aware that the member was liable to say something like that. The minister has said that he will address the issue in his summing-up speech. Why do people enthusiastically come to a big post-industrial city that still labours under an undeserved image—pinned on it by London-centric UK media—of being dirty and violent? The reality is that Glasgow is a welcoming and friendly place to visit and has astonishing Victorian architecture, a large number of parks and green spaces, a varied nightlife and a continually growing rep—that is street talk—as the place to come for shopping. For the fourth year running, the city has been named by Experian's business strategies division as the top shopping venue outside London. Today, it has been reported that the top American clothing store Abercrombie & Fitch is looking to open only its third European branch, in Buchanan Street. The highly quoted brand COS has opened in Princes Square. I should mention the Glasgow conference ambassador programme, which accounted for 23 per cent of all the conference business that was secured in 2007-08.  I am saying a lot of great things, but is everything totally hunky-dory for tourism in Glasgow? Not exactly. As is the case for tourism in the rest of Scotland, Glasgow is having to fight its corner in the face of competition from other holiday venues across Europe. It is important in the modern tourism climate that VisitScotland ensures that city breaks are promoted equally with the longer, more traditional holiday patterns of coach and golfing tours. That would help to boost the numbers of people visiting the great range of museums and galleries that Glasgow boasts. Further to that, I have had discussions with the National Galleries of Scotland about the possibility of establishing a permanent exhibition in Glasgow that links with those in Edinburgh, thereby providing a twin-city visiting experience that would benefit both cities. Let us remember that in common with the rest of Scotland, Glasgow suffered many years of financially necessary emigration to, among other places, England, Canada, New Zealand, Australia, South Africa and the USA, so many thousands of ex-Glaswegians and their descendants from those countries would happily come back to visit grannie's Hielan hame in Partick and Govan before touring B and Bs in the more traditional tourist areas. We need to target that market as heavily as every other. Glasgow, as a large city, still has many problems that need to be addressed, and resources require to be invested to overturn generations of shameful deprivation. The same can be said of New York. The I love New York campaign helped to turn that city into an attractive city break destination, despite the continuing problems in Brooklyn and the Bronx. Glasgow can do the same. I know that the Scottish Government aims to ensure that all agencies, local government and businesses large and small work together to enhance and enlarge the tourism industry in Scotland. I sincerely hope that our abilities to help fund those aspirations are not constrained by financial restrictions imposed by Westminster over the coming years.

Visiting exhibitions, which are very welcome, come to Glasgow from the National Galleries of Scotland, but does the minister welcome the prospect of a permanent, curator-led NGS facility in Glasgow? I have had talks with Ben Thomson, chair of the National Galleries of Scotland, and with Culture and Sport Glasgow over a period of months on bringing such a facility to Glasgow, and I hope that it can be achieved. Does the minister believe that we should head in that direction?

To ask the Scottish Government whether it will consider extending the community right-to-buy provisions in the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 to urban areas. (S3O-9650)

Why has land reform been confined to rural areas and not extended to urban areas, considering the large areas of dereliction in our towns and cities that could usefully be developed for community use?

As an Equal Opportunities Committee member, I am happy to speak in the debate on our report on female offenders in the Scottish justice system. It is important to acknowledge that, for the most part, women in prison comprise a different prison population from that of male prisoners. In the main, the crimes that women commit and the social circumstances that lead to their offending are different from those of their male counterparts. The committee visited Cornton Vale women's prison, as has been mentioned. We also visited Hydebank Wood prison in Northern Ireland and the 218 centre in Glasgow, which was an eye-opener for all of us. We took a considerable number of statements from witnesses at oral evidence sessions and received 15 written submissions. Great interest was shown in the inquiry, the contributions to which have produced  a report that is worthy of Government consideration. The report is a substantial piece of work. I add my thanks to those from the convener to all those who contributed to it, particularly as it has added greatly to my knowledge of the circumstances that have led to the issues and concerns that a number of my constituents bring to my surgeries. The committee reached the view that preventing reoffending through fully addressing female offenders' needs and individual circumstances is of major importance while they are in the prison system—or the justice system, as not all women offenders go to prison. As almost all members have said, many of the women have suffered abuse or some kind of neglect from an early age. They have carried into their adult lives the attitudes that those pressures created. That has shaped their relationships with others, with society and with authority figures. Of course, as Angela Constance said, poverty contributes to the often chaotic lifestyles that have meant that offenders have been sent to prison or sentenced to carry out other court disposals. The same, sadly, is true of mental illness, which is present to some degree in a significant proportion of inmates at Cornton Vale. Mental illness can be exacerbated by drug abuse, which is also a factor in the theft or prostitution that results in many women being jailed. All those issues must be addressed when prevention of reoffending programmes are being assessed. The women may appear to have arrived at the same place through the same circumstances, but their circumstances are all different. We have to remember that prevention of reoffending programmes must be tailored to each individual case. Some women may be helped by programmes that raise literacy levels, which can then be enhanced by further education programmes. In many cases, that is very important, given that, because of their family circumstances, many women offenders had a poor attendance record or poor disciplinary record at school. Other women need some form of training to enable them to find work and to understand that employment is a way out of the despondency of the cycle of reoffending and repeat sentencing by the courts, leading to depression and drug and alcohol abuse. Although it is important to remember that prison and other forms of court disposal are to some extent meant as a punishment for wrongdoing, it is vital to remember that rehabilitation is of considerable importance, too. No member in the Parliament is in the business of locking them up and throwing away the key; nor do we believe that  the out of sight, out of mind approach is acceptable. Along with my colleagues on the Equal Opportunities Committee, I know that good work is being done for women in our justice system. However, as our report suggests, there are still issues to be addressed and improvements to be made. I mentioned earlier one such issue: the sending to jail of women with mental health problems. In many cases, prison exacerbates their mental ill health and achieves nothing. It is equally important to remember that there are many mothers among the female offender population in the Scottish justice system. Their children are often the innocent bystanders, caught up in the system of crime and punishment. Every possible means must be looked at to ensure that they suffer as little upset in their upbringing as possible, if for no reason other than the fact that a disturbed upbringing is often the cause of their mother having committed the crime in the first place. If we can avoid that vicious circle, so much the better—[ Interruption. ] Hugh O'Donnell looks as if he is swatting a fly; I am not sure what he is doing. Avoiding a jail sentence whenever possible and whenever appropriate by ordering women to a place such as the 218 centre is more beneficial to their continuing family life than prison is. I was happy to hear the cabinet secretary report on the developments that are to take place in Inverness and Aberdeen. I am not certain that they will be exactly the same as the 218 centre, but if they serve the same purpose, they will be extremely useful. If it is judged that prison is necessary, Hydebank Wood's family visiting centre, which we saw on our visit, is an ideal model for us to follow. Cornton Vale is developing a similar facility. I ask the Scottish Prison Service to consider the Northern Ireland experience as a model that it might wish to follow. It is a privilege to have taken part in this debate on the Equal Opportunities Committee's report. I join our convener and fellow committee members in commending the report to the Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Government what measures are being taken to address the lack of community access to schools built under previous private finance initiatives. (S3O-9422)

Can the cabinet secretary assure the Parliament that schools that will be built in partnership with the Scottish Futures Trust will address the issue of access and make it much easier for pupils and communities to use the schools outside school hours?

I am pleased that the green paper's proposed changes to the provision of attendance allowance for those of our fellow Scots who will be affected by a major change in the delivery of that benefit has been raised as a matter for debate in the Parliament. The proposals might be contained in a green paper, but the fact is that green papers have a habit of developing into white papers and becoming law. It is important that we ensure that, since we were not asked previously, we in Scotland have the opportunity to put our point of view on the issue. Having lobbied on the issue at every opportunity since the changes were mooted last July, I must say that I am saddened that the media in Scotland have, in general, been painfully slow to make our public aware of the situation. I see that no member of the media has bothered to turn up to observe today's debate from the press gallery.  I am upset about that lack of media coverage because, although the proposed major change to what is an important benefit was consulted on the length and breadth of England, not one Scottish pensioner, disabled person or organisation was consulted. That is despite the fact that page 104 of the green paper "Shaping the Future of Care Together" states: "Any changes to the care and support system in England that integrate some disability benefits funding would affect the devolved administrations in Scotland and Wales, and Northern Ireland". Obviously, the green paper has been compiled to address the future of paying for care in England, but to pay for that care the UK Government intends to raid the welfare benefits funding for the elderly and the disabled. Page 103 of the green paper proposes "integrating some disability benefits such as Attendance Allowance into the care and support system." That means taking money that is currently paid as a non-means-tested benefit direct to the individual elderly disabled person and putting it directly into care services instead. In other words, the benefit will be scrapped. It is inconvenient that attendance allowance is a UK-wide benefit, because it means that Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, which have care systems that are different from the one in England, will all be affected as well. The number of people who will be affected is quite staggering. As the minister said, according to the Institute for Social and Economic Research, more than 67,000 of the 168,000 recipients of attendance allowance in Scotland would fall below the poverty line if they did not receive that allowance. We are told that attendance allowance will not be removed but will simply be delivered in a different way. Rather than applying to the Department for Work and Pensions for a UK-wide benefit, people will apply to their local authority, but where will the extra council staff come from to assess eligibility and to pay out that benefit? How will those staff be paid for? What training will they receive and who will provide it?

I do not think that it will be possible to merge those assessments without an increase in staffing. How much of the increasingly scarce resources that are available to fund a benefit that is vital to  so many people will be eaten up in bureaucracy? The British Government's green paper states, on page 22, that local authorities will be "the channel for state funding and support" and will "undertake assessments" of claimants. Therefore, it is fair to say that the duplication across the 32 local authorities in Scotland that will result from the replacement of the current single system will suck scarce resources out of the system. Members should remember that attendance allowance and DLA for the over-65s are a lifeline for many of our constituents, whether rural or urban. All members have been contacted by such respected organisations as the Royal National Institute for Deaf People and the Parkinson's Disease Society, which have told us that the legitimate fears of people who receive attendance allowance and DLA must be taken seriously by all members of all political parties.

It would reassure me if the consultation had taken place in Scotland at the same time as it took place in England—that would have made me much happier. It is a bit late to consult people after the fact. We were elected to act as the voice of people who have serious concerns about such serious issues. We must look seriously at the potential effects on the incomes of, and the provision of care for, the elderly and the disabled. We must also take account of the position of their carers, whose benefit, insubstantial as it is, is dependent on the cared-for person being eligible for attendance allowance. Members should also remember that it is not only those who currently receive attendance allowance who will be affected; those who would be eligible for it in the future stand to be affected. As has been said, on 22 October last year, the Secretary of State for Health at Westminster, Andy Burnham MP, told the national children and adult services conference: "I can state categorically that we have ruled out any suggestion that DLA for under-65s will be brought into the new National Care Service." From that it can be inferred that the DLA care component of payments to people who are over 65 or who will turn 65 could be at risk. He must address that issue, which means that someone who is under 65 and who presently receives DLA would not benefit from any transitional payment  after their 65 th birthday but would have to reapply for attendance allowance to the local authority that was administering it and would have to be reassessed. As the saying goes, "If it ain't broke, don't fix it." The attendance allowance benefit works well in Scotland.

No. I am nearly finished. It is disgraceful that our elderly and disabled should have that benefit tampered with without consultation or prior notice—as has happened in this case—purely as a by-product of changes to the care system in England. I would not like to be the politician or candidate who has to sell that one to the electorate either at the Westminster elections this year or at the Scottish Parliament elections next year.

To ask the Scottish Government what measures it is taking to tackle fuel poverty in areas of multiple deprivation in Glasgow and across Scotland given the impact that the recent severe cold weather will have on those already in or in danger of suffering the effects of fuel poverty. (S3O-9081)

What impact would the abolition of attendance allowance have on those who experience the effects of fuel poverty?

I congratulate Claire Baker on securing a debate on what I believe to have been one of the most important innovations in education in the 20 th and 21 st centuries—the Open University is undoubtedly as important today as it was when it was founded in the 1960s. To have taught more than 2 million students over the past 40 years is indeed remarkable, but of course it is not just about the numbers. As a result of the innovative ways in which students learn with the OU, opportunities have been presented and taken and lives have been changed. It provides a viable learning alternative for people who would find accessing more usual learning environments—for example buildings that are concentrated in specific areas and open at fairly specific times—a problem and its availability to disabled people, the elderly and single parents whose personal study time can be variable has turned it into an educational lifeline for thousands. Through partnership working with the Scottish Trades Union Congress and employers in workplaces throughout Scotland, the OU has provided people with the flexibility not only to learn but to advance skills that would otherwise have been denied them if they had had to rely on conventional student routes. Moreover, a suite of short health courses developed by the OU and aimed at health care workers, patients and the general public has played a major role in diabetes care and the battle against obesity and, by supporting the Scottish Government's objective of driving up productivity by using skills more effectively in the workplace, the OU benefits not only businesses and individual workers but the whole of Scottish society. Over the years, relatives, friends and work colleagues of mine have embarked on OU courses for a variety of reasons. Some wanted to improve their qualifications to help their jobs or careers; some wanted to gain the qualifications that they never had the chance to get because of a school  record that was, for whatever reason, poor; others wanted to delve into a subject in which they had an abiding interest purely for the satisfaction of knowing as much as they could about it. The OU has been the only practical way to meet those important needs. So yes, those of a certain vintage will remember that, many years ago, earnest mathematical chaps with bad beards and even worse Christmas jumpers filled in the Saturday morning television schedules and, for the uninitiated, the OU became the butt of puerile humour—not for me, though, because I tended to watch "Swap Shop". Now, happily, the kudos of an Open University degree is in no doubt; OU graduates are among the most employable in the UK. So here is to the big five-oh of the OU.

I am pleased and honoured, on human rights day, to open this members' business debate on the world march for peace and non-violence, which started in Aotearoa—New Zealand—on 2 October this year and will arrive at its finish in the high Andes on 2 January 2010. There, the flame of peace, which was lit at Hiroshima, the site of the explosion of the first atomic bomb, will be held aloft as the sun rises on a new year of hope for the world. The relevance of 2 October, the start date, is that it is the anniversary of the birth of Mahatma Gandhi and the international day of non-violence; the relevance of New Zealand, the start point, is that it allows no foreign military bases on its soil and no nuclear weapons to be stationed there. Among the signatories who have supported the world march are United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, former Ireland President Mary Robinson, former United States President Jimmy Carter, the Dalai Lama and First Minister of Scotland Alex Salmond. I was delighted that, after visiting 40 countries in 50 days on the way to visiting 100 countries in total, the core team of the world march accepted, at very short notice, my invitation to come to Scotland. On 20 November this year, Alexander Mora Mora, a deputy of the Legislative Assembly of Costa Rica and the envoy for human rights in Latin America, flew into Edinburgh for a two-hour visit, with the flame of peace, on his way from Spain back home to central America.  Prior to coming here, Mr Mora Mora had met Mikhail Gorbachev, Lech Wałęsa and Pope Benedict, but he emphasised, through his interpreter, that it was a matter of major importance that the march and the flame of peace should come to Scotland because this Parliament had made clear its commitment to work to remove nuclear weapons from our land. Mr Mora Mora also told us that the world march for peace had not received an invitation to visit Westminster, and that Scotland was therefore the only place in the United Kingdom to accept the message that he carried. I express sorrow on behalf of many of our parliamentary colleagues at Westminster, of all parties, who had hoped to welcome the world march delegation as they carried the flame of peace, but who had their hopes dashed. Although it was lobbied for, no invitation was issued from Westminster. The world march for peace has visited Parliaments across the world and many thousands of people have joined it, from Sydney to Los Angeles, from Rabat to St Petersburg; it is shameful that it has been ignored by the UK media. It has been wilfully ignored by the press probably because of the Westminster Government's failure to issue an invitation to the delegation. That is very parochial of the UK media. Just two days before they came to the Scottish Parliament, the same core team of the world march for peace were received in Berlin by the 10 th world summit of Nobel peace prize laureates, with the words: "For the first time in history an event of this magnitude has been put in motion by the participants themselves. The true strength of this impulse is born in the simple act of one who, out of conscience, joins a dignified cause and shares it with others." Three days before, the team had been received at the Vatican by the Pope with the blessing: "May God bless you all." It is incumbent on all of us here to celebrate the human spirit that has carried the flame of peace, which was lit at Hiroshima, around the world as a symbol of hope and of the belief that there is a better way than war and violence to settle disputes. The aims of the world march for peace and non-violence have been stated as nuclear disarmament at a global level; the immediate withdrawal of invading troops from occupied territories; the progressive and proportional reduction of conventional weapons; the signing of non-aggression treaties between countries; and the renunciation by Governments of the use of war as a means to resolve conflicts. Some people might believe that those aims are just pie in the sky or wishful thinking, but the  impact that the world march for peace has had on so many Parliaments and populations around the world suggests that we might be pushing at an open door, even though there will still assuredly be those with vested interests and closed minds. Scotland might be a small country in square miles, but we carry a big responsibility, as has been demonstrated by the determination of the world march for peace to ensure that this place was one of the stops that it made on its historic journey. Let us not allow the message to falter here. The flame of peace should burn strongly in this place.

I thank George Foulkes for having secured tonight's debate, and  for speaking so well on a serious issue that affects a significant proportion of our fellow citizens across Scotland. Be that as it may, when most people visit their local pub or a city centre venue or a nightclub—that is what they call discos now—they do not give disabled access, toilets or other facilities a second thought. Unfortunately, neither do some of the owners of those establishments, until they are challenged on the issue, which Mark Cooper is doing. Under the Disability Discrimination Act 2005, there are duties of liability on service providers who offer goods, facilities or services to the public, whether they are free or paid for. An example that has been quoted is of the bar manager refusing to serve a deaf man because he thinks the man is drunk. The man explains his deafness and his hearing aids are clearly visible, but he is nonetheless refused and is shown out of the pub by the bouncer. Under the DDA, the owner of the bar is liable to be charged with discrimination. Furthermore, if the man's hearing friend remonstrates on his behalf and finds herself barred for doing so, she also has a claim for damages from the licensee. However, as Mark Cooper has said, there are other ways of achieving justice than going through the courts, even if they can be challenging. I heartily congratulate Mark on his initiative and determination in finding the right people to approach and going ahead with his campaign in a logical and reasoned manner. I know that he has the strong support of Capability Scotland, this nation's largest disability rights organisation, and I know that he will also have the support of all in the Parliament, across all parties, as a result of his tireless campaigning for the publication of a good pub guide that includes information about establishments that are wheelchair-friendly and have disabled access and disabled toilet facilities. To that end—and although I come from Glasgow—I congratulate the City of Edinburgh Council on agreeing with Mark's campaign and including on its licensing portal a list of accessible pubs and clubs. I am sure that we will all, in any way we can, support Mark's efforts to persuade other local authorities to follow Edinburgh's encouraging lead. Disability discrimination is a blot on Scotland's landscape, and it needs to be tackled wherever it is encountered. All local authorities should follow Edinburgh's lead by writing to their licensees, reminding them of their obligations under the DDA, and ensuring that they are followed. I have only water in my glass, but here's to Mark Cooper and Capability Scotland for working to make Scotland a more civilised place in which to live.

I thank Sandra White for securing a debate on such an important issue. In theory, the issue is reserved, but it is of vital importance to us because it concerns the rights of children, responsibility for which has been devolved to us on the grounds of health, welfare and education—and in any case it is the duty of us all to stand up and be counted if a wrong is being done to a fellow human being, particularly a child. As has been said, there is cross-party consensus on that. If a child is locked up for a potentially indefinite period without automatic oversight by the courts and without any crime having been committed, a wrong is done to that child and, by extension, to all children and to society as a whole. As Sandra White and Linda Fabiani said, the detention period in Dungavel has been limited to 72 hours. That is bad enough, but that period is in most cases a precursor to transfer to Yarl's Wood or another detention centre. It is known that that approach is used to cause maximum disruption to claimants' maintenance of full legal representation. All members will know that stress is one of the greatest medical complaints of the 21 st century. If members think that they have known stress, they should think about what I am about to say and consider what they would think if the children involved were theirs. What would be the impact on them of a dawn raid at home followed by transportation in a van by people they did not know, while their parents and siblings were terrified by the prospect of an imminent return to a war zone or into the hands of an oppressive  regime? That is stress. It should be remembered that the impersonal approach allows all that to take place; the people are not known and it is not known where they came from or what they are going back to. There are attempts to keep it that way because if the people involved are not known they are unlikely to be empathised with. Earlier this year, I secured a members' business debate to congratulate the youngsters of Knightswood Youth Theatre on their well-deserved winning of a Philip Lawrence award, which they won exactly a year ago today. Knightswood Youth Theatre brings together young asylum seekers, refugees and local Glasgow children. Through hard work and just by being together, those people learn that they have many more things in common than things that separate them. They are fine young people with intelligence, determination, good manners and a lively sense of humour. Given a chance, those young asylum seekers and refugees will grow up to contribute greatly to their adopted homeland of Scotland. That they or others like them should be subjected to arbitrary detention in a prison setting is unconscionable. I whole-heartedly support the Parliament's work in promoting the welfare of children in Scotland and in the rest of the United Kingdom through increased engagement with the UK Border Agency to consider how it deals with children. I also whole-heartedly support our continuing commitment in the Parliament to alternatives to detention, which will see an end to children being locked up at Dungavel. It should end now.

To ask the Scottish Government what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has had with the Minister for Culture, External Affairs and the Constitution regarding the expansion of Gaelic-medium education throughout Glasgow. (S3O-8619)

Will consideration be given to bringing the provision of Gaelic education within the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning's responsibilities, to integrate the Gaelic language further in mainstream schooling?

The minister and I come from Glasgow, and I know from personal  experience that sectarian attitudes are normally intergenerational and start when people are young. They therefore require early intervention. What funding is the Scottish Government providing for anti-sectarianism activity in our schools?

To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to promote the development and promotion of healthy living centres in Glasgow, given the long-term health inequalities that exist in the city. (S3O-8319)

I thank the minister for that encouraging reply. Does she agree that, given that many of those who access healthy living centres live in intergenerational poverty, education on low-cost healthy eating should be as widespread as possible?

Will the member give way?

Can the minister provide Parliament with any further information on the Scottish Government's efforts to secure a  wider audience for BBC Alba through its provision on Freeview?

Is the cabinet secretary aware that Strathclyde police authority has applied to fund 60 new trainee police officers at the Scottish Police College in addition to the trainees who are funded by the Scottish Government? The SPA is doing that at a cost of £2 million, which rather flies in the face of the claim of a possible shortfall in funding.

Is the minister aware of the case in north Kelvin meadow in the west of Glasgow where local residents have grassed over, and planted flowers on, a long-derelict site to beautify and enhance their community but have found themselves evicted from the area by Glasgow City Council although there is no immediate plan to develop the ground?

I am very pleased that we have reached this stage of the bill, at which, as Patrick Harvie said, there is unanimity across the chamber. He deserves real credit for introducing the bill, the purpose of which is to enable the consideration of crimes aggravated by prejudice against sexual orientation, transgender status or disability in the same way as racially motivated attacks are now considered. As the disability reporter to the Equal Opportunities Committee, I am particularly pleased that disablism has been included. Disablism is not a word in common parlance, but it means the abuse of, or discrimination against, disabled people arising from a belief that they are inferior to others, less than human in some cases, or of no value to society. Sadly, we must recognise that there are people in our society who will abuse anyone who they deem to be different or who they view as an easy target. With an estimated 800,000 disabled people in Scotland, and approximately 500,000 LGBT citizens, it is our duty to provide in law safe and strong communities where no one faces the fear of crime or intolerance born from the cowardice or ignorance of others. Discrimination on the ground of disability was legislated against only with the passing of the Disability Discrimination Act 1995, 20 years after the outlawing of racial and gender discrimination. That gap was a serious lapse in equalities legislation, which we should have learned from. It is time for us to bring aggravations by prejudice against disability or sexual orientation or status fully into line. The 2004 research by the Disability Rights Commission and Capability Scotland found that 47 per cent of disabled people in Scotland reported experiencing hate crime. A third had to avoid certain places, and a quarter had moved home as a result of an attack. Disabled people are four times more likely to be violently assaulted than non-disabled people. Visually impaired people are four times more likely to be assaulted or attacked than their sighted neighbours. People with mental health issues are 11 times more likely to be victimised, and 90 per cent of adults with a learning disability report being bullied. All of that says more about the perpetrator than about the abused. Let us put the abuser and the bully in full sight of the public gaze, name their crime and have it taken into account when sentencing is carried out so that, as Patrick Harvie said, the sentence will be appropriate. Most, if not all of us will have had constituents come to us with cases of discrimination due to disability. In the worst cases, that will include fears for their physical safety.  After today's vote, I will be proud to say that we in the Scottish Parliament, the Parliament for all the people of Scotland, are specifically targeting those people who carry out disgusting antisocial behaviour towards people simply because of their disability or sexual orientation. Let us vote to pass the bill and, in doing so, let us oppose discrimination in Scottish society and help to improve the lives of so many of our fellow citizens.

To ask the Scottish Government whether it was informed of the Ministry of Defence's decision to move the remaining three nuclear-powered Trafalgar class submarines from Devonport in Plymouth to Faslane as of 2017 and what impact that will have on emergency planning in Scotland. (S3O-7206)

In the light of known events involving nuclear submarines, such as radioactive leaks, fires and collisions, will the Scottish Government seek additional finances to fund necessary extra emergency safety contingencies that may arise from the stationing of those three further nuclear-powered vessels at Faslane?

I am sure that all members welcome the opportunity to discuss employment in Scotland at a time of great uncertainty for all our people. All too many Scots live long term with an uncertainty of income, or at least the certainty that it will be low. Sadly, the present recession brings them closer to their neighbours, although only by degrees and then for all the wrong reasons. The benefits system is a mess. At present, the Parliament cannot address that directly, but the issue must be considered. Many more families, through no fault of their own, are finding themselves in the worrying situation of unemployment, debt and living on benefits that do not meet their outgoings. That is why I am glad that John Park's motion is, in essence, positive in its presentation and that it gives the Scottish Government the opportunity to look for a like-minded approach from Opposition members. The Government, by bringing forward capital investment in the housing sector, will help with the training of the 1,000 modern apprentices in Glasgow over the next three years, which is backed by £6 million of Government money. As my colleague on the back benches Stuart McMillan mentioned, that has been welcomed by Graeme Ogilvy, director of ConstructionSkills in Scotland, who has stated: "there is still short-term growth in the industry, assisted by public sector spending". As Stuart McMillan also mentioned—note to self: never go last in a debate—Steven Purcell has gone on record to praise the booming parts of the economy in Glasgow because of regeneration projects that are funded, at least in part, by the Scottish Government. That is surely the kind of cross-party consensus about which we are all happy, especially as Steven Purcell was not at that point referring to the jobs that are to come from the construction of the new Glasgow hospital and the Glasgow airport rail link.  Everything is not hunky-dory, however. A growing number of our citizens are suffering from unemployment or are worried for themselves and their children in the job market in the short and long term. I have been there more than once, so I know the humiliation, and the fear that the longer someone is without a job, the less likely an employer is to take them on. We must therefore keep our eye on the ball in the Parliament and consider ideas from elsewhere, such as the ProAct initiative in Wales. However, we must ensure that such an initiative would work here, or we risk wasting the limited resources that are at our command. We will also have to work alongside Westminster, as long as it will let us, and only while it still holds the purse strings. We should remember the need for Scottish solutions to Scottish problems. One size does not fit all, so with any joint economic programmes to boost employment, or in launching any initiative, we must ensure that it fits with the requirements in the Scottish jobs market and with the funding that is available to us under the present economic constraints. Investment in renewables is an ideal medium for a longer-term solution for Scotland. It will help us to ride out future recessions, while helping to save our planet's environment and all our futures. After only six years in business, the renewables company SgurrEnergy in Glasgow is growing internationally—it recently opened an office in Beijing. Welcon in Machrihanish, which Jim Mather knows well, is creating long-term construction jobs in the hundreds. Those are examples of Scottish solutions to Scottish economic and employment problems. I hope and believe that all members will work with the serious attitude that is required to see Scotland's people through the recession.

What role does the minister envisage for Creative Scotland in delivering a lasting arts legacy for the people of Glasgow following the 2014 Commonwealth games in the city?

I congratulate Bill Butler on having secured a members' business debate on Drumchapel table tennis club and its celebration of 20 years as a focal point for sport in north-west Glasgow. Drumchapel sports centre has been an exemplar for the sport of table tennis in Scotland. Players travel to it from throughout Scotland because of the first-class coaching at the club. As Bill Butler said, that has been due in great part to the dedication, hard work and passion for the sport of Terry McLernon. He has worked since the 1980s to ensure the development of table tennis as a core activity in Drumchapel. People like Terry have driven sport throughout the country over the years—often without the level of support that their dedication has deserved. I believe that we all want that situation to be addressed sooner rather than later. The legacy of Glasgow's 2014 Commonwealth games will come into its own in combining established coaching, such as Terry McLernon provides, with a robust infrastructure for sport at the local level. That can be achieved by developing a network of community sports hubs throughout Scotland, as has been proposed, which will bring sport in Scotland fully into the 21 st century. Drumchapel table tennis club is an example that should be followed. We cannot and do not all aspire to be Commonwealth games champions. However, at whatever age and at whatever ability level, Drumchapel table tennis club has shown that the taking part is what it is really all about. If someone happens to become a champion due to their inherent skill and the sheer hard work that that takes, they will also be a role model for others in their community. That in itself is a reward worth seeking. I recently visited the sports centre at Scotstoun, which is near my home, and was impressed by the on-going developments that are taking place there with a view to the Commonwealth games in 2014. I was even more impressed by the friendly and hard-working staff and by the high level of usage by fellow Glaswegians. I do not use the centre as yet, but I intend to. Many of those people have been greatly encouraged by champions from local clubs such as Drumchapel table tennis club. The Commonwealth games will come and go, as such events do, but their legacy should be facilities that ensure that Scotland loses the sick-man-of-Europe tag as a result of our citizens, young and old, taking regular exercise. If that is in the form of organised sport, such as that provided by Drumchapel table tennis club, so much the better. The approach that we should aspire to is  about taking part and doing our best. I believe that all Scots will support that approach, which is demonstrated by Drumchapel table tennis club, for which I thank it.

To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning last met Glasgow City Council education department and what issues were discussed. (S3O-6243)

Glasgow City Council has decided to press ahead with the closure of 25 primary and nursery schools despite, as we saw in the demonstration outside today, overwhelming opposition among parents and Scottish National Party councillors' objections to the inadequate consultation. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the council should apply the proposed list of mandatory consultees in the Schools  (Consultation) (Scotland) Bill, which includes pupils and teachers?

It seems like such a long time since we set out on the road of reversing the ill-considered judgment of the House of Lords on the right of asbestos victims with pleural plaques to challenge the big insurance companies for compensation. I say that it seems like a long time, but in political terms we have reached the bill's third and final stage—with due awareness of its importance to those affected by this condition—with as much alacrity as the parliamentary process allows. The fact that that has come about as a result of the co-operation of members of parties right across the chamber is a sign of a mature and decent Parliament that represents the people, not vested interests. Of course, the Justice Committee is also to be thanked for its efforts. The Scottish Government and, in particular, Fergus Ewing, the minister responsible for overseeing the bill's progress, are due very considerable praise for expediting through Parliament this important legislation in the face of  pressure exerted by members of the Association of British Insurers. Moreover, Clydeside Action on Asbestos and Thompsons Solicitors have been tireless partners on the side of the angels in the process. According to the ABI, in 2006, its member companies paid out more than £1.2 billion in employer liability claims—and quite right too, given that the employers were liable. After all, they had been deficient in protecting their workers against injury. We have to remember that in such situations the insurers pick up the tab. However, they do so not out of their own pockets, but from the payments made to them by employers whose workers are insured against harm as they ensure that their bosses and company shareholders—and, by extension, the insurers themselves—earn the wealth that allows them to live in conditions in which their bodies, at least, do not have to be exposed to chrysolite or other noxious asbestos products. Insurers play an important role in modern society and make a very good profit from running what is a regulated business. They have to be kept in line and in place, which is where Parliaments come into their own. Insurers should not expect—and certainly should not be allowed—to make excess profits by reneging on their side of the deal to compensate workers made ill in carrying out their daily duties and on whose backs this country's wealth was built. I said earlier that the House of Lords judgment was ill considered. Some might say that that is a matter of opinion; however, it is the opinion of the great majority of the members of the Scottish Parliament that their lordships were wrong. In a civilised and democratic society, there must be an unbreakable compact between the people and their Parliament that the politicians are there to defend the people from harm and to enhance society as a whole for the benefit of all. I reiterate what I said in our debate on pleural plaques on 5 November last year: "The Association of British Insurers says that there is a duty on its part, and on the part of its members, to pay out when there has been employer negligence. There has been employer negligence when exposure to asbestos has caused scarring to workers' lungs."— [ Official Report , 5 November 2008; c 12043-4.]  Therefore, according to their membership organisation, the insurers of employers whose workers have suffered scarring of the lung tissue—pleural plaques—as a result of negligent exposure to asbestos have a duty to make compensation payments. If they will not stay true to that duty, it is down to members of the Scottish Parliament to ensure that they do so.  The Parliament is delivering on its compact with the people, and I hope that all members will do so when it comes to decision time. We must reverse the misjudgement of the House of Lords. Perhaps Westminster will be shamed into doing the same. I certainly hope so.

It is an honour to bring this members' business debate to the Scottish Parliament. I welcome to the public gallery the delegation from Clydeside Action on Asbestos. Without them, my colleagues and I would not have been able to acquaint ourselves fully with the issues that are to be debated this evening. The national mesothelioma action day takes place tomorrow. Its aim is to highlight this terrible disease, which is caused by exposure to asbestos, and to increase awareness of the condition, particularly among the medical profession. Mesothelioma is only one of the conditions that are related to exposure to asbestos; others are asbestosis, lung cancer, diffuse pleural thickening and pleural plaque. Pleural plaque has been no stranger to debate in this chamber since the shameful House of Lords judgment removed the rights of sufferers to insured compensation. I am proud that we in the Scottish Parliament, with support from across the chamber, raised the rights of our fellow citizens above that shabby treatment and that the minister is piloting a bill that will soon reverse that state of affairs in Scotland. It is my genuine desire that similar sense will prevail in other parts of the United Kingdom and that sufferers will be able to access some degree of compensation for their condition. Medical assessment of any respiratory problem necessitates taking a full history of any possible  asbestos exposure. In the case of mesothelioma, it is important that the doctor asks specifically about the patient's occupation, all previous occupations and the occupations of their spouse and parents. Mesothelioma is an insidious disease that can affect a huge range of individuals and their families through secondary exposure. There is no standard curative treatment for mesothelioma; it is a case of management options, which include surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy and palliative care. Mesothelioma is not a clean, pain-free, Hollywood-style illness. Asbestos-related illnesses have not been sexy politics and they have been below the radar of all but those who suffer from them and their families. In the case of mesothelioma, an average of 165 cases a year end in death. Clydeside Action on Asbestos has been to the forefront in respect of identification, support and campaigning on all aspects of asbestos-related illness. It provides expert advice on benefits and the pursuit of civil compensation and damages. We owe those people a great debt of gratitude for their dogged determination to ensure, with limited funding, that the victims of mesothelioma and other asbestos-related illnesses are neither forgotten nor forsaken. I have a sheaf of letters of support for Clydeside Action on Asbestos from consultant specialists and cancer nurses throughout Scotland who know of the great work it does. The letters are from hospitals in every constituency in the country—all members should remember the great work done by Clydeside Action on Asbestos. I also have a copy of the invaluable guide that Clydeside Action on Asbestos has produced to brief junior doctors on mesothelioma. On the back is a picture of the lung of a sufferer. It is not a pretty sight and anyone who tries to deny asbestos sufferers compensation should have it tattooed on their forehead. The guide is important—Clydeside Action on Asbestos has experienced a notable rise in inquiries, in line with the prediction of Professor Julian Peto at the London institute of cancer that the incidence of mesothelioma will continue to rise year-on-year until at least 2020. National mesothelioma action day is a day of acknowledgement of all fellow Scots who, in the course of their working lives, contracted a foul disease while building a nation for us all. We owe them due recognition and support, and national mesothelioma action day is a due reward for the hard work that has been done on their behalf.

As a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I am happy to speak on this issue. This morning I had the pleasure of attending Carers Scotland's annual general meeting. I apologise to Cathy Peattie for the fact that she will have to listen again to pretty much the same speech, but I do not think that the issues that it raises have changed in the past couple of hours. We all know that carers are the Cinderellas of the benefits system. That is not an irony, because the great majority of carers are women. In our society, the culture is to assume that it is natural for women to look after the family, so people ask why they should expect to be paid for doing so. That is the attitude that men have had down the years and, of course, most politicians are men. Hopefully, things may change. I find it appalling that in this day and age carers are treated so shabbily that carers allowance is lower than any other benefit. I will concentrate on that issue, as members should be able to agree that bread-and-butter issues concern all of us. The Westminster Government claims that reform of carers allowance is complicated and that it will get around to the issue in due course. That is fair enough, but due course has lasted a long time—carers are not looking for one review after another. All of us in the chamber, as well as members at Westminster, need to be aware that the issue of carers allowance is again in danger of being kicked into the long grass. The UK Government should implement the long-awaited review of  carers benefits now, in recognition of the essential role that carers play in our society. In a recent motion that I lodged in the Scottish Parliament, I emphasised the inequity of carers allowances compared with other state benefits. I will not go through a huge list, but the state pension is £90.70 a week; incapacity benefit and employment and support allowance is £84.50; statutory sick pay is £75.40; jobseekers allowance is £60.50; and, at the bottom of the heap by a long way, carers allowance is £50.50. Unpaid carers make a huge contribution to society as a whole, in respect of both wellbeing and public finance. As Mr O'Donnell said, they make a massive contribution to our society by taking on jobs for very little pay because they care; they care about the person whom they are looking after and, in my view, we take a loan of them. In the name of social justice, there should be an urgent and substantial increase in carers allowance to support more fittingly those who unselfishly sacrifice time, energy and often their own health to look after others. As a first step, carers allowance could be brought in line with the state pension, low though it is—I hope that we in this Parliament will put pressure on the people who have the power to do that—and then we should work towards the poverty threshold of £158 a week that was calculated in a Joseph Rowntree report. Carers should have access to working tax credits under the 16-hour rule, rather than the ludicrous situation in which those who care gain such access only after 30 hours. Carers should be entitled to additional carers allowance on top of retirement pension, which at the moment has an overlap. Changes for carers have made a dent in what is needed, but continued political will is required. There is no room for anyone in any Parliament to rest on their laurels until the national disgrace of carers being treated as second-class citizens has been addressed. To do that, the Parliament must speak on carers' behalf on all issues, whether they are devolved or reserved to Westminster.

It is my pleasure to lead tonight's members' debate and to congratulate Knightswood Youth Theatre on its well-deserved win of a Philip Lawrence award. It may be helpful if I explain a little about the awards. Last year saw the 12 th anniversary of the Philip Lawrence awards, which were established in memory of the headmaster of a school in north London. In his three years at the school, Mr Lawrence was able to turn around its poor academic record and worked to improve its problems with violence. During a fight involving an attack on one of his pupils, whom Mr Lawrence went to protect, he was, sadly, stabbed in the chest; he later died. Mr Lawrence was a brave man who was dedicated to improving the lot of young people in local communities, and the awards are a fitting tribute to him. Knightswood Youth Theatre received its Philip Lawrence award at a presentation hosted by Sir Trevor McDonald at London's Bloomsbury Theatre on 2 December last year. It won the award for using drama to bring together young asylum seekers and refugees with young people from the local area in order to develop and enhance mutual understanding and friendships. We should remember that the awards are made by young people's peers—the judging panel is made up of representatives of previous winners, who get  together to choose those who embody the spirit of Philip Lawrence. The theatre group works closely with the LINKES project, whose name is a combination of Lincoln and Kestrel, the names of the streets that border the high flats where the project is based. There are also connections with Kingsway and Drumchapel groups, through the west integration network. Football, a pensioners club, a gala in summer and the national obsession for cooking that has erupted recently are all catered for at the LINKES base at 200 Lincoln Avenue. We are here especially to commend Knightswood Youth Theatre for its success in bringing together a range of young people from varied backgrounds and giving them a direction through drama. The theatre's work strengthens the whole community and provides those young people with opportunities that they would not otherwise have enjoyed. Some of those who won the award cannot be here tonight, as they have since moved on to drama education; that speaks volumes for the group. However, those who recently performed the collection of short plays entitled "Windows on Our Lives" at Knightswood Congregational church feel that that the work of Knightswood Youth Theatre and youth group—and the friendships and enjoyment that they get from belonging to those groups—go on. That work includes visits by high school student members to local schools to bring back new recruits, spurred on by the enthusiasm and confidence that those inspirational young people bring to all that they do. Even though members of the group are under threat of deportation from this country, they are young Scots. Wherever they originate from, they work together and support one another to deliver a message of hope for all of us. I am sure that the members of the group want me to mention a few names—I do not know whether I should do so, because I might miss someone out. However, I mention Aileen Ritchie and Euan Girvan, who planted the seed that blossomed, everyone at Knightswood Congregational church, and Rhona Dougall, who told me how the youth theatre was paired with Lochaber youth centre at the National Theatre of Scotland youth exchange in Stirling in July. It was a great honour for both groups to work together and enhance each other's work. Rhona Dougall also told me that everything has been achieved on limited finances. Funding and sponsorship are always sought. I must ask the Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture whether I can come to her for guidance on the matter at some point—I am taking it for granted that she will meet me and I thank her.  Glasgow has always been a place where hard work and fun go together, and Scotland has always had people of whom it can be proud. Knightswood Youth Theatre encompasses all that. Its members, past and present, deserve all the praise that we can give them. I thank them for the honour that they have brought to Glasgow.

To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to encourage the spread and development of new and existing woodland areas in urban environments. (S3O-5538)

The minister is aware of the excellent work of the Drumchapel woodland group in Glasgow, to which he presented the Tim Stead award for social and community forestry. Does the Scottish Government plan to ensure that other urban communities are made aware of the various forestry challenge funds through, for example, the  creation and promotion of a register of urban areas that are suitable for woodland development?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to encourage the promotion of positive citizenship in schools. (S3O-5379)

I recently met Sir Bernard Crick, who has sadly since died. He had great hopes for the development of the ethos of citizenship, democracy and the individual's place in society as central to the education of our children and young people. Does the Scottish Government believe that that approach should be a central tenet of Scottish education?

I thank Sandra White for bringing the debate to the chamber. As has been said, it is really a debate on workers' rights and the relationships between owners and management, and employees. Happily, it is fairly rare these days for a company to ride roughshod over a loyal workforce to the extent that Gannett and Newsquest are doing in this dispute. It is obvious that they do things differently in America. The legality of making workers apply for their own jobs is dubious, but the morality is simply contemptible. The Evening Times , Herald and Sunday Herald stable is profitable to the tune of £23.4 million per annum, and awards have been won by all three newspapers and by their journalistic and editorial staff. There is, therefore, no business basis for the undermining of editorial staff morale. The staff are dedicated professionals who produce a high-quality product, but it is clear that they are undervalued by owners for whom squeezing out the last penny of profit is more important than the quality of their newspapers or, indeed, the quality of life of their employees. The suggestion that editorial staff at these three nationally important newspapers should float between titles, with a lesser status than they have at present and with correspondingly poorer wages and conditions, will inevitably result in a lessening of the quality of the newspapers. It is a bean-counter mentality of cutting margins and knowing the price of everything and the value of nothing. As has been said, the suggestion breaches the commitment that the group made to the Competition Commission in 2003 when it acquired the titles to develop and properly invest in the newspapers. The staff at the Evening Times , The Herald and the Sunday Herald were employed at levels of wages and conditions of service for which they had applied and which suited their levels of qualification, expertise and lifestyles. It is entirely false to suggest, as management have, that those jobs at those levels have in reality been made redundant, so Newsquest is on the shakiest of ground in issuing redundancy notices. It must speak to the unions seriously and address the concerns that its actions have raised among its staff. I for one am willing to call for a boycott of all Newsquest titles and products—one is already in progress among growing numbers of Scotland's  discerning newspaper-buying public—should the obduracy and intransigence of the owners and management continue. That appears to be the only form of action that they will understand.

I have spoken to the unions about it, and they believe that the public are already carrying out a boycott. A boycott would only be counterproductive if it continued over a long period. It seems that the company wants only to make as much money as it can in as short a time as possible.

To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with banks over any reluctance to co-operate with  small innovative companies that are in receipt of Government funding but are unable to gain match funding, despite the Scottish Government guaranteeing 75 per cent of any loan via the small firms loan guarantee scheme. (S3O-5218)

What further actions will the Scottish Government take to support small and medium-sized enterprises in what are, regardless of Gordon Brown's arrogant assertions, undoubtedly difficult times for all?

I thank Jackie Baillie for introducing the bill for Parliament's consideration. I am happy to participate in the debate as an MSP, as a councillor on Glasgow City Council and as the disability reporter to the Parliament's Equal Opportunities Committee. Legislation on disabled people's parking places is long overdue. Reliance by local authorities and other public bodies on the courtesy and consideration of non-disabled drivers not to take reserved parking spaces could be seen as a basic abrogation of their DDA duties. It should be redundant to say that disability is not a lifestyle choice. For many people, the use of a car is the only way in which they can access education and employment. For people in rural areas who do not have regular and reliable access to public transport, it is often the only way of reaching shops and ensuring continued social contact. Therefore, abuse of disabled parking spaces by non-disabled drivers is an abuse of disabled people themselves. Such abuse is most often carried out by people who, in a non-driving situation, would be horrified to have it pointed out to them that they were behaving in a discriminatory manner. However, until everyone can be trusted not to indulge in the—shall we say—slight transgression of stopping a wee bit closer to the shops because they have a lot of bags to carry or have children with them, or because it is raining, we must protect disabled parking spaces, because there are disabled people who have all those reasons for parking closer to the shops, as well as a disability to manage.  That being the case, we must consider legislation that will protect the rights of disabled people to use designated parking facilities and which will impose penalties on those who abuse those facilities. The only way of doing that is to create enforceable bays, which are cost effective to implement and operate. Many calls are made on local authorities' finances for delivery of a wide range of services, but their service-provision duties are to all their citizens, both those who are able bodied and those who have disabilities. It is therefore incumbent on our councils to work together to establish best practice in areas such as the one that we are debating. The estimated costs of creating cost effective and enforceable parking bays that are patrolled by local enforcement officers who have specific knowledge of areas where non-disabled drivers abuse such spaces should not vary as widely as they do—from £12.20, which is the figure that West Dunbartonshire Council quotes, to £400 in Glasgow. To ensure compliance with the Disability Discrimination Act 1995 and effective mainstreaming of opportunity for disabled people in the general population, our councils must actively co-operate in addressing such wildly varying quotations for the implementation of viable and enforced disabled parking bays in our cities, towns and villages. Emphasis must be placed on councils' duty to deliver on the disability equality scheme and on their action plans to meet it. No additional administrative burdens are being imposed. Councils already have a disability equality duty, as well as a duty to demonstrate their delivery of it. There needs to be a standardisation of enforceable disabled parking bays, as the complex system of advisory bays has failed to deliver and proved to be open to abuse. As the debate has demonstrated, there is good will on all sides to deliver a legally enforceable system. I understand that some of the costs and operational figures that have been presented might make some members balk but, in some cases, the figures are because the necessary will is lacking among the people who made the estimates. It will be up to us to promote a legislative agenda that will result in the publicly funded bodies in question delivering on their duty to all our citizens, both those who are able bodied and those who have disabilities. We are all aware that the financial consequences of implementing the proposals have not yet been fully evaluated, but I wish to register my support for the aims of a much-needed bill.

I thank the Justice Committee for its report and my colleagues in the chamber, who have conducted today's debate in the dignified manner that the subject calls for. The Association of British Insurers has said: "Insurers are committed to paying fast, fair and efficient compensation to people who are injured or made ill as a result of their employer's negligence; in 2006, our members paid out over £1.2 billion in employers' liability claims."—[ Official Report , House of Commons, 23 January 2008; vol 470, c 461WH.] That is fair and clear. However, it has also been said, and it will be repeated, that when people are exposed to asbestos through employment, they are exposed to the considerable risk of developing pleural plaques, asbestosis and mesothelioma. That exposure will have been as a result of the manufacture of chrysotile or its use by employers in construction, shipbuilding and other industrial processes. Secondary exposure of workers' spouses and children only compounds the problem of the insidious nature of white asbestos. Who is to blame for the illnesses of all those who have been exposed to such material? Surely such exposure must be a result of employers' negligence. By implication, the only people who can provide recompense, albeit of a paltry amount, are the insurers of those employers, as stated by the ABI in the quotation. So where is the problem? The idea is that workers and/or their families who are injured or made ill by exposure to asbestos as a result of employers' negligence make employers' liability claims, and then justice prevails. However, that does not happen. The insurers have decided that they will take the premiums but renege on their part of the deal. They challenge whether pleural plaques—the scarring and thickening of the thin membrane that covers the lungs and the lining of our chests—can be considered to be an injury. Pleural plaques are an indicator of considerable exposure to asbestos, which has been shown to be a major factor in the development of other related illnesses, such as asbestosis and  mesothelioma. If someone has witnessed their family, friends and work colleagues develop such serious and life-taking illnesses, they might be excused for demonstrating a little anxiety about or possibly even fear of the same thing happening to them. That is especially the case when, as the minister and other speakers have mentioned, Dr Rudd, the leading expert on asbestos-related illness, was quoted as saying: "People with pleural plaques who have been heavily exposed to asbestos at work have a risk of mesothelioma more than one thousand times greater than the general population." That would make me anxious, as anyone with pleural plaques has every right to be. The idea that those with pleural plaques are just uninformed and worrying needlessly or that pleural plaques are really a sign that lungs are healthily forming scabs over invasive asbestos fibres is an insult and takes a diabolical liberty with the feelings of the ordinary men and women who made this country's wealth with the sweat of their brows. It has been my privilege to get to know the men and women who, through Clydeside Action on Asbestos, have campaigned for justice—for themselves, their families and for others whom they do not even know. I am proud to be on their side in this struggle for compensation for the injuries caused to their bodies by the insidious scourge of white asbestos. The insurance companies' view is that pleural plaques are asymptomatic thickening and scarring of the lining of the lungs—so what. Pleural plaques are a non-malignant disease—so it does not matter. Pleural plaques do not cause any symptoms or disabilities—so there is no cause for concern. What a disgraceful attitude. How many of the insurers put their hands up when I asked them recently whether they would volunteer to contract such a benign condition during the course of their employment? Not one did so, and I do not think that any of the rest of us would do so either. If someone has pleural plaques, they are more likely to develop asbestosis and mesothelioma. No one knows who is going to develop those killer diseases, so those who have plaques have every right to be anxious. Their lungs have an unnatural scarring that is caused by exposure to a dangerous material. Those people got that condition by working hard in order to raise their families. They paid their taxes and helped our industries to reach the stage at which they could pay big insurance companies to compensate employees financially when required. The Association of British Insurers says that there is a duty on its part, and on the part of its  members, to pay out when there has been employer negligence. There has been employer negligence when exposure to asbestos has caused scarring to workers' lungs. This Parliament will deliver on its duty to our people; by doing so, it will set an agenda that I hope will cause the London Government to give serious thought to reversing the House of Lords decision that affects people with pleural plaques in England and Wales.

Let us just put this on record: after the organisational stuff-up—from here on known as the great debacle—of last year's elections, we now have proof positive, if proof positive were needed, that the Scotland Office could not organise a Saturday night stushie on Sauchiehall Street. The fact is that the original unsavoury coupling in 1999 of Scottish Parliament and local government elections was designed purely in the hope that electors would simply cast all their votes for the same party in both elections. That cobbled-together affair was organised on the basis that democracy was simply a rubber stamp that would deliver more of the same. However, the Scottish  people took a left turn and abandoned the unionist script. It will never read the same again.

I would be perfectly happy if everyone voted SNP in every election. The fact is that when people vote SNP, at least they know what they will get—a party that stands for the people of Scotland. [ Interruption. ] I thank people for that applause. I congratulate the Local Government and Communities Committee on the hard work and honesty of its report. I congratulate the Scottish Government, the Scottish Parliament, the Gould report team and even the majority of the Scottish media on their reports. However, in the name of open, transparent, civic democracy, I condemn the intransigence of the Westminster Government and its cipher that is the Scotland Office. The grandly titled House of Commons Scottish Affairs Select Committee—no doubt presided over by the imperial wizard of that ilk—rejected almost every recommendation in the Gould report.

I find it enjoyable that, once I had congratulated the Local Government and Communities Committee, its convener stood up just to draw further attention to himself. I am speaking about the fact that democracy in this country is being done down by the British state. Even though we have a Local Government and Communities Committee, its Labour members are happy for that to happen and would prefer that nobody brought the issue into the public domain. The fault lies with one of their own—Douglas Alexander and his body politic—so it would not be right for Labour members to admit that another body could deliver a better system. That could be done through the Scottish Parliament, with the guidance of the Local Government and Communities Committee. Despite the fact that the Westminster committee's report on the 2007 elections refers to dithering, things not being satisfactory, a poor communication process and "a shocking lack of accountability", the best conclusion that the Westminster committee could summon about the Gould report was: "The proposal to establish a Chief Returning Officer for Scotland deserves further consideration".  In defence of my comments, I would never suggest that the people outside this Parliament have no interest in democracy. In that, I am unlike some members on the Labour benches, who believe that we should not even be talking about this issue. This Parliament has proven itself in the eyes of the Scottish people to be the representative body that they trust to stand up for them and to speak on their behalf. Our systems are open and transparent and our committees are accessible and overtly democratic. The Westminster Parliament—to which some MSPs still owe fealty—is a closed shop and, like the Crown in Parliament, an anachronism in the 21 st century. As the Gould report states, the electoral process for the Scottish Parliament must be in the hands of those who are elected to sit here. Success or failure—it should be for the people to decide. This is the people's Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has for the perpetrators of vandalism and graffiti to undertake community-based punishments. (S3O-4443)

Is the minister aware of the situation in Knightswood in Glasgow, where the Waterways Trust, working alongside local schoolchildren, recently enhanced the canal side with bright ceramic tiles and mosaics only to see them vandalised? Would he care to visit Knightswood with me to raise awareness of the problem and to publicise his plans to tackle it?

I welcome this opportunity to speak in Margo MacDonald's debate on the legacy that the 2014 Commonwealth games will leave for the people. Such events use lottery funding for precisely the purpose for which the lottery was first established. By the way, I will give a medal to any member who can tell me which person said: "We've struck gold for Glasgow but the hard work starts from here. This is not about politicians taking glory, or about the sporting world coming to Glasgow on its own. It's about making sure there is a lasting legacy." That was said by Elizabeth I of Scotland. I do not know whether the Queen does the lottery, but she can certainly recognise a legacy when she sees one. The finest legacy we can hope to gain from such a great sporting occasion is a population that is free from the stigma of being the sick man of Europe. However, if we fail to retrieve the lottery money that is by right Scotland's from the black  hole of the London Olympics, the legacy of the collapse of industry and job prospects that our young people living in the immediate vicinity of the Commonwealth games can look forward to—a life expectancy of 54 years, obesity levels that are through the roof and levels of smoking, alcohol abuse and drug taking that show few signs of going down—will bring shame on us all. The Scottish Government is funding 80 per cent of our games and Glasgow City Council the other 20 per cent. What has happened to the £150 million of Scotland's lottery share that could and should be used to ensure that there are sporting facilities to serve this generation and future generations in a lasting legacy of health and optimism? For the 2002 Commonwealth games, Manchester received £112 million of national lottery funding that spurred the regeneration of the eastern part of the city and provided a number of excellent sporting facilities. However, the UK Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, Andy Burnham, has insisted that there is no cash available for the 2014 Glasgow games. What he really means is that Westminster has allocated all the money to the London Olympics and that Glasgow can go sing for it. Well, this is our Commonwealth games and our east end and we want our money. Glasgow is not being narrow in this. After all, the amount of lottery money that is raised in Scotland is surely enough to support projects all over the country and ensure that the 2014 games leave a legacy in which we can all share. We should by all means train up the next generation of Chris Hoys and Caitlin McClatcheys in facilities close to home. However, we must also breed the mentality that sport is not just for the elite, but is something that everyone can enjoy and benefit from physically and mentally. Andy Kerr has spoken up well for the repatriation of this money, and Steven Purcell has stated that "we need the funding in place to maximise the Games' potential" and that "the legacy of the Games is more important in many ways than the Games themselves". I know that, among others, the LintelTrust, which has a fantastic record of working with people in positions of disadvantage, is working on legacy projects that are targeted at ensuring that the 2014 Commonwealth games will be remembered not only for feats of sporting prowess but—even mainly—for the long-term improvements in quality of life that they leave for all our people, particularly those whose lives are blighted by poverty or discrimination.  Let us remember that we are not holding out a begging-bowl and that we will not tug our forelocks as we demand our money back. Scotland contributes to the lottery and expects its share to be available to spend on good causes that will benefit the Scottish people. I thank Margo MacDonald for choosing such a vital issue for debate, and emphasise that her desire as an Edinburgh MSP to see right done by the citizens of Glasgow will surely result in tangible long-term benefits for the whole population of Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth has had with HM Treasury about funding mechanisms. (S3O-4140)

Given the recent dispute over the funding mechanism for police and fire service pensions, which the cabinet secretary mentioned and which has prompted Joe Grant, the general secretary of the Scottish Police Federation, to state that the Treasury should be providing funds to meet those costs, can the cabinet secretary confirm that the previous Scottish Administration knew of the pension situation in England since 2006 but disgracefully failed to ensure equity for Scottish emergency services staff by acting for them?

In light of the Scottish Government's welcome abolition of Labour's hospital car parking charges, will the First Minister join me in calling on all trade unions representing hospital staff to realise that the SNP, not the Labour Party, stands up best for their members' interests?

To ask the Scottish Government what assistance it can provide to people whose income is reduced as a result of the scrapping of the 10p income tax rate. (S3O-3705)

Office for National Statistics figures show that almost 4 million children and 2.5 million pensioners still live in poverty under Gordon Brown’s Government. Does the cabinet secretary believe that that poverty will be reduced by replacing the unfair council tax with a local income tax that is based on the ability to pay?

To ask the First Minister, in light of the tax increase on spirits announced in the budget, what plans the Scottish Government has to safeguard Scotland's prime economic products. (S3F-667)

In the light of Labour's tax hike on whisky, may I ask for the First Minister's response to the remarks made at Westminster by Des Browne, the Secretary of State for Scotland, that he has "a long-standing interest in ensuring" that Scotch whisky distilleries and "bottling plants in my constituency—the world-famous Johnnie Walker plant in Kilmarnock" and Scotland's biggest distillery, that of the Edrington Group in Drumchapel, "have a level playing field ... in the United Kingdom and throughout the world"?—[ Official Report, House of Commons , 28 November 2007; Vol 468, c 271.]

I will concentrate on the Glasgow Housing Association, which is a hangover gift from the previous Administration and continues to be an albatross round the necks of local housing associations and tenants in Glasgow, as well as a salutary lesson in avoiding mass housing stock transfer for all those other areas of Scotland in which the same plan has been attempted or even suggested.

Johann Lamont is a wee bit early yet. The GHA is a failing organisation. In recent months, the finance director, the development director, the senior housing manager and middle-ranking mangers have all gone. Those people are housing professionals who joined the flagship Labour housing project because they believed that eventually—they did not think that it would take forever—it would deliver to the local housing associations and allow local people to have control over their housing. It is a flagship Labour housing project whose flag is now fluttering at half mast.

I will let Johann Lamont advise the minister and see what he takes from her advice. The GHA was established by the Labour Party under Wendy Alexander, and successive Labour housing ministers kept it running as an organisation with no desire to deliver on its establishment promise to ensure that using local housing associations would be the way forward. The SNP Government has begun the second-stage transfer process that will allow housing associations to benefit from the GHA's establishment, as was proposed but never delivered by the previous Administration, which had a record of proposing but never delivering and of breaking many promises from previous manifestos. However, analysis of the GHA business plan for this year has shown that it has no intention to transfer any further properties after those in the original 16 transfer proposals. That is a result of the centralised and unrepresentative set-up that was established under Labour, which is now trying to avoid responsibility for its part in the whole  shabby deal. Some 20 plus community-controlled housing associations in Glasgow and the west of Scotland have, only now, under the SNP Government, received guidance from the GHA to allow them to finalise their second-stage transfer submissions. However, those associations have felt that it is incumbent on them to commission a report on the GHA valuation process and its fairness or otherwise. This, they say, is because Labour set up the GHA as an organisation that does not even have a duty to respond to freedom of information requests. Add to all that the grossly unfair treatment that has been suffered by GHA-factored owner-occupiers, some of whom have been landed with bills of £6,000 to £8,000 for upgrading work on their homes, which must be paid within 12 months or they will face court action. That is why I and other SNP MSPs are asking the Minister for Communities and Sport to order an independent financial review by Audit Scotland of a prime example of Labour's failed housing policy in action.

Does the minister agree that teaching in nursery schools is the foundation stone for future educational success and that the Labour group in Glasgow City Council was wrong to remove that foundation stone?

Will the minister consider establishing a central register of the  number and distribution of children and young people who require moving and handling assistance, to enhance planning for resource allocation?

I thank Trish Godman for initiating this debate on an issue that is significant to all those who depend on wheelchairs to live their lives in as dignified and independent a manner as possible. Last week, I had the privilege of sponsoring an event in the Parliament on behalf of Scotland's Commissioner for Children and Young People, which was entitled "Handle With Care" and was about the moving and handling issues that young people with disabilities and their carers encounter. Almost all the attendees where wheelchair users, and all of them had experienced problems in ensuring that they had the best chair for their disability. Given their ages, that will continue to be an issue for some time, as they grow, but all wheelchair users—regardless of age and whatever their disability—require the best wheelchair that can be provided to allow them the maximum possible social inclusion. Disability or not, we are talking about people who have hopes, aspirations and ambitions. They also have abilities, which their disabilities often overshadow for the able-bodied who, when they see someone  in a wheelchair, see the chair, not the person sitting in it. It is hard for people who are able bodied and who take mobility for granted to imagine how a person in a chair feels if they are dependent on it for their comfort and mobility. We should think, if we can, about what it means if the seat causes sores—the person is confined to bed for a long period while the chair is sent away and a new body mould is made. They are socially isolated for a long time and find themselves at a severe disadvantage that none of the rest of us, if we were feeling ill, would expect to have to put up with. As Trish Godman suggested, lacking a wheelchair in that way is a health issue. Minor repairs to chairs, even just to a foot rest or a neck rest on a self-guiding chair, require two or more weeks to carry out. During that time, the person has to sit in a chair that is not made for them and, in most cases, is not suitable for them. Although the use of a supervised manual chair is a way of getting round that situation, it robs the person of the limited independence that they normally have. If we think of those frustrations, we can understand how wheelchair users feel every day when their chair has broken down or requires a repair. That point was emphasised to me by the visitors from Quarriers, whom I was pleased to meet and speak to earlier today—some of them are in the public gallery. It is a pleasure to see them here. I hope that we will have good news for them as soon as possible. It is imperative to consult wheelchair users when formulating policy, right from the very start. We should listen to bodies such as the Scottish Disability Equality Forum and Quarriers, which have the expertise of disabled people and their carers. They have stated that disability issues have for too long been at the back of the queue when allocating resources. Quarriers and the Scottish Disability Equality Forum are not-for-profit agencies with great expertise in providing services to adults and children. They cover the whole range. I know that we are all grateful to them for their input and for providing us with facts and figures, which I hope the minister will examine to guide her response to this debate on the needs of wheelchair users.

I start by stating an obvious fact. Water is a precious resource, without which life cannot exist. Communities overseas without access to clean water supplies are the subject of regular Oxfam-style appeals on television, in which people in affluent countries are asked to donate to the development of water supplies that are free from germs and parasites in those places. We are all aware that we get nothing for nothing. Water is a precious commodity—so much so that it should not be up for grabs. Speculators should not be allowed to get their hands on something without which none of us can  live. Water is a human right, the control of which is too important to be left to market forces. Let us be under no illusions: the Welsh model of mutualisation that the Tories are proposing for Scottish Water—

I expected a wee bit of fatuous vacuity from the Tories.

I am willing to reply to it. Water is a resource without which even food cannot be produced. It must be retained within the public system or it will cease to be able to be used by anyone, including the businesses that the Tories are always looking after. The Tories should want water kept in the proper hands. To use the Welsh model of mutualisation for Scottish Water would be no more than a de facto move to privatise water and sewerage systems in Scotland. Where is the mutual benefit within mutualisation? The only obvious source of funding for a mutual water company in Scotland is the private sector.

I am in favour of the Government, as was stated by the minister—[ Laughter. ] Thank you. I am in favour of the Government allowing a review of all services in Scotland and considering whether better systems can be found. I am stating that there is no other, better system. [ Laughter. ] The only obvious source of funding for a mutual water company in Scotland is the private sector. The water industry is capital intensive. Mutualisation capital funds would be sourced from financial institutions with high interest rates, which would insist that all the services that are provided by Scottish Water would be operated by private contractors with profit margins, high borrowing costs and correspondingly high charges to citizens and businesses. Further, who would control and effectively own the resources that the publicly owned Scottish Water maintains, such as Loch Katrine and the Mugdock, Craigmaddie and Bankell reservoirs? Scottish Water, as a publicly owned body, recently funded a £120 million renovation of the Milngavie treatment works to improve the quality of drinking water for the greater Glasgow area. Would a mutualised company based on the Welsh model be willing to commit to such projects and to  carry the costs, or would water charge payers face excessive prices in order to pay the borrowing costs for those works? Water and waste water are public health issues and are, by their nature, capital intensive. They must be funded by the cheapest means available in order that no one will be priced out of access to those vital resources. The Scottish Government has a duty to ensure best value in its provision of services to the people—it is their money, after all—but the Parliament's duty is to all the people. Scottish Water must be a properly regulated, publicly owned and publicly scrutinised operation that delivers a cost-effective service to the Scottish people. The Tories' Welsh model of mutualisation is known in leading academic circles as being inherently unstable. It is dominated by large private companies with a veneer of public participation and would inevitably leave Scottish Water in private hands.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has given any further consideration to the licensing and regulation of Mosquito ultrasonic youth deterrents. (S3O-2179)

Does the minister agree that the indiscriminate use of such devices would penalise all young people, including the great majority who are going about their legitimate daily activities, and that the use of such devices must therefore be controlled, to ensure that it is both justified and proportionate?

To ask the Scottish Executive what response the Minister for Europe, External Affairs and Culture has had from the United States Congress to the concerns raised over the reclassification of Scottish literature as a subsection of English literature. (S3O-1947)

The minister can tell by the applause that everyone is very pleased about that. We look forward to making sure that the patron saint of poets, Rabbie Burns, is celebrated not only in Scotland but across the United States as well, now that it has come to its senses.

Yesterday, the First Minister visited the young east end speaking—or YES—youth project in Glasgow. I am sure that he had a very interesting and entertaining day, as indeed did I when I visited the project in Dalmarnock last autumn with colleagues, including Margaret Curran. I was very impressed by the depth of commitment of the Save the Children staff and the obvious enthusiasm of the young people involved. What does the Government envisage for the future of that project and similar projects in areas of deprivation?

To ask the Scottish Government whether it has any plans to review the legislation on corporate manslaughter. (S3O-1600)

Can the cabinet secretary explain how the concerns of victims, families and trade unions over the apparent lack of individual responsibility have been and will be addressed?

To ask the Scottish Executive how the recently announced extra £7 million for the central heating programme will benefit pensioners concerned that they may have to wait until after Christmas to have their heating installed. (S3O-1505)

I have a number of constituents who have real concerns about their heating this winter, including one pensioner couple in Baillieston, both of whom are receiving treatment for cancer and other serious illnesses, who will be without heating and hot water as their central heating was condemned. Can I offer them hope that the situation will be readily resolved? May I meet the minister to discuss the situation?

As other members have said, St Andrew is not only—and importantly—the patron saint of Scotland, he is the patron saint of Greece and Russia. Furthermore, he was not a native of our shores, but came from the middle east. St Andrew is a truly international patron saint and, as such, is just the man for our 21 st century Scotland—one Scotland, many cultures. Our celebration of St Andrew will—and should—emphasise that he has been our patron saint since the 7 th century and that he will continue to be seen as a symbol of a mainstream European nation with a long history and a sustained culture. The celebrations must also include the constantly evolving nature of Scotland. Immigration from Ireland, Italy, eastern Europe, Pakistan and India have added, and continue to add, to the number of people—such as my friend, Bashir Ahmed MSP—who are proud to call themselves Scots and for whom this land is their, and their family's, homeland. St Andrew is, of course, a Christian icon, but in Scotland he is also a symbol of unity—of a people with diverse backgrounds but a common destiny. Sectarianism and racism still rear their ugly heads in our land, but there is genuine revulsion on the part of the vast majority of Scots at those knuckle-dragging attitudes and their manifestations. St Andrew's day will not be for such attitudes; it will be for all to join together in joy, not hate. The celebration of a national day on the day of the patron saint is an idea that resonates with the great majority of Scots. They will see the sense in nominating a day that all schoolchildren learn of but which, sadly, becomes less relevant as people become adults. At present, it ceases to be a red letter day. Making St Andrew's day the start point of a winter festival that runs throughout the dark months to include Christmas and the new year, on through Celtic Connections and past Burns night, will make it a day of relevance to all. If we make St Andrew's day a day of colour and unity of purpose for all Scots, no matter their racial background, and for all Scots with faith and without faith, we will be able to draw the poison of the bigots who seek to divide us for their own purposes. We might not at the moment have the powers to establish a full public holiday on St Andrew's day, but we can make it a day of celebration of Scotland and Scottishness in all its wonderful guises. We can also, as the Irish have done with St Patrick's day, welcome home the Scottish diaspora and give them cheer wherever they now live in the world. St Andrew's day will serve the economy and enhance Scotland's image abroad,  but mostly—and most important—it will serve to draw all our people together. Let us celebrate our unity by recognising diversity in a Scotland where St Andrew's day is seen as day for all Scots.

As a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee and its disability reporter, I am grateful to the minister for having lodged the motion for debate today. Parliament must be seen to take a lead for Scotland and beyond in recognising the diversity of our society and, at the same time, raising awareness of the fact that all our diverse elements are of equal value. I am therefore happy to see that the Government's motion contains a commitment to promoting and mainstreaming equality, and to continuing the commitment to tackle disadvantage within our communities. However, I must emphasise that although I know only too well about the need to tackle poverty as an equalities issue, we must not take our eye off the ball with  regard to discrimination in all its other insidious forms. Unbelievably, the Equal Pay Act 1970 still blatantly fails to eradicate the gender imbalance in incomes: 37 years after it was passed, it is disgraceful that women in Scotland are paid on average 15 per cent less than men for doing the same or an equivalent job. Indeed, that gap has widened inexplicably in Scotland in the past two years, which must be investigated with great haste—otherwise it might continue. Furthermore, the Scottish Trades Union Congress reports that approximately 1,000 women per year lose their jobs as a result of pregnancy. Discrimination therefore appears to know no joy at all. Mainstreaming or embedding equalities in society is not yet widely understood as a concept; far less is it a reality. We should therefore hold up as examples organisations that recognise diversities and which implement equalities legislation as intended. Conversely, we must have the courage to focus a light on local authorities, educational establishments and businesses that fail to do that, perhaps by obliging them to publish successful actions that have been raised against them by the people whom they have failed. Fifty-eight per cent of Scottish disabled people have no formal qualifications, compared with 24 per cent of people who do not have a disability. It is sad, but not surprising, that young disabled Scots are therefore twice as likely to be not in employment, education or training as those without a disability. In further education, the ability to travel independently is still being used as one of the criteria that govern admissions, thereby frequently debarring disabled students from further education.

I thank the member for her—I was going to say interruption, but that is not nice—intervention. I am sure that the minister heard the member's full and comprehensive speech earlier, and he is better able than me to make that decision. I hope that the money will be targeted specifically and that the full amount will be given, but that is not for me to do or say. Because young disabled people are twice as likely to be not in employment, education or training, they lack education and job opportunities. Their prospects are limited and, inevitably, poverty ensues.  For those with learning disabilities and mental health problems, there is often a social stigma with the added complication that they might be unable to articulate ideas and feelings, which leads to greater risk of heart and other diseases, and a shorter life span. The learning disabled also now face social isolation and reduced job and education prospects because they will lose their travel passes if they are on the lower rate of the disability living allowance. That will be yet another blow to their chances of equality and hopes of more control over their lives. I hope that that will be addressed. Opportunities in life depend upon the equality that is afforded by society to a diverse range of people. Whether we talk about disability, gender, age, race, faith or sexuality, our words must be a prelude to action. It is the duty of all in the Parliament to embed the mainstreaming of equalities in all our work. I thank the minister for the motion.

Will the minister confirm that the equality impact assessment tool will be used in and applied to all Government policies?

Does the cabinet secretary have any plans to discuss with Greater Glasgow Health Board its procedures for checking on the whereabouts of important documents once they are on its premises?

It gives me great pleasure to open this debate on an issue of growing importance: the recycling of wood and wood products. Sad to say, there are at present only two wood recycling projects in Scotland—one in Glasgow and one in Edinburgh. The Glasgow Wood Recycling Project is modelled on one in Brighton that now collects around 450 tonnes of waste timber a year. That is a fantastic achievement for a community-based project. The Glasgow project has a three-year plan to become a self-sustaining wood reuse and recycling business through the collection of wood from businesses, schools and households. That will ensure a financially viable and sustainable local business in the Drumchapel area, where low incomes and poor business start-up rates and investment have combined to leave many adults and young people with low expectations. That is where the social aspect of this type of recycling project comes in. The unskilled, the long-term unemployed, pensioners and young people are all benefiting from access to the facility. However, the project is not a school; it is a business and social enterprise. At present, its resources are too limited to take on board the number of people who would like to enjoy working with wood and pick up skills. Such enterprises rely on support from public bodies, and the all-too-familiar cry about the funding gap has gone up. However, the returns for the wider community are great. They take the form of improved mental and physical health, the socialisation of young people, the acquisition of woodworking skills, the  provision of education and an improved local environment. It might therefore be beneficial if the Scottish Government considered the possibility of establishing a one-stop shop to allow such social enterprises to receive advice and funding. I hope that the minister will be able to look into that. We already know that the budget has pointed the way towards minimising the amount of waste materials, with the eventual aim of a zero-waste society. There can be no better way of achieving that aim than through the use of what are currently seen as waste materials to create new products, such as furniture, shelving, frames, household items and even works of art to enhance the local area from which the waste was recovered. Glasgow School of Art is a regular customer of the Glasgow Wood Recycling project, and its product design department has worked with the project to develop products from reclaimed wood that will extend the enterprise's income-generating potential. Another excellent example of local co-operation is in the donation of old barrels from Edrington, the bottling company, whose Drumchapel plant gives the Glasgow Wood Recycling Project old, solid, wooden kegs to be transformed into furniture. Such generosity and vision are to be welcomed, and as a member for Glasgow, I extend my thanks to Edrington's management for that. The planners who were involved in the rebuilding of Drumchapel town centre—New City Vision—have also expressed an interest in using street furniture and art installations that have been made from waste wood from the demolished buildings of the old scheme. Similarly, the new Shetland museum and archives at Hay's dock in Lerwick is an impressive example of the use of recycled materials, wood prominent among them. In that case, the wood was taken from 19 th century German ships that have been excavated from the harbour. Wood recycling is an idea whose time has come. Socially and environmentally, such recycling is beneficial and, as the idea, grows, it will easily be able to clear its feet financially. However, in the short term, projects such as the Glasgow Wood Recycling Project will need some help with funding, business advice and the possibility of public contracts. I hope that the minister will be able to look on those issues favourably.

Sorry. I beg your pardon. I have lost my place for my supplementary. Sorry, I was not aware.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government has plans to propose changes to the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002. (S3F-278)

As we know, many of the proceeds of crime come from drug dealing. Given the recently announced proposals, what plans does the First Minister have to increase the seizure of criminal assets and to ensure that funding can made available to organisations such as the Dumbarton Road corridor addictions forum, which does great work in raising drugs awareness in Glasgow schools?

As we are all aware, Stobhill is only one of the hospitals where such car parking charges are being imposed. The charges are spread across Glasgow and the  Borders area, and are causing fear and misery for staff and visitors alike. As the largest trade union representing staff at Stobhill, Unison has reported that many of its members are worried about suffering financial hardship as a result of this poll tax on the earnings of hospital workers. Relatives and friends of long-stay patients, as well as those who are visiting from out of town—as mentioned earlier—will face mounting bills as they perform necessary and psychologically beneficial visits to their loved ones. The arguments of the health board are spurious and disingenuous. It is farcical to claim that because some people are abusing Stobhill and other hospital car parks, the board needs to dissuade them from that behaviour by imposing swingeing parking charges on legitimate staff and visitors. Why should honesty be punished, and why does the board refuse to reveal the fee that it is paying to the private company that operates the scheme? Many staff travel miles to their work at Stobhill—they work shifts, often over the parking company's fixed time limits. Women have to travel in the dark, as Patricia Ferguson mentioned. Public transport is often limited, or does not operate at the times required, as Paul Martin mentioned. Those workers save lives, and they will have to pay for the privilege of doing so. Why were no scientific or academic studies undertaken by the health board on those vital issues? It is not the health board's duty to cut the amount of traffic on the road, nor is it the board's duty to make a cash cow out of its workforce and those who perform the necessary duty of visiting the sick in hospital. Permit schemes could easily be introduced for staff and those who visit long-term patients, and fines could easily be implemented to stop selfish people misusing the car parks at Stobhill and other hospitals. Once again, Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board is acting in the high-handed manner for which it is known without considering the impact of its actions on staff and patients. It needs to be held to account. Although democratically elected board members will make a change in the long term, people at Stobhill are suffering financially now and they would appreciate the Parliament's addressing the problem. Neither Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board nor any other health board should be allowed carte blanche to destroy the core NHS principle of free health care at the point of need.

It is a wee bit sad that the respect that members showed one another and the Parliament last night, when the parties sat here together, debated and reached a joint conclusion about justice for the victims of pleural plaques and other asbestos-related illnesses, has gone out of the window with the motion before us. All debates in the chamber should be treated with seriousness and respect. However, the mischief-making agenda behind the Labour motion makes it difficult to believe that that party—I am in fact talking about Labour and the Lib Dems—is treating the Parliament with due deference. Since day one of the SNP Government, Labour members have found it difficult to be constructive in their Opposition. With a few honourable exceptions, they have sat with faces like a bulldog chewing a lemon-flavoured wasp and have exhibited signs of collective social Tourette's at every ministerial announcement. That has culminated in an obvious attempt to unsettle confidence in the Government as we approach the budget statement next week. Following Ms Alexander's futile attacks on the First Minister week after week, Labour and the Lib Dems have made a spurious attempt today to suggest that, six months into office, we have broken every election manifesto pledge that was made in the run-up to the historic victory of 3 May.

Sit back and listen to what I have to say next, thank you, Ms Baillie. Only six months into the session, with three and a half years to go, our party has the opportunity to make the difference for Scotland that members of the previous Administration failed to make over eight years. I hope their mammies have got a lot of spit in their hankies to wipe the egg aff their faces at the end of the parliamentary session. There is a lot of highfalutin talk in Labour's motion of "aspirations", "scrutiny", resolutions to "set aside chamber time" and so on. In reality, it displays a lack of confidence in our much-admired committee system, and a desire to swamp this place with grandstanding puerility by Labour spokespeople.

And the Lib Dems—I have just been corrected, and my colleague is absolutely right. This time last year, Tom McCabe, the last Labour Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform, stated that the Executive was committed to working with the Finance Committee. That was last year, and the process was right for Labour when it was in control. Now it is this year, the SNP  is in charge and Labour, on the evidence of the motion, is out of control.

It is up to the ministers to achieve that. Jeremy Purvis said that the approach was informal. His party was in the Executive for eight years, it should have formalised it.

It was not me that was using it.

That was last year, when his party was in control; now, it is out of control again. People might believe that democracy is a fine idea as long as they are in charge. The truth is that, in its passion to attack the content of the SNP's budget next week, Labour is suffering from premature political ejaculation. What is left for next week now? What is left for budget day? Will Tavish Scott and the Lib Dem poodles still yap ineffectually? Will Wendy Alexander and her Labour attack dogs still be barking? I can tell them that the SNP Government will deliver our full programme over the full four years of this session. That programme will be delivered for the benefit of the people of Scotland, and the shabby display of hiding in corners by Labour and the Lib Dems will be blown away as the SNP shows what can be done with this Parliament for the Scottish people.

I thank Stuart McMillan for securing the debate. The fact that we can stand here and, in the spirit of natural justice, stand alongside those who are victims of pleural plaques and other asbestos illnesses shows that this Parliament is a Parliament of the people. I am happy to stand here to speak up for those many victims, but I am saddened that it has proven necessary for me to do so. Sadness is experienced by many people in communities across Scotland who, over the years and up to the present day, have lost relatives and friends to the various asbestos diseases. Pleural  plaques, which can cause breathlessness and various other health problems, may or may not lead to more severe life-threatening illnesses such as pleural thickening, asbestosis or mesothelioma. However, pleural plaques exist only in the lungs of people who have worked with asbestos or been exposed to asbestos as a result of being related to such workers. They do not exist in any other form. They exist only in people who have been exposed to asbestos. On that basis, we can say that those employers who exposed their workers to asbestos are liable. If those employers had a liability policy with an insurance company, that insurance company will have to pay up. Today I met representatives of the insurance companies. At a very civilised meeting, they impressed on my colleagues and me that medical evidence suggests that pleural plaques have no impact on the lung capacity or general health of the affected person. I am not a medic, but the suggestion that pleural plaques, which occur only as a result of exposure to asbestos and are scars or calcified areas on the lungs, are not injuries or injurious is insulting to those who are affected. Calcification of living tissue by exposure to asbestos is an unnatural injury to the human body and, by extension, an injury to the mind and spirit of the victim. The anxiety that victims and their relations feel is real. In my opinion, they are due whatever compensation a payment from employers or insurers will achieve.

I thank David Whitton for highlighting an issue that needed to be raised. The lung's reaction to asbestos is calcification, which occurs only when asbestos is present in the lung. Asbestos is a killer. To say that the anxiety that victims feel is unnecessary, as there is no suggestion of incapacity or of a further serious condition, is again insulting to the men and women who suffer those fears and worries. They helped to build this country in the 20 th century. It is for us to ensure that 21 st century justice sees the resumption of compensation payments to pleural plaques claimants.

I thank the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing for her clear explanation of the Government's guidance: that it is at the point of acceptance of the contract that free personal care provision must kick in. That Lord Macphail made a literal judgment is unarguable. However, he stated that it is implied that a local authority—Argyll and Bute, in this case—would provide payments in respect of personal care. That implication will have arisen as a result of the Community Care and Health (Scotland) Act 2002 that was drafted by the previous Labour-Lib Dem Administration. If Lord Macphail reached a contrary decision regarding the intentions of Parliament, it is the fault of the Parliament in its establishment of the 2002 act, because it failed to draft it properly in the first instance. Let us remember that, as the cabinet secretary stated earlier, we should be trying to make this system of free personal care work better for all our citizens, even as complexities arise that could or could not have been foreseen at the time of the drafting of the original act. I welcome the rise in the level of payment from next April that has been announced—the first rise since the inception of the system of free personal care. Ministers of any Government must not micromanage court cases and their decisions, but must bring clarity to the legal system here in this Parliament and not in the courts. Let us work together in this Parliament and move forward on free personal care by supporting the Government's commitment to get the waiting lists down, by getting the elderly the financial support that they need, deserve and have paid for through years of tax-paying, and by ending the nit-picking and arguing over points of order and the little battles among ourselves. The elderly—who deserve their free personal care—should be receiving all our attention.

I am surprised that we are revisiting this issue again so quickly, but not surprised that the Lib Dems have had to cobble together so many apparent concerns and regrets, as listed in their motion. There will be no jokes from me about Lib Dem cobbles. Having worked on the clerical and admin side of health care in some of the biggest hospitals in Glasgow—[ Interruption. ] I am being interrupted by members from my own side. I am aware of the excessively long waiting lists and waiting times that patients have had to thole, frequently in pain and often in frustration and despair, and I am proud to be part of the new Government, which took on the previous Administration's hidden waiting lists with the intention of making hospital treatment more responsive to patient needs. I am confused when I compare the 2007 SNP manifesto, which says that waiting times should be shorter with a new national waiting time guarantee, with the 2007 Lib Dem manifesto, which says that waiting times should be shorter with a "new waiting time guarantee". If that was deemed to be the solution by both parties prior to the elections five months ago, should not the Lib Dems just accept that if their policy stance is the same as the Government's, they should be happy to see it being put into practice and stop indulging in embarrassing backtracking?

I have four minutes and am nearly finished; I ask the member to take a seat. After all, did the Lib Dems not think through their policy on waiting time guarantees before including it in their manifesto, or were they so confident of losing the election that they did not bother to investigate and cost their promises? To argue that there will be increased bureaucracy is fatuous, unless they can present evidence to corroborate that assertion. Do they not know that experienced NHS administrative staff are already in place to operate the present system and that they would rather operate a waiting list that is shorter rather than longer? I ask the Lib Dems to show us why a new IT programme should result in an increase in  the difficulty of tracking patient records or waiting times—or had they not thought of that before now, just as they did not think of it when they compiled their manifesto?

The member has spoken more than anybody else in the chamber; I ask him to hold on please. To suggest that increased litigation will result from the new Government's measures is scaremongering and suggests that clinicians are incapable of judging an appropriate waiting time to set within accepted national standards. Why should Scots be more litigious than people in any other European nation? Perhaps the Lib Dems are confusing the citizens of this country with those of the United States of America, where private health care, which the Lib Dems promote in their motion, is commonplace, if not rife, and where ambulance chasing is a mainstay of the legal profession. As Sean Connery says, "That is not the Scottish way." To suggest, as the Lib Dem motion does, that the Scottish Government should abandon its manifesto commitment and deliver some variation on a new national waiting time, which the Liberals and Labour wanted and which the Tories also promoted in the lead-up to the election, is tantamount to betraying the trust of the Scottish people. Do not get me started on dogma. The radical Lib Dems in England state that they oppose the privatisation pursued by Gordon Brown's new new Labour Party, while in the chamber, Scotland's Lib Dems call for the private sector to be used to reduce waiting times. I would ask them not to hold their breath, but, as well-meant advice, that would be as disingenuous as their motion.

I thank the cabinet secretary for her statement. As a former health board worker, I have observed the present system and welcome the new, fairer system. What measures will she take to ensure that health boards implement the new system and what steps will she take to monitor it?

I welcome the announcements that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has made and thank her for outlining the Scottish Government's further proposals to develop a smarter Scotland. Some of the speeches by members from other political parties suggested that, after only five weeks, the cabinet secretary ought to have solved all the problems that the previous Executive failed to solve in eight years. Education is a lifelong process. A firm foundation, based on an increase in free nursery education provision, will set our children, especially those from deprived backgrounds, on course for future successes. For that reason, I welcome the announcement of a greater entitlement of hours of nursery provision for all three and four-year-olds. It is the duty of any responsible Government to ensure that fully qualified nursery teachers are provided in sufficient numbers and are suitably recognised and rewarded as professionals.

I was coming to that point. The member will have to hold on, as I want to deal with the issues in order. During the cutback in nursery teacher numbers in Glasgow in 2005, it became clear that, in its haste to balance the city's budget, the Labour-led council had failed to recognise the necessary contribution to children's long-term development that is made during the three and four-year-old stage. One senior elected official in the Labour group advised that playing with weans in the sand  all day did not qualify as teaching. On the contrary—the holders of posts in nursery education have qualified as teachers and have gone on to gain additional qualifications that enable them to work with very young children. They do not just play with children all day; they educate, train young minds and produce children who are ready to attend school, where they are able to participate more fully than they otherwise would. Many parents to whom I have spoken have expressed eternal gratitude to qualified teachers in nursery education who have identified in their youngsters a wide range of learning and behavioural problems at the three and four-year-old stage. That meant that effective interventions were made, from which children, their families and the wider community all benefited.

I am certain that Glasgow City Council is addressing the mistakes that were made in 2005 by the previous Labour administration. The development of a flexible, dedicated early years development teaching degree will progress the first vital step in lifelong education and ensure that additional support funding is directed towards improving services for children with conditions such as dyslexia and autism. That will be warmly welcomed by parents in Glasgow and throughout Scotland. During the recent election campaign, when the previous Executive was in power, I frequently met newly qualified primary school teachers. They were nearing the end of their one-year probationary placements but were unable to find continuing work in schools because they were to be replaced by the following year's probationers. I was told by them often that they would be happy to take a further course that would lead to work with children with learning difficulties or in nursery schools but that the opportunities to do so were not available. I am certain that those newly qualified teachers will welcome the cabinet secretary's announcement of additional teachers as a considerable improvement on what has gone before. The cabinet secretary made an announcement about the reduction of class sizes in primaries 1, 2 and 3. I attended primary school at a time when it was typical to have 40 in a class. Although there were many dedicated and accomplished teachers, a large number of classmates, many of whom were demonstrably intelligent, fell through the academic net. Others, who required specialist education that would have been identified in a smaller class, were simply left aside because they were too difficult or too wilful to spend extra time on. It is self-evident that having smaller classes in  the early stages of schooling is vital to allow for the identification of children with problems, but it is also important in enabling all those children who are among the majority to gain an appreciation of learning that will benefit them later in life. As a Glaswegian and a Glasgow MSP, I commend the previous Executive on the beginnings of joint-campus education as a progressive and positive step towards the eradication of sectarian attitudes in the west of Scotland. I would be pleased to see the new Scottish Government considering a similar approach and hope that the cabinet secretary will take that on board. Once again, I thank the cabinet secretary for her welcome announcements and commend her for her strong commitment to deliver.

It is a pleasure and an honour to deliver my first speech in Parliament on what I believe will be an historic day—a day on which we hammer the first nail in the coffin of the British Government's weapons of mass destruction programme. I congratulate the Greens on securing this debate, to which we in the SNP are delighted to contribute, as the motion keeps faith with the many thousands of Scots who voted for all the parties in this chamber. The true consensus among members of this Parliament reflects the broad consensus throughout Scotland against the maintenance of nuclear weapons in our nation. It forms a solid bond through civic Scotland, the STUC, Scottish CND, the churches, voluntary organisations and the 76 per cent of the Scottish people who would rather that the £25 billion cost—at least—of upgrading Trident was spent instead on public services such as schools, keeping hospitals local, and police and fire services.

I am sorry, but I cannot; this is my first speech. During the long years of the cold war, we were constantly told that it was only the threat of the Soviet Union that necessitated the endless waste of billions of pounds of public money, but now we see the truth—instead of the promised peace dividend following the fall of the Berlin wall, we witness the gimlet-eyed global imperialist sabre rattlers in Washington and Westminster, who will  never allow their hands to be prised from their nuclear phallic symbols until forced to do so by a committed public voice. Is that unfair?

I do not care, because article VI of the non-proliferation treaty states: "Each of the Parties to the Treaty undertakes to pursue negotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament, and on a Treaty on general and complete disarmament under strict and effective international control." The replacement of Trident would commit the UK to owning nuclear weapons until at least 2050, which, since the NPT came into force in 1970, would mean 80 years of complete failure to disarm—in other words, barefaced duplicity. Meanwhile, last week's report from the Federation of Small Businesses showed a Scotland where swathes of rural and urban poverty are still commonplace, early death stalks housing schemes, small businesses go to the wall and 600,000 carers struggle to keep body and soul together as they are denied the resources that are wasted on bombs that must never be used. As I have spent all my life living just 30 miles from the spectre of first Polaris and now Trident, I am qualified to speak out against the spurious arguments of those who want to continue the despoliation of our land, our waters and our sense of ourselves as human beings by spending our hard-earned wealth on big-boy's toys over which we have no control. Allow me to exercise a word that we have all got used to over the past few weeks—consensus. There is a genuine feeling of camaraderie on Trident in this land. By standing together against Trident, we will be embarking on an historic journey towards common humanity and a more prosperous and peaceful future for all. I commend the motion to Parliament and the people of Scotland.