The decision to withdraw that service is a matter for the Scottish Borders Council. Therefore, there have been no formal discussions between the council and the Scottish Government prior to any decision being made. Furthermore, there is no statutory duty on councils to provide a household garden waste collection service, although that is a service that many households across Scotland benefit from.

I understand that in recent years there have been technical changes to how Scottish Borders Council’s recycling figures were calculated, but other plans are in place that will see the council increase its recycling rates. I understand that there are plans to roll out food waste collections to more than 20,000 households in the Borders—that is a statutory obligation. I am confident that Scottish Borders Council and other councils across Scotland will increase their recycling rates, which will be good for the environment and local communities.

I agree that it is bit rich of Conservative members not to recognise the difficult decisions that local government must take in response to the Westminster cuts that have been imposed on Scotland. However, with regard to the garden waste collection service in the Borders, if help can be made available to social enterprises or small businesses so that they can take advantage of any gap that is there to be plugged, I will ensure that my officials advise the council and meet Christine Grahame in the first instance to see how those thoughts can be taken forward.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. It is, of course, appropriate that we have a farmer in the chair for this debate. This morning, the Government published interim figures for the total income from farming in Scotland for 2013. As the chamber might be aware, total income went up by £128 million, although the picture varies between sectors and, in some respects, the increase represents a bounce-back from the very difficult year that we had last year. Nevertheless, the figures confirm the common agricultural policy’s importance to farmers and crofters. Given that £561.9 million of the total net income of £828.6 million came from grants and European support, this debate is on a topic of great importance for the sector. In 2011, the European Commission published its proposals. Following on from the MacSharry and Fischler reforms, those proposals represented not only the biggest changes to the CAP in a decade but Europe’s first-ever attempt to redistribute CAP payments, basing them on fairness rather than history. The Commission said that the new CAP must be “greener, fairer, more efficient, and more effective ... moving away from income support and market measures and focusing on environmental and climate change objectives.” Europe wanted its farms to become greener and more market focused; they would be supported with CAP payments but not driven by them. Here in Scotland, the Government and indeed many people in this chamber supported the general thrust of the reforms, and Brian Pack’s inquiry confirmed that the CAP had to deliver clearer benefits for the public purse. However, we also insisted that Europe should not lose sight of the policy’s primary purpose of supporting viable food production and we had specific negotiating objectives on slipper farming, coupled support, new entrants and so on. It is therefore worth reminding ourselves how the Scottish Government’s objectives differed from the United Kingdom Government’s. Although the fear that the EU might make a massive cut to the CAP budget thankfully evaporated, the UK still wanted a substantial reduction in CAP spending, especially in pillar 1 or direct payments to Scottish farms, and wanted to abolish coupled support and phase out pillar 1 payments completely. The EU negotiations finished last autumn. As always, the final compromise was far from perfect but Scotland scored some negotiating successes. We secured the Scottish clause to combat slipper farming; ensured that new entrants can be treated fairly under the new policy; and changed the details of greening to ensure that they fit better with real farming practices. We also fought off the risk that heather would be ineligible, whether or not it is genuinely farmed; ensured a realistic timetable for changing the less favoured system; secured more flexibility; and removed the worst of the bureaucracy in the original proposals. However, I think that I speak for many people in Scotland when I say that, alongside such successes, there were some disappointments. For example, coupled support is now pillar 1’s only remaining tool for directly supporting production. Moreover, Scotland is limited to 8 per cent coupled support when other member states can have 13 per cent.

I hope that we influenced the UK Government in that respect. However, the fundamental point to bear in mind is that the UK Government wanted zero coupled support, which, given the disproportionate importance of the livestock sector to Scotland, would have been grave news indeed for our economy and our various sectors. As I have said, Scotland is getting only 8 per cent coupled support while other countries are getting 13 per cent. The UK Government has generously said that it is prepared to discuss letting us go a bit higher, although that offer is hedged round with conditions. It all reminds us that, as with the budget, the UK Government failed to negotiate what Scotland needed in the first place. We entered the negotiations with the worst budget deal in Europe on pillar 2 rural development and Europe’s third-worst settlement on pillar 1. Although the UK had the opportunity to get us a fairer deal, it did not lift a finger to do so. Moreover, to add insult to injury, when it divided the budget within the UK, it spread the so-called convergence money that Europe had intended for Scotland over the sectors across the whole of the UK, leaving us with the worst per-hectare budgets in Europe for both the direct payment and rural development budget pillars. I have said it before and I say it again: had we been an independent country, we would have got an extra €1 billion under that formula for pillar 1 alone, which we estimate could have generated 2,500 new jobs. We would also have been able to negotiate a better deal under pillar 2, the rural development budgets, where, ironically, it is easier than in pillar 1 to target support at active farmers. Faced with a pretty difficult—indeed, impossible—situation, I had to make a decision in December on transferring funds between the two pillars. Our pillar 2 budget is so poor that without a transfer we would have been unable to meet our rural development commitments, such as our legal requirements on the environment, and protect our less favoured area support scheme payments, which alone account for about a third of the pillar 2 budget. After taking stakeholders’ views, I decided that limiting the transfer to 9.5 per cent would strike the right balance, limiting the impact on pillar 1 while allowing a reasonable pillar 2 programme. Even with the transfer, our budget for the Scotland rural development programme is extremely low and tough decisions about prioritisation are required within that programme. I continue to look with envy at other member states, which are deciding what to spend their budget increases on while we are debating how to deal with our decreases. I would love to be able to fund a big beef sector improvement programme in pillar 2, as Ireland has done with its large budgets, but Scotland’s budget is tiny in comparison with those of many other countries. My proposals for the rural development programme will protect LFASS payments and will increase agri-environment schemes by more than £10 million a year. However, we are having to squeeze the budgets in other areas. In particular, farm capital grants will have to be a lot more focused on new entrants, for instance. Those proposals are set out in a Scottish Government consultation document that was published in December, and we are conducting a separate consultation on pillar 1, on direct payments, which will finish in mid-March. To complement the consultation exercises, I will shortly write to all farmers in Scotland who receive CAP payments about the time that remains for them to participate in the consultations, reminding them to submit their views if they can.

I recognise the specific issues in the islands, and I will discuss some of the wider issues that are similar to the situation in Liam McArthur’s constituency. That is one reason why we were keen to protect the LFASS payments, which account for a third of the pillar 2 budget and will benefit Mr McArthur’s constituents. The consultations are generating a lot of interest, as members are already indicating, and the Government will not make any decisions until they are over. Nevertheless, some key themes are emerging, one of which is slipper farming. We worked hard to ensure that the new CAP would end slipper farming, and we were pleased when the so-called Scottish clause was included in the CAP regulations. However, we were disappointed with the European Commission’s first draft of the implementing rules, which did not accommodate the Scottish clause in the way that we had envisaged. If that renders the Scottish clause toothless, payments to slipper farmers might continue and everyone else’s payments will be diluted. However, I am pleased to say that we think that there is a way forward and the Government believes that such fears are unfounded. We have proposals that we want to discuss with the industry, and we are meeting the stakeholders and others to address the matter next week. Another emerging issue is greening. We must deliver more environmental benefit from the policy, but the risk of red tape is high and getting the right balance will be crucial. Concerns are being expressed about the impact on beef producers, in particular, some of whom fear reductions in their payments—in some cases, massive reductions. I very much understand their concerns and greatly sympathise with them for the reductions that they face, particularly those who are genuinely still active beef producers and who face significant reductions in their payments. However, that is a crucial area of new policy and it is important that we understand the detail of it. First, some people are implying that the impact on beef farmers’ payments is entirely due to Scotland’s plans for regionalisation and transition, but that is not the case. There is a general downward pressure on the basic payments budget and everyone’s payments will be smaller than they would have been if Scotland had got a fairer budget deal. Mandatory deductions are also imposed by Europe, so some reduction is inevitable for many producers. Secondly, some people think that the deal breaks a link between activity and payment levels. However, we must remember that the link between the size of a farmer’s payment and the size of his herd or flock was broken back in the 2003 reform. I recognise that there is a contradiction here in EU policy. Europe wants to support food production, as we in Scotland do, but for a decade it has operated a policy that limits our ability as countries to do that when it comes to issuing the payments. That is in no way a logical position for Europe to adopt, but we are where we are and Europe will not shift its direction of travel. It is therefore true that some farmers who are highly active and who have been getting high payments may see their payments go down, significantly so in some cases, as we move from historical to area-based payments. I understand why some people are attracted to an alternative to what is in the consultation document: the so-called tunnel approach, which would maintain historical-based elements from the single farm payment. I know that NFU Scotland sees potential merit in that option. However, in considering options we have to be very careful, because there is a dilemma here. Using the tunnel, farms would get payments in 2019 or 2020, based on their activity back in 2000. It would protect payments to farmers who used to be very active but now are not. In one example, a farmer contacted me and said that his payments were going to be halved, but when we checked his actual activity over the period of the current policy we found that his activity levels had also halved. The tunnel approach could prolong the disadvantage that is suffered by new entrants. A new entrant who started in 2000, aged 35, would perhaps not be on a fully level playing field till 2025, by which time he would be 60 years of age. Some people say that the Government’s approach would move Scottish farmers more quickly to area-based payments than would be the case in other countries. That is another argument that I am listening to. Again, 15 years will have passed between the decoupling of headage payments and full area-based payments. The tunnel option has attractions, but of course we must go in with our eyes open and recognise that it has very serious downsides as well. I understand the real concerns that are being expressed by many sectors in the industry. However, we must not let our farm sector tear itself apart over this CAP reform. Of course, every group has the right to argue for its interests, and I will listen to each and every individual case. However, we must focus on overall solutions that are best for Scottish agriculture as a whole, and look at that very closely. I want to avoid partial solutions that pit farmer against farmer, young against old, beef against arable and hill against lowland. That is what lies behind the Government’s proposals that are on the table at the moment: the big picture. We believe that our transition plans give established businesses time to adjust and new entrants fair treatment, and will get the whole sector on to a level playing field by 2020. Our activity rules will ensure that no payments go to land where there is no activity or just token activity, leaving more investment to spread over the real farming community in Scotland. We will target the beef sector with coupled support. Modelling shows that the impact of reform is complex. Overall, over 50 per cent of farmers would get higher payments under the new policy and only 47 per cent would get lower, although that is of course a substantial number of farmers in Scotland. Even within the beef sector, over 40 per cent would receive increased payments. However, I recognise that the most productive beef farmers will actually receive the biggest reductions, which is an issue. We acknowledge the impact on the beef sector specifically, which is why we have said that we will use the maximum coupled support available for the beef sector, unless we are persuaded otherwise by the result of the consultation exercise. We have set up a group under Jim McLaren of Quality Meat Scotland to look at the beef sector and its future. Some people have said that our approach to the reform is guided by keeping the deliverability of the policy simple and easy, but that is not what is guiding our approach to the reform process. We are doing what is best for Scottish agriculture and food production, and for our wider rural economy. However, the more complex we make the solutions to some of the issues that have been brought to our attention, the more difficult it will be to deliver the policy in Scotland. We do not want to go through the experience that other countries have had when they have simply been unable to make the payments because of lack of preparation or because the system is so complex. Because we have diverse farming systems in Scotland, there is a temptation to have a really diverse, complex policy. However, doing that would lead only to bigger problems in the future and we would regret choosing the solutions we did. We must be very careful and try to strike the right balance. We will look at the responses to the consultation exercises very carefully and closely. We will continue our very close, intense work with the stakeholders in the coming weeks and months. Of course, the purpose of today’s debate is to hear the views at this stage in the consultation process—there will be more opportunities in the future—of each political party and MSPs who represent our farming sectors. I very much look forward to hearing members’ views today as we collectively, I hope, try to get the best solution for Scottish agriculture through the new CAP reform process. I move, That the Parliament notes the importance of the new EU common agricultural policy to Scotland in helping to deliver viable food production and sustainable management of natural resources; welcomes the publication of two Scottish Government consultation documents on its implementation and notes that these are based on detailed and extensive discussions with stakeholders; recognises the complexity in implementing the policy changes adopted by the EU; supports the Scottish Government’s determination to ensure that future farm payments are made on the basis of active land; agrees that the options available to the Scottish Government to implement the proposals are further limited due to the poor budget settlement from the UK Government, which failed to recognise Scotland’s distinct needs and confines it to the lowest per-hectare funding in Europe for both direct funding and rural development, and welcomes the Scottish Government’s commitment to seriously consider issues raised during the consultations and to take the right decisions for the future of Scottish agriculture prior to the final implementation.

Does Jim Hume accept that Ireland exports as much as, if not more than Scotland does per head of population to the English market? Why is it okay for independent Ireland to be able to export its food and drink to England, whereas our constitutional status would somehow have a bearing on the choice of consumers south of the border?

The debate has been good. It has been helpful to hear MSPs highlight some of the key issues for their constituents and parties. Yesterday, I had the privilege of attending the Cabinet meeting in Bathgate, after which we had a question-and-answer session with the public. I then had the opportunity to visit a local food business, Findlater’s Fine Foods. That reminded me that the debate is about not just the primary producers but the whole supply chain and the wider impact on the rural and national economy. Farmers and crofters in Scotland produce some of the best raw materials to be had anywhere on the planet, underpinning our fantastically successful food and drink industry, as I was able to witness at first hand when I visited Findlater’s.

I can clarify that venison is one Scotland’s finest foods. I will come to the wider issue of deer farmers shortly. Our farmers and crofters produce for our food and drink industry, which reminds us that much of our activity must be guided towards the demands of the markets. Our income and the profitability of Scotland’s agriculture are very much dependent on being market focused, as well as on our getting the right support mechanisms in place. It is a good, healthy sign that demand from the marketplace, not just in this country but throughout the world, for Scottish produce is on the up. We have to focus much of the debate on that opportunity and on the opportunity to get the right financial support mechanisms in place. Yesterday I also visited one of Scotland’s biggest livestock hauliers. That is another example of other sectors’ dependency on agriculture—the debate is not just about one particular sector. We have the beef sector, the sheep sector, the pig sector, the poultry sector, the dairy sector and indeed the venison and deer sector, as Jamie McGrigor mentioned. All those sectors contribute hugely to the Scottish economy in their own ways. The debate is about ensuring that we get the right mechanisms in place in the years ahead to support their fantastic contribution to not just Scotland’s tables but our wider economy. We should avoid scaremongering. It was ironic that Jim Hume said in one breath that he hoped that the Scottish Government would not use the debate to make any constitutional points and then proceeded to lay down at least four scaremongering arguments about what would happen to various sectors if Scotland were to vote to be a normal country in September. That was sheer hypocrisy from Jim Hume, but I guess that we just have to get used to that. The biggest threat to the livelihoods and future of most farmers and, in particular, most of the people in the food and drink sector whom I speak to is the idea that the UK might pull Scotland out of Europe. Excluding our food and drink industry from half a billion consumers in Europe is the biggest threat to the industry. This is a very anxious time for our farmers and our rural communities, with on-going discussions over the next common agricultural policy. Where we are now and the consultations that we have discussed today follow a couple of years of very close, detailed work with our stakeholders in this country. What members see in the consultations are not ideas off the top of the heads of Scottish Government officials or my ideas alone; they are the result of that detailed partnership working with Scottish industry, which has been the subject of very detailed modelling over the past year or so. However, in a consultation we listen closely to what people say. I think that perhaps Rhoda Grant has been taking part in a different debate in the past couple of years. She said that the changes taking place in the common agricultural policy will disadvantage the Highlands and Islands, but that is far from being the case. Of course individual producers in the Highlands and Islands might see a big reduction in their payments—I will come to the reason for that shortly—but Argyll and Bute, the Western Isles, Highlands and Shetland will see their payments increase under the shift to the new payment system, in which we are moving from historic payments to area payments. It is not right for her to stand up in the chamber and say that, for the reasons that she outlined, the reforms will disadvantage the Highlands and Islands.

Liam McArthur’s question gets to the heart of much of the debate. We are going through what is going to be the first massive redistribution of funds across Scottish agriculture as a result of a new common agricultural policy.

After Rhoda Grant’s speech and that intervention, I ask her to raise the standard of the debate and not to refer to rumours in the chamber. We are in the middle of a consultation and we are listening to different views from all sectors and all parties in every part of Scotland. We will listen closely to what people say; we have not taken any decisions on what we will change or not change from the proposals in the consultation. No doubt there will be changes and I will shortly talk about some of the areas that people have highlighted. However, to talk about rumours lowers the tone of the debate overall. We are going through a major change with the new common agricultural policy. We are moving from historic payments to area payments. That is why many producers in Orkney and elsewhere will be calculating—using our ready reckoner, which many farmers in Scotland have used and which gives an estimate of the likely outcome under one particular scenario—that they will see big reductions in their payments. The background is that, in the 1990s, we had headage payments, which then determined, under the most recent reforms, the single farm payments, which people got from the 2000s up to the current day. Therefore, those payments were based on activity from back in the 1990s or before. We are now breaking the link between payments and production, as agreed by Europe, and moving to area payments. Those who face the prospect of a big reduction in payments are those who benefited from the payments that they received previously under the 1990s regime or before that. Now, in 2014, we face a change from historic payments to area payments, but Europe will not allow a link between area payments and production. Therefore, the size of herds or activity on a farm will not relate directly to the size of the area payment. That is the crux of the debate. The major dilemma that we have is that we are trying to support activity and production, but the rules that have been agreed under the common agricultural policy as a condition of getting the budget do not allow that to happen, other than through the limited coupled support scheme that we have secured for Scotland during the negotiations. That is the situation at the moment—we have the limited coupled scheme. When we started the negotiations, Owen Paterson said that he did not want to use such a scheme at all, so we would have been able to use 0 per cent of our budget for such a scheme and there would have been no link whatsoever with production. He then moved to his position of 5 per cent—that was an apparent concession to Scotland, although it was obvious that he moved because he was going to lose a vote in the Council of Ministers. Then, of course, Europe finally decided that one tier of countries would be able to use 13 per cent of their budget for coupled payments and another tier of countries could use 8 per cent. Unfortunately, Owen Paterson and the UK Government decided that we would be in the 8 per cent category.

As I said in my opening speech, we now have the option of increasing the 8 per cent to perhaps around 10 per cent. That is being discussed with the UK Government, but there are many different conditions attached. We are working with the UK Government to iron out the strings that are attached to that generous extra 2 per cent for coupled payments in Scotland. I will keep Parliament updated on progress on that.

Sorry, but I really have to move on in my remaining three minutes. We have a smaller budget for Scotland, new entrants coming into the payments system and mandatory deductions from the pot of money that we have been allocated, because money for young farmers and for the national reserve has to be deducted. Against that backdrop, it follows that there will be reductions in payments for many farm businesses throughout Scotland. As far as possible, we are trying to link the area payments to activity. We cannot link them to production, but we can link them to activity. That is what we want to do, because it is not in Scotland’s interests or in the interests of the public purse to use vital investment for food production and looking after our environment to pay businesses that are inactive. That is why it was important to secure the Scottish clause. Although Europe says that we cannot use a minimum stocking density because, under World Trade Organization rules, that is linked to production, we are confident that there are other ways of tying that Scottish clause to activity in Scotland. The more we can do that, the more we can take payment away from inactive businesses and up the payments for active businesses. Clearly, that is an important point in the debate. When we talk about reform of the common agricultural policy, we should not talk only about livestock, because in some cases the arable sector faces difficult challenges as a result of the greening proposals, which were largely designed for the monoculture that we see in eastern Europe and not for the diverse agriculture sector in Scotland. Nevertheless, at least the current proposals are a lot better than the proposals of a year ago, which would have been really impossible to implement in Scotland. At least we now have a set of greening proposals that can be implemented in the Scottish context. I will answer some of the questions that members have raised. We are working closely with the arable sector to consider how we can mitigate the impact on the production of malt and barley, which is so important to the Scotch whisky industry. In addressing some of these important issues, there will be changes to the proposals in the consultation—I think that I can say that fair and square. However, we are in the middle of the consultation and although I do not know what changes will be made, we will have to go into any changes with our eyes open to the consequences and to the knock-on impact on other sectors if we help one particular sector. There are difficult dilemmas and difficult circumstances. The number of payment regions, which Jim Hume and others raised, is an issue that we are watching closely. We may divide grazing into two regions or whatever. There are a number of suggestions out there about how to make the system more fair and equitable and how to protect genuine activity. However, we could have a situation in which there are three categories of field on one farm, and although we are genuinely considering that option it clearly brings a price with it, and we have to ensure that we can cope with such a system when it comes to implementation. I am confident that by working closely with the industry we can find a way forward on many of these important issues. There are two more issues that I would like to mention quickly in the final couple of minutes of my speech. First, pillar 2 is crucial to the debate, and many members have mentioned its importance. Within that, we have protected the less favoured areas scheme, which is worth between £60 million and £65 million a year. The scheme is absolutely crucial to the outlying areas of Scotland and to those areas where the land is of poorer quality and presents extra challenges in farming, producing food and looking after the environment. Its importance justifies the 9.5 per cent transfer from one pillar of the policy to the other pillars. I understand the arguments for using the full 15 per cent and those for using 0 per cent and not doing any transfer. I think that we achieved a fair compromise. Finally, the decisions are all underpinned by the size of Scotland’s budgets. I do not believe that there will be any review that will deliver results for Scotland in 2016 onwards in terms of the convergence uplift. We are likely to have a new secretary of state in DEFRA in 2016, which is after the next UK elections, and I hope that Scotland will not even have to bother listening to what DEFRA has to say, because we will be an independent country by then. I will come back to that. Of course, there may even be a referendum on the rest of the UK leaving Europe then, because by the time the results of a 2016 review are available it will be 2017 or 2018. Scotland was not a member state in Europe in its own right during the recent CAP negotiations, which has cost us a €1 billion uplift. It has cost us a €220 million uplift that we should have got, which came to the UK because of Scotland’s lower payments as some kind of concession for not getting the €1 billion. Not getting that extra €1 billion that belongs to Scotland has cost us 2,500 jobs that could have been created between 2014 and 2019 in Scotland’s rural communities and the £500 million that would have been added on to Scottish gross national product because of those 2,500 jobs and the extra €1 billion that would have been pumped into farming businesses the length and breadth of Scotland. I have to say in closing that I will work with the industry and with all parties to get the best common agricultural policy as we go through the difficult and challenging but important process for the new policy. If Scotland had been an independent country, many of the difficult issues that we are wrestling with would have been a lot easier. With independence, our farmers and crofters will be wealthier, Scotland will be an even bigger food-producing nation, our rural economy will be prosperous and we will have a bright future for Scotland’s farmers and crofters.

Mike MacKenzie will be aware that Scotland has been united in its pursuit of a fairer deal from the common agricultural policy budget allocation, particularly in respect of the full €223 million convergence uplift that was given to the United Kingdom from Europe, given Scotland’s low level of payments. However, as members will be aware, the UK Government—despite representations to the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, and even to the Prime Minister, from the Scottish Government, Parliament and our agricultural sector—is refusing to budge and do what is right for Scotland’s farmers and rural communities. As a consequence, Scotland will be left at the bottom of the European league tables for direct payments and rural development funding.

Mike MacKenzie sums up very well the seriousness of the budgetary decision that the UK Government has taken. It is not just the livelihoods of our farmers and crofters that will be damaged by the decision to deny Scotland the Scottish share of the EU budget, but the wider rural economy. That money would have been invested in the rural economy by our crofters and farmers, who tend to spend their public support in their local communities, so the decision is therefore a blow to the whole of rural Scotland.

I had a conversation about the convergence uplift several weeks ago with the secretary of state, Owen Paterson. It was made clear to me at that time, and in subsequent comments to the media by Owen Paterson and the industry, that, despite the apparent pledge for a review in 2016 or thereabouts—however long it may take, and despite the fact that there is a UK election in 2015 and an in-out European Union referendum in 2017—any outcome of such a review would not be implemented until the next common agricultural policy post 2020. I therefore cannot see that such a review would make any material difference, given that EU negotiations for the post-2020 CAP are still to take place. Any internal UK review must take that into account, notwithstanding the fact that, even though the review may be happening in 2016, it would not have any bearing in the period of this common agricultural policy.

The review that the UK Government promises is a dead end and a red herring, for the reasons that I have just outlined in my answer to Claire Baker, and in particular the timescale. We are promised a review in 2016, which may be concluded after the in-out EU referendum and will not begin until after the UK elections in 2015. We do not know who the secretary of state will be at that point, given that there have been so many changes in the past few years. Of course, the secretary of state has said that the impact of any review will not be until post 2020, which would be into the next common agricultural policy period, not the new one that is about to be implemented in 2015. Therefore, the conclusion of any reasonable person must be that the review is a red herring and a fudge by the UK Government to cover up a betrayal of Scotland’s farmers and crofters.

I met the president and chief executive of NFU Scotland last night at a meeting near Lauder, along with around 70 farmers, and we discussed the implementation of the new common agriculture policy. It was, of course, a lively discussion, and it was good to hear at first hand the farmers’ views on the new CAP.

As Alex Fergusson points out, that is a key concern for anyone who is interested in the future of vibrant Scottish agriculture, particularly the livestock sector and the beef sector within that, given that many intensive beef units face substantial reductions in their single farm payment as Scotland moves from the historic basis of payments to an area basis. Of course, the key is to find a solution that, on one hand, mitigates the impact on genuinely active livestock units but, on the other hand, does not continue the historic payments for other units whose activity has declined. That is the key to trying to find a solution to the complex problem that we have been handed by the new CAP. Although the policy has taken some steps forward, there are still some big challenges, given Scotland’s circumstances and the rules that we have to abide by.

I am looking carefully at pillars 1 and 2 of the new common agricultural policy in respect of crofters in Tavish Scott’s constituency and elsewhere in Scotland. I can say only that, because we are in the middle of the consultation on the rural development programme, which closes at the end of February, it is difficult to give a precise answer to his question. All that I can do at this point is give an assurance that I am paying close attention to that scheme and the overall impact on crofting of the new common agricultural policy.

The European Union rural development regulation states that the new areas facing natural constraint designation is to be implemented by 2018, and we will review the current less favoured areas scheme in line with the regulation. In the meantime I am committed to continuing vital funding at current levels for the current scheme, to ensure that farming and crofting businesses remain sustainable.

The debate on this matter has been going on for some time, and a set of criteria has been initially debated. However, because there has been a postponement of the decision to move to a new system, there will, no doubt, be further debate over the next couple of years about the exact criteria that will be used to define areas of natural constraint. During the original debate over the past couple of years, we took some comfort from the fact that Scotland met most of the criteria, although there may have been some debate at the edges about whether some parts of Scotland qualified. Clearly, however, we have an opportunity to debate the issues and iron them out over the next couple of years.

As I explained in response to Alex Fergusson’s earlier question, to which I am sure the member listened closely, I met with NFU Scotland and around 70 very vocal farmers last night near Lauder to discuss the implementation of the new common agricultural policy.

I am sure that Jackson Carlaw recognises the fantastic tourism boost that there has been in certain parts of Scotland due to the reintroduction of sea eagles. However, I recognise that there are also some genuine concerns among livestock farmers, particularly on the west coast of Scotland and elsewhere. In the past few days, I have been approached by some sheep associations who have asked to meet me on the subject. Of course, I will be happy to do so and to explore the issues that Jackson Carlaw has raised.

Scotland currently receives the third lowest average per hectare rate in the EU for direct payments, known as pillar 1, at around €130 per hectare, but we are set to become bottom of the EU league table once EU convergence sees Estonia and Latvia overtake us. Those countries will, of course, benefit from the EU rule that all member states will achieve at least an average of €196 per hectare by 2019. Scotland would also have benefited from that if we had been independent already. We already have the lowest average per hectare rates in the EU for rural development funding, known as pillar 2. If Scotland had had its own seat at the table in Brussels, we, too, would have argued for and negotiated extra funding, just like the 16 other member states successfully did, sharing a total of €5.6 billion. Once again, unfortunately, because of the United Kingdom’s lack of negotiating skills or priorities for Scotland, we are also bottom of the European league for that fund.

It is true that there is a heavy cost for our farmers, crofters and wider rural communities to pay, and that the fact that we are not a member state in our own right means that we do not qualify for those funding uplifts. To clarify the point, according to the formula adopted by Brussels and Europe, because it is not an independent member state, Scotland has lost out on investment of €1 billion between now and 2019. We estimate that that would have created an extra 2,500 jobs in Scotland and added £0.5 billion to Scottish gross domestic product.

We had a good response to our consultation on Scotland’s first national litter strategy and are in the process of analysing the responses. Thereafter, we aim to publish the strategy in early summer. In the meantime, we are pressing ahead with important early actions. From 1 April, fixed penalties for litter will increase from £50 to £80, and for fly tipping from £50 to £200. We are also finalising plans for the national litter prevention campaign, which will start in May and will seek to influence peoples’ behaviour towards litter.

The Government has been discussing that issue. I am not aware of the detail of the responses to the strategy that are currently being analysed, so I will make a point of looking into the issue that Drew Smith has raised and I will get back to him. If Drew Smith, or anyone else, has specific ideas that they wish us to consider as part of the strategy, they should feel free to write to me.

We are, of course, very disappointed by the agricultural budget allocation, which has left Scotland at the bottom of European Union funding tables for both pillar 1, which is the direct payments to farmers, and pillar 2, which is the rural development funding that supports our local communities. The United Kingdom Government let us down badly. It failed us in the budget negotiations in Europe, particularly when, unlike 16 other member states, it did not negotiate extra resources for rural development. Various agricultural sectors are represented in South Scotland, from mainly dairy in the south-west to cereals and general cropping in the south-east, to name but a few, and all will suffer as a result of that dreadful decision.

The funding formula that has been agreed in Europe for the agricultural budget that is in place for 2014 to 2019 applies to all member states. Had Scotland been an independent member state at the negotiations, the formula would have delivered an extra €1 billion—that is £850 million—between 2014 and 2019. Our initial estimates show that we have lost out on the addition of half a billion pounds to Scottish gross domestic product and around 2,500 jobs by 2019. That huge missed opportunity for Scotland comes from our not being a member state of Europe, and it shows why it is in the interests of every farmer and crofter and all our rural communities to vote yes in September.

We meet after what has been another eventful year for our important fishing industry. We started this year by breathing a sigh of relief after the negotiations in December 2012, having avoided a further cut in the number of days at sea allowed to our vessels and having protected our vital North Sea cod quota. That soon gave way to increasing anxiety over the persistent and worrying scarcity of prawns in our waters, which lasted throughout the first half of the year. We acted to bring the fleet through those tough times, with a jointly agreed action plan worth £6 million launched in the middle of the year. That included a £3 million hardship fund to help vessels that were suffering exceptional economic distress to get through an acutely bad patch, endured as a result of the dramatic fall in prawn catches that, as we all recall, was in the headlines. Our fishermen are among the most resilient in the world. I am glad to say that, more recently, prawn catches have bounced back and catches of white fish have held up very well. Indeed, the industry’s dynamism was on display only last week when we saw more than 28,000 boxes of fish landed in Peterhead alone in a single week, which is one of the highest catches ever recorded in the past decade. In addition, Shetland has set—even though we have yet to reach the end of the year—a new annual record for the number of boxes of fish sold, with the figure heading towards 275,000 boxes for the year, which eclipses the previous high set in 2008 of more than 260,000 boxes. That shows how our fishermen continue to brave the elements to bring Scotland’s superb seafood ashore and help to feed not only Scots but populations around the world. Scottish seafood cannot always compete on volume but, with its strong emphasis on provenance and sustainability, it produces the utmost quality, which overseas markets crave. That is why we are striving to expand opportunities overseas, driving up the value of Scottish produce and maximising the income for all those involved—from net to plate. We are also supporting the industry closer to home. I am delighted to announce the latest package of awards under the European Fisheries Fund. This is the 11th round of awards under the EFF, supporting some 45 new projects with more than £3.1 million-worth of support, enabling investment of more than £11 million. Since the launch of the EFF in 2008, it has delivered an impressive £76 million of awards and £170 million of investment in Scotland. We will make the most of the fund. However, Scotland receives only £46 million under the EFF, which equates to only 40 per cent of the funding available to the United Kingdom. That does not reflect the size of our fishing industry and pales into insignificance compared with the funding in excess of £100 million given to countries such as Lithuania and Denmark. The industry deserves the support of the Parliament and the Government. As I stand here at the end of another topsy-turvy year—at times distressing and challenging; at times buoyant—I am struck by the constant uncertainty and the unpredictable ups and downs of this great industry. I am also struck by its steady resilience and its unerring spirit in the face of those challenges. Unflinching support for our fishermen is foremost in my mind as we approach the vital first round of negotiations in Brussels next week.

Yes. I will come on to that very important point on the shared stocks between the EU and Norway if the member will just hold on. I mentioned that the first round of negotiations will take place next week. As Tavish Scott alludes to, we will decide at those talks only the quotas for those stocks wholly within the EU’s waters. To answer his point, the negotiations on the North Sea stocks shared between the EU and Norway, such as cod, haddock, whiting and saithe, have been postponed until a second round of talks that will take place early next year. That is not the first time that such delays have happened, but it is the situation that we will again face next year. All is still to play for. Across many of those stocks, the situation this year, as often before, will be challenging. Unlike last year, the scientific advice for a number of stocks is for reductions in some quotas. That is a reflection not of the conservation efforts of our fishermen but of a lack of juvenile fish coming through, which is simply the way of things when dealing with a biological resource. However, within those circumstances, I am determined to negotiate the best possible deal for Scotland’s fishermen and their communities this month and to meet the many challenges coming down the line in the policy landscape in the months and years ahead. On that note, just a few hours ago the final part of the common fisheries policy reform process was completed, when the European Parliament took its final vote. The new CFP will become law on 1 January 2014. There will be a ban on discards in the pelagic fisheries in 2016, and a ban on discards for all species by 2019. I am sure that all members are aware that that will transform fishing practices in our waters. The industry and other sectors who are involved are very much aware of that. At last, an end to the wasteful practice of throwing dead fish back into the sea is in sight, and decision making can be brought closer to home, as we move away from the dreadful one-size-fits-all, top-down approach of the old CFP, which has been so damaging. I hope that decisions and plans will be taken forward on a more regional basis and will deliver more sensible and practical proposals for our industry. As usual, our work will be cut out for us in the December talks as we fight to protect Scotland’s position. We will be guided, as ever, by three fundamental principles; first, our approach will be guided by the science on stocks and sustainability; secondly, we will protect the social and economic wellbeing of our industry and the communities who depend on it; and, thirdly, we will act in line with our commitment to achieve discard-free fisheries. Those principles are underpinned by our conviction that conservation and stability of stocks will deliver long-term economic health for the whole industry, onshore and offshore. That is our key message. With a view to achieving all that, I have set key objectives for our negotiations. First, we need to minimise the burdens of the deeply flawed cod recovery plan. I will again demand a freeze in the days at sea that are allocated to Scotland. I will ask the European Commission to ensure that no more automatic cuts are permitted—otherwise our fleet simply will not have enough time at sea to catch its quotas. Another aim is to secure a cod quota that reflects reality. In the North Sea, cod mortality is at its lowest since assessments started in 1963. Our fishers are seeing the stock in ever-greater numbers, and their findings are backed up by scientists. If we were slavishly to follow the long-term management plan for North Sea cod, which was set in stone a few years ago, we would have to agree to a 9 per cent reduction in the North Sea cod catch, which seems perverse given the stock’s increasing abundance year on year and the certainty that a quota reduction will simply serve to increase discards, which is the exact opposite of one of our key objectives and indeed of one of the European Commission’s supposed key objectives. The science shows that a modest increase in the allowable catch for North Sea cod will allow the stock to continue to grow in abundance and deliver a sustainable fishery for the long term. That is why I have pressed for the UK to make a moderate increase in the North Sea cod quota a top priority at next week’s negotiations. Another key priority is to secure increased flexibility in where the fleet can catch its valuable monkfish quota, which will be vital in allowing our vessels to fish more efficiently and sustainably. Currently we have only 5 per cent flexibility; in my view we need at least 20 per cent if we are to make a genuine difference to how the fishery is conducted. I will work to ensure that the UK vigorously sticks to such a position throughout the talks, because it is important for a number of our fishermen. In other areas, we need to begin the transition to a discard ban. If we are to run trials in which vessels can start to land all that they catch, which is the fundamental point of a discard ban, we need the Commission to provide fishermen with additional quota to cover the fish that they are currently forced to discard. The Commission must give us the tools to get on with the job of putting in place a sensible and practicable discard ban in our waters. On the west coast fishery, in the talks next week I want to maximise our valuable hake opportunities and to secure the flexibility that I mentioned in relation to catching monkfish. We welcome the recent advice on increases in the Rockall haddock fishery, which is important to the west coast. In addition, we have worked hard over the past year to put in place rigorous cod avoidance measures on the west coast, to conserve stock and get it on the road to recovery. I will press the Commission to ensure that our fishermen have the means and the flexibility to make the transition to a discard ban, identifying the issues and the solutions. Fishermen will clearly need additional quota if that is to happen. If Brussels refuses that, it will quite simply be planning for failure of the discard ban. We cannot allow that to happen. That is why, in negotiations earlier this year, I fought hard for regionalisation to be at the heart of the reformed common fisheries policy. We cannot have an effective discard ban unless the principle of regionalisation is adhered to and decisions are taken closer to home. I am pleased to say that the process is coming to life. Regional groups for the North Sea and our western waters were swiftly established and regional plans for delivering on the discard ban are beginning to take shape. Having pushed for decentralisation from Brussels, I am determined that the Commission should provide the regions with the tools that they require if they are to make discards a thing of the past. We always seem to face stiff challenges and difficult decisions at the end-of-year fisheries negotiations, but what those negotiations are all about—what they will mean in the real world for our fishermen and the women who work in the industry, what they can fish, how much they can catch, where they can catch it, how much time they will have at sea to catch it and all the consequences for the onshore sector—is never out of our minds. I will ensure that Scotland’s priorities are uppermost in the minds of the UK ministers, and we will do our utmost to fight for Scotland’s interests right across the board. Our aim throughout the negotiations will be to build and maintain a strong platform for our industry offshore and onshore—a platform that will do justice to the resilience and ingenuity that are shown by our fishermen, and which will allow them to continue to thrive in 2014, by putting premium Scottish seafood on dining tables throughout Scotland and around the globe. I move, That the Parliament supports the Scottish Government in its efforts to achieve the best possible outcome for Scotland across the range of ongoing annual negotiations and agrees that the negotiated settlements must have at their heart the interests of Scotland’s fishermen and coastal communities while seeking to ensure the sustainable use of Scotland’s marine environment and its natural resources.

Once again, this has been a helpful and useful debate prior to the end-of-year bun fight that takes place in Brussels every December. These annual fisheries negotiations are so important to the future of our coastal economies, our seafood sector and the wider fishing industry. I feel the weight on my shoulders as I head out to Brussels on Sunday for a two-day or three-day marathon, no doubt overnight and without sleep at some points, as is often the case in those mad surroundings. However, it is important that Scotland is represented there, given the importance of the fishing industry and seafood to Scotland. I thank the many members from all parties for their fine speeches today. Alex Fergusson enjoyed the subject so much that he wants to come back and debate it again on Christmas day. He may be a lone voice on that particular suggestion, but I agreed with many of the other points that he made. Claudia Beamish referred to what she was giving her partner for Christmas, which I thought rather spoiled the surprise. I am sure, however, that he never reads in the Official Report the comments that his partner makes in the Scottish Parliament. I congratulate Christian Allard on his first speech in the annual fishing debate. He reflected on his more than 20 years of experience of working in the north-east of Scotland fishing industry. It is fantastic to have his experience of the industry in the Parliament and to have heard from him during the debate. As he is French, I am trying to work out how we can use his ability and his negotiating and diplomatic skills, given that we sometimes have issues with the French in relation to some North Sea stocks. Perhaps we could make Christian the hake envoy for Scotland—we are always trying to get hake quota off the French, so that is perhaps a new job that we could give to him. Many members have mentioned the quality of seafood from Scotland. I welcome that, because when we have such debates, we should always remember that, although they are about the technicalities, quota negotiations and all the other issues and bureaucracy surrounding them in Brussels, ultimately they are about the fantastic food that we are lucky enough to have in our waters. We are also lucky enough to have people with the skills, ingenuity, attitudes and aptitude to go out in all kinds of conditions to land that fantastic seafood for our own tables and the rest of the world. Given that around 50 per cent of our food exports are seafood, it contributes to their success. I am pleased that Claire Baker mentioned serving up that fantastic seafood in our schools. The Scottish Government has run the seafood in schools project for some time now with a lot of success in introducing many of our children to healthy and good-quality Scottish seafood. My son is just as fussy as most other children of his age. It is encouraging that, when he comes back from his school dinners in Moray, he always compliments the fish, which he says is his favourite thing on the school menu. That is good news. There are schools across the country that serve up seafood. A number of issues have been mentioned. I want first to turn to the talks between the EU and Norway. Many members have mentioned different dimensions of those talks, but there are essentially two dimensions to them. There is an on-going mackerel dispute, which is, of course, of international significance and of crucial importance to Scotland, and there are the white-fish stocks that are shared between the EU and Norway and are often the subject of separate negotiations. Those negotiations have been postponed to early 2014, as have the mackerel negotiations. It is fair to say that those negotiations are not completely divorced from each other. They are tangled up to a degree, but in past years the white-fish negotiations on some of the crucial North Sea stocks, such as haddock and cod, have been carried out early in the following year due to their being postponed. The guidance that I have taken from our industry is that it is better to wait for a few months—perhaps even just a few weeks—to get the right result in the white-fish negotiations than to rush and have those negotiations on the normal schedule if we are not confident of getting the right result for Scotland. I take comfort from the fact that our industry understands the situation at the moment. There is a new minister in place in Norway, of course. She is getting to grips with her portfolio and all the complex issues that surround it, and she no doubt welcomes the extra few weeks to do that. The mackerel dispute is, of course, crucial. I am afraid that I have a slight issue with the Liberal Democrat amendment, as it seems to take the onus off having the option of securing a deal at the right time if the opportunity presents itself. Now that we have good science for the mackerel stock, there is a new atmosphere in trying to reach a deal in the dispute, which has gone on for several years now. I do not want to be bound by Parliament’s view, if possible, to avoid any opportunity that comes along to sign up to a deal if it is the right one for Scotland, so the wording of the Liberal Democrat amendment is not helpful. If we have the opportunity to secure the right deal for Scotland in the next few weeks or months, we should grasp that and put in place a stable management framework for an internationally important stock that is crucial for Scotland and which has to be governed on a sustainable basis. I put on record once again that I will not sign up to any deal that is unreasonable and unfair to Scotland, rewards irresponsible behaviour from Iceland, the Faroes or any other country, and does not take into account the fact that Scotland, like many other countries in Europe, has been responsible over the past years and was part of an international management regime until the agreement broke down. That regime led to the stock being so healthy in the first place and to those other countries being able to take their quotas, which, unfortunately, they have established on a unilateral basis. I am happy to support the Labour and Conservative amendments, which add to the motion, and I hope that the Liberal Democrats and other parties sign up to the final motion so that we can move forward with one voice. Presiding Officer, before I address any other issues, can I check how long I have in the debate?

Okay. Eight more minutes or eight minutes altogether?

Thank you. The talks between the EU and Norway are therefore crucial; let me now turn to members’ comments on the cod recovery plan. Lewis Macdonald made a very good point when he alluded to the fact that we have a regulatory straitjacket that is the cod recovery plan, which was signed up to a few years ago and reflected circumstances at the time. This Government, of course, was not happy with the particular wording of the plan back then, and here we are in 2013 looking at the current fishing biology and circumstances with a plan that was designed a few years ago—a plan that is being adhered to time and again by a European Commission backed up by its lawyers. At the forefront of our minds should be what is best for the cod stock and a reasonable outcome for our fishing industries. We do not want a situation in which Europe implements a 9 per cent cut because that is what the plans says. The cod recovery plan leads to more cod discards in our waters, forcing our fishermen to have the abhorrent experience of throwing good-quality fish—that is dead—overboard back into the sea. It is therefore good that the scientists, environmental organisations, the Scottish Government and all other parties in the chamber back a reasonable outcome and the potential for a modest increase in that quota. A difficulty with the cod recovery plan is that it has had a huge negative impact on fleets’ ability to catch other stocks. It has been difficult for the Scottish fleet to catch other healthy stocks, because the state of the cod stock and the related legislation that it must adhere to means that it is not allowed to visit parts of the sea at certain times. The inflexibility in the cod recovery plan is so damaging to the Scottish fleet, and we must get it changed as quickly as possible. A number of big challenges are on the horizon. We have the short-term challenges of next week’s quota negotiations, which we have discussed at length; the mackerel dispute that forms the backdrop of the negotiations—I hope that we can get a deal on that signed up to in the next few weeks and months; and the implementation of the discard ban, which will be possible only if we have genuine regionalisation in place. We do not want the detail in our complex fisheries decided in Brussels over the implementation of a discard ban; rather, we must work in partnership with our own industries and scientists in Scotland and those in other countries in the same waters to put the right measures into place.

I am happy to confirm that, as I alluded to in my opening remarks, I will not support any deal that leads to any cut in days at sea for the Scottish fleet. It is ridiculous that, in 2013, we are still in a legal quagmire given that we all accept in Europe that the cod recovery plan is flawed and does not work in the way that it should. Indeed, many countries agree that there should be no further cuts in days at sea, and yet once again we have such a formal proposal from the European Commission. We must fight against that proposal next week, but I am hopeful of a good outcome. I will be demanding the support of the UK Government in taking that approach forward. I thank members for their contributions. As I said, there are short-term challenges to face as well as the long-term challenges that include the discard ban and implementing regionalisation. We are fighting for a valuable industry for Scotland that lands fantastic seafood for our tables in this country and throughout the world. There is light at the end of the tunnel—if we can get through some of the challenges of the next year or two, we will be talking about a prosperous fishing industry for many years to come, with sustainable fish stocks in our waters. That is a win-win situation for everyone. I ask the industry for its patience and its co-operation and to continue the resilient attitude in the years ahead, so that we can achieve that success for Scotland.

It is, of course, important that we have the supply to meet the burgeoning demand in our food and drink sector and to take advantage of its opportunities. One of the products that are most in demand is our fantastic red meat, which has a reputation throughout the world for provenance and quality. To ensure that we can respond to the growing demand, I have asked Jim McLaren, the chair of Quality Meat Scotland, to establish a short-life industry group to examine what can be done to upscale the supply of primary beef production. We hope to have its recommendations in late spring.

I urge our beef farmers in Scotland to produce for the fantastic export markets that are developing around the world. It would be unfortunate if we did not have the supply available to take advantage of those opportunities for Scotland’s economy and our food and drink industry. A number of factors affect the affordability and viability of producing beef, and they will have to be taken into account in how the common agricultural policy reforms are implemented in Scotland. Within the industry, if the most efficient farmers were able to pass on their knowledge to other farmers and they were all able to cut costs, that would help each individual business. A number of factors need to be taken into account, which include business changes as well as having the right support mechanisms in place.

I met Iain Gulland, director of Zero Waste Scotland, most recently two weeks ago, at the opening of Dryden Aqua’s award-winning glass reprocessing plant. It is a fantastic company—and project—for Scotland, with international benefits. During our chat, we discussed what can be done to help the company to source recycled glass from households throughout Scotland. On 20 March this year, I hosted a summit to discuss Scotland’s litter problem, at which I met all key stakeholders, including the chief executive of Keep Scotland Beautiful. We discussed a range of ideas to help to tackle litter throughout Scotland.

I am sure that we all share the member’s condemnation of those people in Scotland who think that it is acceptable behaviour to litter their communities and Scotland’s beautiful landscapes. The member is right that we are addressing the issue in legislation; indeed stage 2 amendments were passed this morning in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee to increase the fixed penalties for littering from £50 to £80 and to quadruple fly-tipping fixed penalties to £200 from 1 April 2014. We will also publish our updated litter strategy next year and I would be happy to bring the subject back to Parliament for debate. In the meantime, I know that many members have strong feelings about what to do to tackle litter and if anyone has any ideas, I would be delighted to hear from them. I hope that we can do our best to persuade the people of Scotland to look after their country and support Keep Scotland Beautiful’s campaign to clean up Scotland.

We have a desire to listen to people’s views on these issues and on exemptions. However, there is widespread support for the general thrust of the legislation, which is to introduce a levy on single-use bags. Given that a range of benefits are being experienced by other countries that have similar bans in place, we should certainly follow suit in this country. There are a number of issues to be ironed out in the detail of the legislation. I have an open mind about how we can address those.

The Orkney Fish Producers Organisation provides valuable support to the fishermen of Orkney, and the Government strongly supports the work that the organisation does to manage community quotas and to encourage new skippers into fishing. There are a range of issues on which the Government is in dialogue with the organisation and we will continue to work with it during 2014 to develop ideas on how we can support fishermen and deliver a number of initiatives locally. In the meantime, we will maintain the Government’s recognition of the producers organisation as those discussions continue.

As I said, constructive discussions are taking place between the Scottish Government and the Orkney fishermen to ensure that a valuable role continues to be delivered by the Orkney Fish Producers Organisation. Of course, we need to have that dialogue with the producers organisation because we are under an obligation to monitor these issues and that is why the discussions are important. As I said, we recognise the very valuable role that the PO carries out and we will maintain recognition.

I thank the member for raising this issue. As he will be aware, I will be making a full statement to the chamber on the budget allocation immediately after this question. The decision not to pass on the added budgets provided by Europe to the UK is hugely disappointing and will severely limit what we can deliver in this country under the future common agricultural policy. There will be less resource to support our food producers and we are now left with very difficult choices about how we allocate our budgets in Scotland. We considered that the full convergence uplift should rightly have come to Scotland because the UK was awarded it only because of Scotland’s very low average rate of direct payment supports, which was less than half the European average per hectare. All other parts of the UK are either at or above the European Union average. Without the convergence uplift, Scotland’s average per hectare rate will be only €128 per hectare by 2019, when the EU’s lowest average rate for member states will be €196 per hectare.

I am grateful for this opportunity to update Parliament on developments relating to farm payments and rural development funding from 2014 following the United Kingdom Government’s announcement on 8 November on the common agricultural policy budget allocations for the devolved Administrations. I know that the chamber appreciates that Scottish farming is deeply dependent on European payments to help our farmers compete and remain viable, to support our rural economy and, of course, to put food on our tables and to care for Scotland’s environments. The CAP budgets also support wider rural development and environment schemes the length and breadth of Scotland. Earlier this year, the European Union set its seven-year budget framework for 2014 to 2020. That included member states’ allocations under the common agricultural policy’s direct farm payments, which are known as pillar 1, and rural development payments, which are known as pillar 2. At the time, the Scottish Government was deeply disappointed with the deal that was negotiated by the United Kingdom, given Scotland’s demands for a fairer share of the EU budgets. However, once we knew the wider CAP budget at the EU and UK levels, all that remained was for the UK to announce the internal UK split of that budget. For pillar 1, Europe adopted a formula called external convergence. That increased the payments per hectare for all member states in which payments were below a threshold that was set at 90 per cent of the EU average. In addition, Europe said that no member state should end up with an average payment of less than €196 per hectare. Had Scotland been a member state, Scottish farmers and crofters would have received the full benefit of external convergence, which would have been an extra €1 billion—£850 million pounds—over the seven years, because our average payment per hectare is well below the EU threshold. However, while Scotland is part of the UK our low average payment is offset by the average payments in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. As a result of that, the UK as a whole received only €223 million—around £190 million—from external convergence. Nevertheless, despite our historically low share of funding, there was a chink of hope for Scotland. The average payment levels in England, Wales and Northern Ireland are all above the EU’s threshold. It was, therefore, clear that the UK’s uplift was a direct result of the low payments in Scotland. Were it not for Scotland, there would be no uplift for the UK; therefore, in the interests of justice, 100 per cent of the UK’s convergence uplift should come to Scotland. In a debate here on 1 October, it became clear that other parties shared that view. On 14 October, in an unusual step that illustrated Scotland’s unassailable case, rural affairs spokesmen from Labour, the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats joined me in writing a letter on the matter to Owen Paterson at the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. However, in his announcement last Friday, Mr Paterson delivered a slap in the face to Scottish agriculture by deciding that the uplift would not be allocated to Scotland after all. Instead, he divided it among all parts of the UK even though the average payments in England, Wales and Northern Ireland are already above the EU’s threshold. As a result of that decision, Scotland’s pillar 1 budget—direct payments for farms—will fall from €597 million in the current scheme year to €580 million in 2014 before recovering slightly to €587 million in 2019. That is a drop of 1.6 per cent in cash terms between 2013 and 2019, and it is an even bigger drop in real terms. Scotland will now receive just over 16 per cent of the external convergence funds rather than 100 per cent of them, which will leave us with an average payment of €128 per hectare in 2019. We are starting with an average payment of €130 per hectare, which is the lowest level in Europe, and we will be even further away from the EU threshold by 2019. The rest of the external convergence money will go to England, Wales and Northern Ireland, even though, in 2012-13, the average payment in Wales was €247 per hectare, which is 26 per cent above the minimum of €196 per hectare and 90 per cent above the average payment in Scotland; the average payment in England was €265 per hectare, which is over twice as much as the average payment in Scotland; and the average payment in Northern Ireland was €339 per hectare, which is more than two and a half times the average payment in Scotland. During my time in this job, there have been many examples of UK policy undermining Scottish agriculture. I thought that Hilary Benn’s decision a few years ago not to compensate sheep farmers for foot-and-mouth disease was a low point, but this is even worse than that. The decision goes against the intentions of the EU, it defies the wishes of the Scottish Parliament and it takes away from Scottish farmers and crofters resources that should be theirs and on which their livelihoods depend. It is no surprise that Scottish farming and crofting leaders are bitterly disappointed by Mr Paterson’s decision. The UK Government tries to defend its decision by quoting figures not on a per-hectare basis, but on a per-farm basis. However, that is spurious for several reasons. Different countries have different minimum farm sizes for the purposes of CAP budgets and policy, so there is no like-for-like comparison. The quality of land in Scotland is also much lower, with 85 per cent of our land having less favoured area status, so farms here are bound to be bigger. Most important, Europe’s entire external convergence process is based on a per-hectare formula. Europe decided that, for convergence, payments per farmer are totally irrelevant. It is ironic that, during the recent agriculture negotiations, Owen Paterson was the first to remind other member states at every opportunity that payments per farmer were a misleading and irrelevant measure. Indeed, in June he made the same point to our Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee. However, now, when it suits him, Owen Paterson is using the opposite argument to take funds away from Scottish agriculture. Moreover, Paterson argued to cut the CAP budget even more deeply than was agreed by Europe, but he is now saying that Scotland’s cash is required to help to mitigate cuts elsewhere in the UK. That is rank hypocrisy. Friday’s announcement contained two additional elements on pillar 1—the direct payments—that are presumably intended to sweeten the bitter pill. The first is that there is to be a review of the formula by 2016-17. However, the UK has made it clear to me that that review will look only at the next EU budget period, which starts in 2021, and that there will be no change whatever before then, so that is another red herring. In any case, what is a promise from Westminster worth when a UK general election and a referendum on EU membership are due to be held before then? The other additional element is on voluntary coupled support, which is a part of the policy that is vital for our livestock sector. Scotland asked the UK to secure the option of using up to 15 per cent of our direct payments budget for coupled support. Unfortunately, the UK accepted an unlevel playing field—a deal that let other member states use 13 per cent of their direct payments budget for coupled support, but which limited us to a figure of 8 per cent. Therefore, with the support of the industry, I asked Owen Paterson whether Scotland could apply coupled support above 8 per cent of our budget, provided that the UK as a whole remained below 8 per cent. Owen Paterson’s reply to me merely says that the UK Government is prepared to think about increasing our level of 8 per cent. In any case, that is just damage limitation, given the unlevel playing field that we are starting with, and it would give no extra money to Scotland, as any extra coupled support would have to be funded from within Scotland’s existing budgets. That is small comfort to Scotland’s farmers in the context of the overall direct payments decision. I have spoken about pillar 1 of the CAP, on direct farm payments, but Friday’s announcement also covered pillar 2, which is important not only to farmers, but to all those who are interested in the environment and our rural communities. Here, the European Commission started with high hopes of replacing the current arbitrary allocations with a system that would be based on objective criteria. That principle, which was strongly supported by the UK Government, should have benefited Scotland, given that under the old system—the existing system—we started out with lower pillar 2 or rural development funding per hectare than every member state. However, vested interests resisted change and the final deal was based, essentially, on historical figures, except that 16 member states insisted on getting special uplifts. The UK could easily have argued for such an uplift for Scotland, especially given our position of having the lowest payments in the UK and Europe, but it chose not to do so. In relation to the within-UK decision, the Scottish Government urged DEFRA to stick to its principles and to use objective criteria, but DEFRA has chosen to go with history, so Scotland will get €477.8 million of pillar 2 or rural development funding for 2014-20. That is 18.5 per cent of the UK total, which is the same as our share in 2007-13. The UK Government makes much of the fact that, in cash terms, that is a 7.8 per cent increase but, by the UK Government’s own figures, it equates to a 5.5 per cent decrease in real terms. The overall result of the UK Government’s negotiations and decisions is that Scotland will get the lowest per hectare funding in Europe—our rate will be lower than that of every member state in both pillars of the new CAP. In pillar 1, even the lowest funded of the other member states will get one and a half times what Scotland will get per hectare. Ireland will get twice our rate and Belgium will get three times our rate. On pillar 2—the rural development funding—the comparisons are even worse. Even the EU average is more than six times our puny rate of €12 per hectare, and member states such as Austria and Slovenia will get 15 to 20 times the amount that we will get per hectare. Our environment and our rural communities will be much worse off. The position that we find ourselves in is deeply regrettable. As I said at the outset, we will have some tough decisions to take in the times ahead. We are talking about the future of our rural communities, our environment, farming businesses, food businesses, village facilities and other rural facilities. The issue is extremely serious for Scotland. I deeply regret the appalling budget position that we are in as a result of the UK Government not making Scottish agriculture a priority. When I meet farmers’ leaders later this afternoon, I will assure them that the Scottish Government will continue to work with them and our rural communities to make the case for justice and fairness.

First, I welcome Claire Baker’s support for the convergence uplift coming to Scotland. Her support was valuable in helping to make Scotland’s case. In response to her comments, though, I should point out that an independent Scotland simply could not do any worse than it has in the negotiations that the UK Government carried out. I must remind the member that Europe adopted a formula that applies to all member states. It does not apply to some member states but not to other member states; it applies to all member states. Therefore, if Scotland was a member state, the formula would have applied to Scotland and we would have gained €1 billion euros and not faced the cut that we currently face. That is the benefit of being a member state in the common agricultural policy negotiations. On the UK Government’s agreement to have a review, I have to say that 2017 is quite far away from now. It is post the in-out referendum on Europe—which will be in that year if the UK Government happens to be returned to office—and, of course, it is post the next UK general elections in 2015. Given that I am already dealing with probably my fifth secretary of state from DEFRA over the past five or six years, I think that we will have had even more down the line by 2017. I therefore feel that the commitment to a review is pretty worthless to Scotland and Scottish agriculture. We had the opportunity here and now to deliver the uplift for Scotland, but unfortunately the UK Government has decided to give us a slap in the face, ignore justice and fairness, and deliver a cut instead of a substantial increase.

Again, I thank Alex Fergusson for his support for Scotland’s position. I know that our agricultural sector very much appreciated the cross-party support that it had for its case for 100 per cent of the uplift to come to Scotland. On pillar 2 budgets, even with the cash increase of the pillar 2 funds, we will still have the lowest level of rural development funding in the UK and the whole of Europe. That is something not to celebrate but to regret. The member’s first question was about whether I will work to improve the formula for Scotland and our future budget negotiations. Of course I will do that. I always work in the interests of Scottish agriculture. What I have been doing for the past few years, and specifically in the past few months in relation to the budget negotiations, is putting the interests of Scottish agriculture first. It is just a real pity that Alex Fergusson’s counterpart, his colleague in the Conservative Party south of the border, is not doing likewise.

I believe that, when the new Secretary of State for Scotland, Alistair Carmichael, looks back—I was going to say “in a few years”, but perhaps even in a few days—he will be deeply embarrassed by his comments in response to Owen Paterson’s decision last Friday. More important, however, I think that his constituents in Orkney and Shetland will be deeply disappointed and will feel betrayed by the lack of support that they have had from the Secretary of State for Scotland on the issue. However, it is not too late for him to get behind Scotland’s cause in the coming days and weeks over the issue and the fact that he stood by Owen Paterson’s completely indefensible decision. I congratulate Stewart Stevenson on his detective skills. He is quite right to highlight that comment from June 2013. We have special challenges in this country, and that is why a formula is in place to ensure that the funding is decided on a per hectare basis.

Various pieces of work are under way, and our own consultations in Scotland are about to be launched on the rural development programme and the direct payments element of the common agricultural policy. On the member’s comment about not having confidence in the review, I note that we have another dispute with the UK Government over the fact that our producers’ red meat levies go south of the border and are not used for promoting Scottish red meat produce. After raising the issue with UK Governments for several years, we were promised a few months ago that a review will happen in the future; likewise with the really important issue of the funding formula and convergence of payments between Scotland and the rest of Europe. Last week, the decision could have been made in Scotland’s favour. It was not made in Scotland’s favour, but we were promised a review a few years down the line. It is a fudge, and that is all that we are getting from the secretary of state, Owen Paterson.

As I said in my statement, there are two sources of funding through the common agricultural policy. The first is direct payments for farming and food production, and the second is rural development funding, which is pillar 2—and unfortunately we have a rotten deal there as well. Many of the schemes to support Scotland’s natural environment, such as forestry and agri-environment schemes, are funded through pillar 2, so we are missing a huge opportunity to help many communities, organisations and, most important, Scotland’s environment by having a proper funding stream and a proper deal under pillar 2.

I gave a very cautious welcome to the decision to increase coupled payments from 8 per cent. We understand that the Secretary of State for Scotland has said that that could potentially go to 10 per cent, although we are still waiting for the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, Owen Paterson, to confirm that. I do not think that anyone in this chamber seriously views a move from 8 to 10 per cent as a fundamental shift that will help to bring huge benefits to Scottish agriculture. It is perhaps a small step in the right direction, but other countries are getting 13 per cent, which perhaps puts it into perspective. On plans for moving from an historic to an area basis, which is the big challenge of the new policy in Scotland, we will, as I said, launch in December the consultation on how the options are shaping up. The question is whether the transition is quick or slow, and that is one of the fundamental questions that we are speaking to the industry about.

We find ourselves in a strange set of circumstances. If we were independent in Europe, we would have €1 billion—£850 million—more for direct payments for food production in Scotland. As part of the union, we are not getting near enough our fair share of even the UK allocation, never mind Europe’s allocation. If we go outside Europe under a Conservative or Labour Government down south—those parties have policies of removing direct support from Scottish agriculture—there is the potential to have no support for agriculture in Scotland. We would be at the mercy of a Government in London that was outside the common agricultural policy, so the likelihood is that there would be no direct support for Scottish agriculture. That is the serious choice that faces our farmers, crofters and rural communities.

There were a number of questions in there. On preparation for the new rural development programme, we will launch a consultation in a few weeks’ time. I have already put on record our desire for the programme to be a lot simpler and a lot more focused, and we want to learn the lessons from the existing rural development programme, which at times has been too bureaucratic and has not provided the right support to the right people, albeit that overall it has been very successful. The Scottish Government did not design the existing rural development programme, of course; we inherited it from the previous Administration. On the use of coupled payments, again I have put it on record that I envisage that there is a case for supporting the beef sector through the use of that mechanism. It is clear that it will all depend on what the final percentage is in respect of our budget for coupled payments and the results of our consultation. There are differences in support for the beef and sheep sectors through coupled payments. Some approaches are more complicated than others in terms of delivery. We must take all those factors into account.

I agree with the comments of crofting leaders, who must be gutted by last week’s decision, given the fragility of many of our crofting communities. The reason why support exists in the first place, of course, is to help our crofters meet the various challenges that they face, from the climatic and geographical challenges to the challenges of the fragile communities in which crofting is often based. That is why the funding is so important. It is about not only the direct payments to farms and agriculture, which many crofts benefit from, but how much money can be made available to the rural development programme, from which the less favoured area payments and other support for crofting flow. The debate is therefore relevant and crucial for our crofters in Scotland.

In the letter that I received last Friday from Owen Paterson, the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, he announced the regrettable decision but said that he is willing to consider giving Scotland some of the UK’s flexibility to use our budget to move from 8 to 10 per cent for coupled payments to support livestock. However, he also appeared to suggest that there might be some legal and other bureaucratic issues around that and that those would have to be ironed out. My officials will speak to UK officials to find out exactly what obstacles the UK envisages and how we can access that potential extra flexibility.

To answer the member’s latter point first, it is obvious to all that I believe that every political party in the Scottish Parliament gives Scottish agriculture a higher priority than any party running the Westminster Government would ever give, which is illustrated by the appalling track record of successive Westminster Governments. The point about the wider benefit of agricultural support to the rural economy is important. We are not just talking about the direct payments that go to farmers through the first pillar of the policy; we are talking about money that is spent in other businesses in our local communities—we are talking about the whole supply chain in wider rural communities. When they get their single farm payment through the CAP, farmers invest it locally in services and the supply chain, which is of huge benefit to rural employment and the rural economy. The UK Government’s decision is a blow not just to our farmers but to Scotland’s wider rural economy.

Alison Johnstone asks a good question. One of the new common agricultural policy’s key objectives is to ensure that agriculture across Scotland and all Europe is greener than it was before. Of course, many of the measures that will have to be adopted will come through not just regulation of direct payments but the rural development funds for agri-environment schemes and other low-carbon schemes that I would like to see included in the new rural development programme for Scotland. The less funding that we have available, the less we can make those special and important projects happen throughout Scotland, and that is to the detriment of Scotland’s biodiversity, natural environment and climate change targets.

The pillar of funding that comes through the common agricultural policy for rural development—pillar 2—is very important and, as David Stewart suggests, we are able to transfer funds between the two pillars: we can take funds out of pillar 1, which is farming support, and put them into pillar 2, which is rural development funding. Many pillar 2 schemes also benefit agricultural and wider rural Scotland. We must take a decision on the balance of that transfer, or the extent to which we impose a transfer, by the end of this year, and there will be a mini-consultation with the industry before we decide what percentage we should transfer from pillar 1 to pillar 2. As I have just implied, there is likely to be a transfer from pillar 1 to pillar 2 because of our appallingly low pillar 2 allocation for rural development. If we want to deliver the benefits that David Stewart refers to, we have to have a substantial rural development budget.

I regularly take the opportunity while attending Council of Ministers meetings in Brussels to promote to the Commission and, indeed, others Scotland’s fantastic food and drink industry and the growth that it has enjoyed over the past few years.

I of course warmly welcome the Commission’s proposals to strengthen the regulatory controls in country-of-origin labelling, which is what the member is referring to. That will enable our food and drink sector to ensure that everyone is aware of the provenance and quality credentials of our food and drink, which more and more consumers are looking for in this country and throughout Europe. We are paying close attention to the other issues that are part of the discussions in Brussels, such as extending country-of-origin labelling to processed products, which is clearly a very topical issue. Again, the Scottish Government will make its views known, because we want to see a proportionate extension of country-of-origin labelling.

That is a very good question, because there are many small food and drink producers who are already successful and beginning to export or who are new producers who wish to do that. We are working closely with Scottish Development International and other bodies such as Scotland Food and Drink to ensure that relevant support is made available. I had a meeting recently with small producers in Arran, and it was very exciting to hear about their ambitious projects to work together, which is certainly one way to do it. If small producers work together, they can perhaps bring together the kind of resources that a bigger producer might have and can have an overseas presence to get into new markets. We also want to support that.

The European waste incineration directive imposes stringent emission standards and controls on pyrolysis and other thermal treatment facilities. Before any new plant can begin operations, it must obtain a pollution prevention and control permit from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and, to obtain that, an operator is required to undertake a detailed environmental risk assessment to demonstrate that there will be no negative impact on the environment. Moreover, SEPA has a range of regulatory enforcement tools for dealing with each application.

I recognise the concerns that have been expressed by communities, but a robust planning regime is in place as well as an environmental regime. Each application must be treated on its merits and, as the member’s question illustrates, there are examples of applications being refused by the authorities. The system is robust and the circumstances of each application must be taken into account.

For several weeks, we have pressed the United Kingdom Government for a resolution on this urgent matter, given that we are talking about around €4 billion of European funding for the UK. We have presented strong arguments—which are supported across the chamber—on why Scotland should receive a fairer allocation of the overall funding and why the full CAP convergence uplift that the UK will receive should come to Scotland. The ball is now firmly in the secretary of state’s court in Whitehall to do the right thing for Scotland’s industry, and I hope that we will receive positive news soon.

As the member knows, under the CAP that has just been negotiated for 2014 to 2020, a new funding formula was agreed to close the gap between countries that have poorer payments per hectare and countries that have higher payments. We estimate that, if Scotland had been a member state, we would have qualified for an extra €1 billion to come to Scotland under the formula, given that we are third bottom of the league. Thanks to the UK’s poor negotiations and its not prioritising Scotland’s interests, it looks as though we will be bottom of the league under the new arrangements. That relates just to direct payments under pillar 1. Under pillar 2, which provides rural development funding, it looks as though we will be bottom of the league as well. Other countries negotiated an uplift in their rural development funds, but the UK did not do that for Scotland.

As I have said, and as I said in the debate in Parliament a few weeks ago, the decisions that we take—including the decision on the extent to which we transfer from pillar 1 to pillar 2—will be influenced by the size of the overall budget. The smaller the budget, the more difficult will be the decisions that we must take. I am sure that Claire Baker will also ask for decent funding for environment schemes and other schemes under pillar 2, which is on rural development, but we do not have the budget to satisfy all the demands, because of the poor negotiation result that the UK Government delivered for Scotland. As for negotiations on Scotland being in Europe as an independent country, no one seriously thinks that Scotland will not be permitted to enter the European Union. CAP budget payments will continue, because the budget is already in place for 2014 to 2020. Given that an independent Scotland would be a net contributor to that budget, it is ludicrous to suggest in any forum that Scotland would be denied its farming payments under independence.

I say to the member that of course we will consult the industry on the new common agricultural policy, and we will stick to our consulting schedule for the rural development programme: the pillar 2 funding in November and the pillar 1 funding—the direct single farm payments, or the new area payments—in December. We will stick to that schedule. As regards how the budgets were calculated, if the member looks at the results that other member states within Europe achieved in the negotiations, he will see that the result is not down to historical reasons; it is down to the lack of willingness by the UK Government to negotiate on behalf of Scotland’s farmers. That is what determined the pitiful low budgets that we have under pillar 1 and under pillar 2. Billions of euros will be lost to Scotland’s rural businesses and rural farms as a result of that poor negotiation. Those are the facts and the hard reality of the poor deal that is delivered for Scotland as part of the UK.

It is estimated that Scotland exported approximately £400 million-worth of crop, animal and hunting-related products to the rest of the UK and approximately £75 million-worth of such products to the rest of the world in 2011. Our primary production sector supports Scotland’s food and drink exports and, indeed, the overall performance of the food and drink sector’s growth in this country. With £5.4 billion-worth of food and drink exports in 2012, we hope to build on that success and meet the ambitious target that we have set of food and drink exports reaching £7.1 billion-worth by 2017.

I regret James Kelly’s scaremongering and his attempts to sow doubts and uncertainty. If that is the sort of politics that he wants to conduct, it is fair enough—we will come back with our positive case for independence, and he can stick to his negative politics. For instance, Ireland—small country, not far from here—exports roughly the same per head of population to England and the rest of the UK as we do. It does not seem to have encountered any problems in being a successful country and exporting to those markets, so why on earth would Scotland? The benefits for Scotland are illustrated by my answer to the previous question. As an independent member of the European Union, we will be able to negotiate a much better funding package for our farmers and crofters in rural communities, which will bring great benefits. The biggest threat to our access to markets elsewhere comes from the Tory Government’s threat to hold an EU referendum. If Scotland was taken out of the EU by the UK, that would be the biggest threat to our food and drink sector.

That is another good question, and it helps to answer the previous question from James Kelly, in that another benefit of independence would be that the levy raised by the livestock sector here in Scotland would stay in Scotland to promote Scottish livestock produce. Unfortunately, the current UK Government is making no progress in returning to Scotland what is rightfully its levy—paid by Scottish livestock producers—but which has unfortunately been used to promote produce from the rest of the UK and not from here.

Food waste is a global challenge, as 1.3 billion tonnes per year—a third of the food that is produced—is wasted. Government, individuals and businesses all have responsibilities to address that. We are already working with retailers and major brands to use their influence to cut waste in households and supply chains. Last year’s national food waste reduction campaign combined awareness raising with practical tips on how to reduce waste at home. We will reinforce those messages in a follow-up campaign in the new year, and we will encourage more food waste recycling in the 1.2 million households that now have a separate food waste collection service, following our investment of almost £20 million through the zero waste programme over the past three years.

I am due to meet the retailers forum that was set up by the Scottish Government. Given Bill Kidd’s question, I will make a point of raising that issue with the supermarket representatives when I meet them very shortly. On the pretty scandalous figures that Bill Kidd mentioned, I acknowledge that many retailers are conducting food collections that go to good causes—that is a significant move that we should acknowledge—but they could look much harder at their practices, their pricing mechanisms and the arrangements within each retail store that lead to there being so much food waste. For instance, we all know the impact of two-for-one deals on particular goods. There is a lot more that retailers could do to cut down food waste in our society, so I ask them to live up to their responsibilities to do that.

Those are very good questions. As I illustrated in my previous answer, we have moved on from the position that we were in only a few years ago, when very few homes had food waste collections, to 1.2 million households in Scotland now having separate food waste collection. I hope that that helps to connect with all householders in Scotland who are now putting their food waste out for collection and who were not previously doing so. I hope that it will help to change our culture so that we appreciate the costs, both financial and environmental, of food waste.

As John Wilson will know, the uplift is an important and serious issue for Scotland’s agricultural and rural sector. I was pleased that colleagues from all across the chamber were willing to write jointly to the United Kingdom Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs to set out the unassailable argument for the external convergence money to come to Scotland. That demonstrates the overwhelming support in the Parliament on the issue. I hope that Owen Paterson will recognise that and do the right thing for Scotland’s farmers and rural communities.

Under our latest estimates, the uplift that the UK will receive—it is only because Scotland is currently part of the UK that the UK qualifies for the uplift—will amount to around €220 million between now and 2019. Given that the UK is receiving the uplift only because of Scotland, we believe, as do all members in the Parliament, that 100 per cent of that uplift should come to Scotland.

I am pleased to confirm that the first instalment of almost £900,000 has been paid to around 600 farmers, whose applications for support were approved by the joint Government and industry working group. We are now in the process of clarifying some information about a further 50 applications. There will also be a further payment next year.

Due to the financial discipline—if Clare Adamson is referring to the subject that I think she is referring to—that is being imposed by the European Commission, there will be a small percentage decrease in single farm payments in the coming year. Thankfully it is, as a result of negotiations, a much smaller decrease than was expected, so we must put it in perspective. Single farm payments will be roughly the same as they have been in previous years, so I hope that the impact will not be too great.

The Scottish Government is working with the seafood sector to deliver a range of activities that seek to encourage people to eat Scottish fish. They include the eat more fish campaign, first launched in 2009, and on-going initiatives such as the seafood in schools project, which aims to teach schoolchildren where seafood comes from, and the eat in season campaign, which has a strong seafood focus.

I have no doubt that Christian Allard’s healthy glow is down to the amount of seafood he eats each and every week. Of course, I agree with Christian Allard. We should get behind our fishing industry from net to plate. Scottish seafood is healthy, tasty and increasingly sustainable. We have to talk up the health benefits—especially as I am sitting next to the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing—because fish is packed with healthy essentials, such as protein, minerals and vitamins. Oily fish is also rich in omega 3, which has been shown to help protect against coronary heart disease. By eating at least two portions of fish a week, consumers can get a major health boost and support the fishing industry. I am sure that the chamber will want to join me in congratulating Roy Brett of the Ondine restaurant in Edinburgh, which recently won best Scottish restaurant at the British hospitality awards. Ondine is of course a seafood restaurant. More and more people in Scotland and who visit Scotland are enjoying Scottish seafood.

As Jamie McGrigor will be aware, the scientific advice for mackerel stock, which is subject to international dispute, was issued just last week and shows that there has been a healthy improvement in mackerel stock, despite the overfishing by some countries to which he refers. I hope that that provides us with a window of opportunity to allow the international dispute to be settled finally in the coming weeks and months. A lot of sensitive issues need to be negotiated, but of course I encourage all consumers from Scotland and elsewhere to enjoy the fantastic mackerel landed by Scottish fishermen, which is healthy and tasty.

Last year, the Scottish Government commissioned research that found that availability of co-products suitable for inclusion in animal feed rations, including draff, was at a historically high level. Following on from that, it has been agreed that the NFU Scotland will co-ordinate a diverse group of organisations to discuss and agree a set of actions that can be taken to ensure the continued supply of draff in the future.

As I just explained to the member, following concerns that were expressed last year, the Scottish Government undertook considerable work. That has now reported and the industry is taking forward some of the recommendations. It is worth bearing in mind that draff supplies have grown substantially in recent years in the wake of higher levels of Scotch whisky production, which is a sector that is absolutely booming. Significant quantities of draff are exported to England because of oversupply in Scotland. I recognise that some farmers in some localised areas of Scotland still have concerns about access to draff, which is a cheaper alternative to other animal feeds. We will keep a close eye on that situation.

The debate on the common agricultural policy for 2014 to 2020 provides an opportunity for the Government to update Parliament on the state of play in the European Union negotiations and our preparations in Scotland and to explain the next steps. The debate is well timed, as EU-level agreement on the CAP package was confirmed only last week. Europe still has to finish the formal adoption procedures, which will take until November or December, but the content of the deal has now been decided. This is a good time for the Government to update Parliament on that deal and its implications. Before delving into the detail, we should remind ourselves of the wider context. Nearly every country treats agriculture as a unique sector that often requires special treatment. Europe is no different. For 50 years, the CAP has supported European agriculture, initially to modernise it and recently to support its role in relation to the environment. As we all know, here in Scotland, CAP funding is vital. At just under £600 million, last year’s receipts from the CAP were almost the same as the net income from farming, which was just over £600 million. In many cases, our industry’s survival depends on a successful CAP. At the start of the process, one of our priorities was to bring new entrants and other excluded farmers into the CAP’s scope. We wanted to clamp down on slipper farming and to have sufficient coupled support to address declining livestock numbers. We supported greening the CAP, but we needed the details to be changed so that they would not affect farming operations disproportionately or have unintended consequences for the environment. We wanted to remove unnecessary red tape from the proposals and to have flexibility to tailor the new CAP to suit Scotland’s needs. Above all, we needed the United Kingdom Government to negotiate a decent outcome for us on the budget. It is fair to say that we were successful on nearly all those priorities. We achieved changes that will put past and future new entrants on a level playing field. We secured the so-called Scottish clause to clamp down on slipper farmers and we resisted an ineffective active farmer test that would have tied us up in red tape. We got more flexibility, for example, to ensure that properly farmed heather will be eligible, to choose our own timescale for phasing out payments with a historical basis and to decide for ourselves whether to cap or reduce big individual payments—so-called degressivity. We also achieved improvements on greening. The original proposals could have caused problems for farmers without commensurate environmental benefits. We secured a much more realistic version of the greening in the final text. Cropping records suggest that roughly 5,000 farmers will now be covered, but the majority already meet the rules. Only about 800 farmers will have to plant an additional crop under the cropping rules. All those achievements are under pillar 1 of the policy, which relates to direct payments to farmers. There was perhaps less to play for under pillar 2, because the proposals were more for evolution than revolution. However, we still secured important flexibility in several areas. Perhaps the most important is on areas of natural constraint, which will replace less favoured areas under the new programmes. Under pillars 1 and 2, our negotiating efforts were mostly successful. However, I was disappointed with the outcome on coupled support, which is the optional production-linked support, such as headage payments, to maintain types of farming in areas where that is particularly important. The original proposals gave Scotland 5 per cent coupled support, on the bottom tier of a two-tier system. In the final deal, we will have the option of 8 per cent, which is nearly double our existing coupled support under the beef scheme. However, the system still has two tiers, which I and most farmers in Scotland believe is fundamentally unfair. The 8 per cent is also well below the 10 to 15 per cent that the Brian Pack inquiry recommended.

Yes we have, and I will talk about that now because this is a key area for Scotland. Unfortunately, our negotiator, Owen Paterson, did not want any coupled support whatsoever, never mind the 5 or 8 per cent that we finally got. Given where we have ended up, I can tell Claire Baker that I have written to Owen Paterson to ask whether the 8 per cent limit can apply to the member state rather than to Scotland, because we have had so many mixed messages from different ministers during the past few months. This is all about damage limitation. Fundamentally, the deal on coupled support remains a major disappointment for Scotland, but the deal is now done and we must turn our attention to how we implement it. The Government has been working on that with stakeholders for several years. We have run workshops, had various groups and done extensive modelling; we also held a major conference this April. As a result, a consensus is emerging about the way forward, which takes various concerns into account. One such concern is how the move to area-based payments will impact on farmers with high payments under the current historical scheme. For example, the more intensive beef and dairy farmers are concerned about that. However, it is inevitable that their rates per hectare will come down. By definition, below average rates will rise and above average rates will fall, but there are tools that we can use to mitigate the impact and, we hope, manage the transition. In doing that, we must be aware of the impact on farmers who have been excluded from the single farm payment until now, such as new entrants and deer farmers. They must be put on a level playing field as quickly as possible, even if we give other farmers more time to adapt. Of course, we must also keep our eyes open for loopholes. We know that people like loopholes in agricultural legislation, and undoubtedly some people are already thinking that if they have an empty hillside with some deer on it, they can qualify for big CAP payments. The answer to that, incidentally, is no. However, there is always a minority who will try to exploit the system and we need to be aware of that. Speaking of exploiting the system, under the Scottish clause we must find minimum activity rules that keep slipper farmers out of the system while letting genuine extensive hill farmers in. We must also look at the impact of the greening measures. Greening presents a great opportunity. I want every farmer in this country to be getting greener over time. Consumers are paying increasing attention to how their food is produced, and Scotland has a great reputation for green and natural food that we can exploit in valuable overseas markets as well as at home. That means that we must be genuinely green. Scotland is not the worst in the class. For example, we do not have the extreme arable monocultures that the three-crop rule is aimed at tackling; other European countries have that. However, at the same time, we must be aware that we have competitors who want to be seen as green and they are catching up with Scotland. Even in Scotland, we must accept that we face some genuine environmental challenges. Our index of farmland birds has gone down in each of the last three years of data. On water quality, only 60 per cent of our bodies of water are in good condition, which is below the long-term target of 98 per cent, and that has not improved in the past four years. There are many wins to be secured if we get things right. We must address our genuine environmental challenges. In doing so, we can stay ahead of our competitors and ensure that our fantastic natural products succeed in tomorrow’s markets. To deliver those wins, we have to take many of the important decisions that lie ahead of us. Unfortunately, those decisions will be all the more difficult because of the budget that has been negotiated by the UK Government. In the new CAP, Scotland will probably have lower rates per hectare in both pillars than every other member state in Europe. That is even worse than what we get today. If Scotland had been a member state, we would automatically have got an uplift to €196 per hectare in pillar 1. As I have said before, that would bring in an extra €1 billion up to 2020. We could also have negotiated an uplift in pillar 2, in the same way as 16 other member states have done. Finland got a €600 million uplift, Portugal got €500 million, Slovenia got €150 million, Lithuania got an extra €100 million, and so on. However, the UK Government took the decision not to press Scotland’s case. If the UK Government was not willing to get us a decent deal from Europe, the least that it could have delivered was a fair division of the funding within the UK. We urgently need agreement on that.

I am sure that the member is aware that only 38 per cent of the Europe budget is for CAP. That is one area in which Scotland gets an extremely raw deal. We deserve a greater share of the CAP budget. The deadline for many of the decisions is approaching. We have to give notification of any pillar-to-pillar budget transfers that we would like by the end of the year. I have written to Owen Paterson to seek a fair deal for Scotland within the UK’s CAP allocation so that we can start to take those decisions. In particular, the UK received an uplift under the external convergence mechanism, which will be worth more than €60 million per year by 2020, and a total of €230 million over the whole budget period. As that uplift was obtained only as a result of Scotland’s low payments under the current system, at the very least, Owen Paterson must allocate it entirely to Scotland. It is not a case of taking money away from farmers in England, Wales and Northern Ireland; it is about ensuring that money that belongs to Scottish farmers comes to Scottish farmers to help them through the challenges ahead. The first challenge will be getting through 2014. In theory, the new CAP was supposed to start on 1 January 2014, but that was never realistic under Europe’s timetable. As I said, the main regulations will not even be adopted until November or December, after which the implementation rules will have to be developed. I was frustrated by how long it took Europe to recognise that 2014 will be a transition year, but it has now come forward with a transition regulation, which we are negotiating. Despite all that uncertainty, I was able recently to set out a plan for 2014. Europe has made it impossible to avoid a gap between the current Scotland rural development programme and the new one, but our plan will minimise the impact on the ground and provide continuity where it is most needed—for instance, with less favoured area support scheme payments, agri-environment contracts and woodland creation. We have more decisions to turn our minds to. To inform them, we will run consultation exercises on pillar 1 and pillar 2, which will start towards the end of this year. I do not want to pre-empt the results of those consultations, but we have to give as much certainty as we can to the industry. I would like to outline my thinking. On the pillar 1 basic payment scheme, a consensus is emerging on the establishment of two or three payment regions in Scotland. That would be simpler than some other options, so I am pretty well minded to go with that. On coupled support, if we are stuck with 8 per cent of the Scottish ceiling, I will give serious consideration to devoting all of that to the beef sector. I know that some sheep farmers will be disappointed to hear that, but their sector already stands to gain considerably from the move to area-based payments. I am also keen to explore other options for weighting any future beef scheme. The current scheme gives higher rates to the first 10 calves per holding, but the data suggests a decline in slightly bigger herds, so we must review that aspect. On greening, we will continue to look at the option of equivalence schemes, which we are allowed to put in place, but even the strongest supporters of equivalence are getting slightly cold feet as the details become clearer, and our analysis does not show huge benefits from equivalence schemes for biodiversity, for example. I will reserve my judgment on the issue, but it looks quite complex. However, I want to find out whether we can use equivalence schemes under greening to deliver carbon-reducing measures to help with the role that agriculture plays in our climate change efforts. There are arguments for and against capping and degressivity, which is the reduction of big payments. I am keen to address the issue of huge individual payments, but we must consider what will happen to those payments in any case. The move to an area-based system should reduce big payments significantly, and we should take that into account when we decide whether to apply an absolute cap to payments. There is another measure called redistributive payment, which is the idea of giving a top-up on the first 30 or 50 hectares per farm. We should look at those options. We also have decisions to make on pillar 2. I have said many times that the new SRDP must be simpler for applicants and better focused on key areas such as climate change, food and drink, and support for hill farmers and crofters. However, the SRDP is not only for farmers; we must bear in mind that it has a much wider role to play in supporting rural communities. Therefore, many people have a big stake in the decisions that we will take in the coming months. With such crucial decisions ahead, I look forward to hearing members’ comments on the new CAP. I hope that Parliament will join me in welcoming our negotiating achievements, and that it will welcome our call for the UK Government to provide a much fairer budget deal so that we can work towards a successful new policy for Scotland and our farmers can continue to bring food to our tables and care for Scotland’s magnificent environments. I move, That the Parliament notes the importance of the EU common agricultural policy (CAP) for underpinning productive agriculture, delivering environmental and other public benefits and supporting rural development; notes that the EU reached an agreement on a new CAP and welcomes the Scottish Government’s success in negotiating provisions that meet Scotland’s needs on new entrants, active farming and increased flexibilities; looks forward to the Scottish Government’s future public consultations on implementing the new CAP in Scotland; notes that, as a member state, Scotland would have qualified for increased Pillar 1 payments worth €1 billion extra up to 2020 and been able to negotiate improved Pillar 2 rural funding; deplores the budget deal negotiated by the UK Government, which failed to address Scotland’s unacceptably low CAP funding, and calls on the UK Government to deliver a fair deal for Scotland through the UK’s allocation of CAP funds, including the full external convergence uplift to Scotland.

The figures that Claire Baker has read out illustrate why we have to move from the historical basis for payments to a new basis for payments. That is why we are moving to area-based payments. We cannot reward people in activity in 2013 or, indeed, 2020 with what they had back in 2002. That is the explanation behind the figures that the member mentioned. The formula that would benefit Scotland is the formula that Europe used to allocate the national pots of money to each member state. That formula would have delivered a greater national pot to Scotland as a member state, which we could then have decided how to distribute among the Highland farms, the East Lothian farms and so on.

I should probably start off by welcoming the many expressions of sympathy for the decisions that lie ahead of me over the next few months. I felt daunted before I came into the debate and now I feel an ever greater weight on my shoulders. However, I guess that those expressions of sympathy illustrate that members of all parties recognise that the issues that we are debating today—and I feel that we have debated them well—are important ones for the future of Scotland in many different sectors, particularly in our rural communities. Starting out in the CAP reform process, I was always at pains to make it clear that we must do what we could to ensure that we have men and women in this country producing food for the nation, as well as looking after the environment and delivering other public benefits. That is a precious thing that we must hold on to as a country—men and women with the skills to produce food, especially in a world with a growing population and less land on which to grow food for that population. In the decades ahead, as a people and as a country, we will have to be more self-sufficient and more careful about food security, so these issues are important. Clare Adamson, Mike MacKenzie, Jayne Baxter and others mentioned the importance of underpinning the economic contribution of our food and drink industry, because the raw materials that are produced by our farmers and crofters underpin that hugely successful industry, which, just a few weeks ago, during Scottish food and drink fortnight, celebrated achieving its growth targets six years early. Another point that I have been at great pains to highlight over the past few months, as we have negotiated with the UK and other member states in the European Union, is that we have a distinctive agriculture sector with unique issues, challenges, opportunities and features, and that that is why we need the right policy coming through the CAP reform process for this country. Our climate, the fact that many of our farming communities and food producers are a great distance from their markets, and the diversity of our industry—hills, lowlands, north, south, mainland, islands and everything else in between—means that we have a challenging policy to implement. It is not a one-size-fits-all policy, but it must deal with that diverse agriculture sector. The fact that 85 per cent of land in Scotland has less favoured area status, compared with exactly the opposite situation south of the border, where it is only 15 per cent, also highlights why our case is unique for agriculture policy.

I was going to come on to the need to give certainty to our farming communities and crofting communities as soon as possible. That is why it was important to put the transition arrangements in place for 2014, during which LFASS payments will continue. On the long-term future of LFASS, we have until 2018 before the designation of areas of natural constraint replaces the existing scheme. We are confident that we have got most of the details right for that, but there is still some time between now and when the new scheme comes into play. For the transition period, which many members mentioned, we are putting in place arrangements for new entrants schemes, for woodland creation and for agri-environment schemes. Where we are unable to plug the gap is in capital expenditure, which is something that Claudia Beamish asked about. As we know, many capital projects in rural Scotland are funded through the SRDP in pillar 2, the rural development regulation, and unfortunately Europe would not listen to us and has not made it possible to have transition for capital projects, which is a pity for the rural economy, because there are many good projects.

I hope that there will be. We have clearly looked at the projected demand over the gap year and at what would have to be paid out in that financial year, so I hope that we will be able to deliver that. As far as the need for certainty for our farming and crofting communities is concerned, we have to look at the big changes in the new CAP as compared with the CAP that we are moving from. The big change, of course, is moving from historical payments to area payments, and I hope that we are all united in the view that we cannot pay out payments in 2020 based on the level of activity that farmers were undertaking in 2002. That would be unjustifiable and untenable, especially at a time when new entrants are frozen out of getting support for their genuine activity. I am very pleased that we have made the fundamental breakthrough that, from day 1 of the new CAP, new entrants will be on a level playing field. That is important for attracting new blood and new generations into agriculture and maintaining the food-producing capacity that I talked about. It is really important that we attract new blood into agriculture. Of course, it is important to make sure that, under the new CAP, there are no slipper farmers—those who have exploited the loopholes in the current CAP to get large payments even though they are not conducting much genuine activity on their farms. Thankfully, under the new CAP we will make that history. I hope that we all accept that the impact of agriculture on the environment has to be taken very seriously. That is why I welcome the commissioner’s determination to make the new common agricultural policy greener than the existing policy. As many members alluded to and as I said in my opening speech, we are looking at how we can use the greening measures to make sure that every single farm in Scotland becomes that bit greener and hopefully cuts its carbon emissions to help us to achieve our climate change targets and to protect biodiversity, where we know that there are significant challenges that we have to address. Of course, the SRDP plays a big role in delivering such measures.

As the member knows, we have to take that decision over the coming months—before the end of this year. I will be conducting a mini-consultation on that specific aspect, on which we have to take an early decision. We have concerns about the pace of change from the existing system to the new system. Many members have spoken about the impact on the beef sector which, to a large extent, is the engine room of Scottish agriculture. That is about not just the beef producers on the ground—the farmers who produce fantastic, world-famous beef—but the thousands of processors, hauliers and people working at the marts. We have to protect those jobs. That is why I am giving close attention to the pace of change for beef producers, whose sector is the engine room of Scottish agriculture, as they move to the new payment regime. We have to pay close attention to that. The budget has featured in just about every single speech in the debate. My job is going to be made 10 times harder because of the very poor and scandalous deal on the agriculture budget that the UK Government signed up to. I listened to the contributions from many members. I listened to Alex Fergusson and Jamie McGrigor, who both said that it is really important that we do not transfer money from pillar 1, which is the direct payments to farms on the ground, to pillar 2, which is the wider rural development regulation. They said that it is really important that we protect direct support under pillar 1. Meanwhile, their Conservative colleague in London who was negotiating on behalf of Scotland in Brussels wants to scrap pillar 1. That is sheer hypocrisy and double standards.

I say to Alex Fergusson that I have had to sit opposite Mr Paterson in negotiation after negotiation in which he has argued to reduce pillar 1 direct support for Scottish agriculture and said that the free market will deliver all and that it is okay to have imported food or whatever. I understand from Mr Fergusson’s speech that he totally disagrees with that. It is time for a universal declaration of independence by the Scottish Tory party. Tavish Scott said that we should see the debate about the future of farming not through the prism of independence but through the prism of what is best for farmers and crofters in Scotland. Quite frankly, I cannot do one without the other; they are absolutely tied together. The size of the budget that we get as a country will determine how we can deliver for our farmers and crofters throughout Scotland. People on one side of the debate say that we should vote yes in the referendum next year and people on the other side say that we should vote no. I have been dealing with Owen Paterson, and his predecessors for that matter, for the past few years and I can say that they have been running their no campaign for quite a few years now. The no campaign from Westminster is not a new thing. I asked Owen Paterson to deliver support in Europe for Scottish agriculture—he said no. I asked him to ensure that the levy paid by Scottish producers that is currently lost south of the border comes back to Scotland—he said no. I asked him to give Scotland a fairer rural development budget because we get the lowest in the whole of Europe—it is not just a poor budget and not just less than our fair share; we get the worst rural development budget in the whole of Europe—and he said no.

I have taken enough interventions.

During his negotiations, I asked Owen Paterson to please make the livestock sector a priority. He gave more time to talking about a sugar plant in London than to talking about Scotland’s livestock sector at the negotiations, and he said no. The best way for Scotland’s farmers and crofters to deal with all the no, no, no from Westminster is to say yes next September.

Given that this serious issue has been going on for far too long, the First Minister recently wrote to the Prime Minister to seek his support for repatriation of the levy that rightly belongs to Scotland. I inform members that the Prime Minister has responded to the letter but has declined our request, which is unfortunate. I know that that decision will disappoint the whole of the Scottish red meat industry, which is unanimous in the view that Scotland’s producers are being short-changed. Quality Meat Scotland has cautiously accepted an invitation from the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs minister of state to join a forum to determine spending priorities for the disputed levy income. However, I hope that members agree that rather than make the new and spurious argument that the lost levy somehow benefits the Scottish industry, the United Kingdom Government would do better to focus on putting right the wrong.

I think that there will be a huge degree of anger throughout the livestock sector in Scotland, particularly at a time when the levy income is desperately needed to promote the Scottish brands, so that producers can have a greater return from the marketplace. As James Dornan said, it is estimated that we are losing £1.4 million of red meat levy over the border every year. The promotional levy in relation to animals that were born and reared in Scotland is being used to promote produce from outside Scotland, because the animals were slaughtered over the border. That is ridiculous, unacceptable and indefensible. I am very disappointed by the Prime Minister’s response, as are the First Minister and the Scottish Government.

Claire Baker made an important point. Because of the reduction in concentration and capacity of processing throughout Great Britain, more animals are going south of the border to be slaughtered. A number of moves are afoot to try to increase processing in Scotland, but, as the member knows, those moves largely relate to sheep—we have very little processing capacity in Scotland for lamb. That is a long-standing issue, unfortunately. As a result of a number of other factors, such as the closure of Vion, there are moves afoot to address the problem in relation to the pig sector. We are working closely with the red meat sector to see whether we can increase capacity in Scotland. However, a very flawed formula is putting Scotland at an unfair disadvantage; that is what should be fixed.

I point out to Alex Fergusson that there have been reviews in the past. There was a review several years ago, and it is unfortunate that its recommendations were not acted on. A spurious new argument came on the scene a few months ago, although there have been disputes and debates about the issue for several years. The UK Government is trying to defend the status quo for the levy arrangements by suggesting that somehow Scotland benefits from UK spend. We want to promote the Scottish—not the British—brand and to secure the Scottish premium for red meat. That is why the current arrangements are flawed. On the proposed new forum, I said at the time and continue to say that I would be very concerned if the forum was another fudge and simply a talking shop to soak up time and allow the current arrangements to stay in place a bit longer, to Scotland’s disadvantage.

Last November, I led Scotland’s biggest delegation of food and drink businesses to Japan and China to promote our fantastic larder to those exciting and lucrative markets. However, I was extremely disappointed to hear from the United Kingdom embassy that gaining access for Scotch beef to the Japanese market was not a priority at the time for the UK Government. I have since written to the UK Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs to ask him to prioritise that, but hope that we will see more progress in the near future. Of course, if Scotland was an independent country, we would be able to decide our own priority markets and take the necessary actions to help our red meat sector.

When I was in Tokyo—a city of 30 million people—I spoke to a top chef who told me that he believed that the best beef in the world came from Scotland. He wished that he could source it so that he could serve it in his restaurant in a top Tokyo hotel. There is certainly a demand for the Scottish product, which is why I have been doing what I can to make representations to the UK Government to make that more of a priority. A questionnaire from the Japanese authorities has been with the UK Government for some time and requires to be filled in. I hope that it will be returned very soon and that we can get the ban lifted and get Scotch beef on to the top restaurant tables in Japan and elsewhere in Asia.

The Scottish Government has made available a total of £6.5 million in compensation. I confirm that more than £730,000 has been paid to around 4,100 farmers. That will meet almost half the costs incurred in the collection of fallen stock that died because of the severe weather in March to May this year. The remainder will be used to meet eligible claims arising from more than 1,000 applications received under our weather aid scheme, with payments starting in the next 10 days.

I am happy to send the member some of the rates that were in the application documents, because every case will be different. The compensation scheme will cover all livestock species affected so that people can claim for cattle and sheep and so on. I have to pick up on the member’s comment that the Scottish Government is somehow dragging its feet. We are dealing with a complex and difficult situation faced by many farming businesses and we also have to meet state aid rules. The industry is very understanding of the time taken; indeed it is a steering group involving industry members that is driving the weather aid scheme forward. If the member thinks that we are not doing enough in Scotland, perhaps she should look south of the border at the anger among farmers in England about the lack of support that they have received from the Conservative-Lib Dem coalition Government in that country.

A marine planning consultation is under way and that includes proposals for marine protected areas and details of how MPAs might be managed to protect habitats and species. The main legislation for designation and management of MPAs is the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010 for inshore waters and the Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 for the offshore area. The Marine (Scotland) Act 2010 includes powers to make marine conservation orders to ensure that the conservation objectives of an MPA are met. The act also includes powers to set up management schemes to help to ensure that everyone knows which features are being protected through either statutory or voluntary measures.

Fiona McLeod raises an interesting point. Marine Scotland is taking seriously the issue of how new technology can be used in relation to the marine protected areas. Of course, with regard to fisheries management, Scotland has helped to blaze a trail in terms of the use of closed-circuit television on fishing vessels, sensors on equipment and so on. We are giving a lot of attention to the issue.

In each case in which a new marine protected area is proposed, there will be a management plan, which will have to be proportionate and effective and will be based on scientific evidence. I would welcome more information about the member’s concerns about the particular proposal that she mentions, but I assure the chamber that we are taking a sensible way forward to ensure that we balance the impact on marine industries with the need for the MPAs to do what they need to do, which is to protect the marine environment.

The way in which Scotland has approached the identification of marine protected areas, through the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010, has been highly praised, especially when contrasted with the situation south of the border. Stakeholders feel that Scotland is going about this the right way and that there are perhaps lessons to be learned by the authorities down there. I am confident that the interests of fishermen are being taken into account. Indeed, they have been fully involved in the consultation process to get us to where we are today.

Since 2011, our zero waste programme has provided £20 million to councils throughout Scotland to support the roll-out of food waste collections. That action means that, by February 2014, 1.2 million households will have access to a food waste collection service. In addition, the waste regulations that the Parliament passed last year will mean that the majority of households and businesses in Scotland will have access to a food waste collection by the end of 2015, with many receiving the service by the end of this year.

The overall target for recycling is 70 per cent by 2025, and food waste has a contribution to make to that. There are no specific targets for food waste recycling but, as I indicated in my answer, there are regulations in place that mean that, by 2016, all local authorities in Scotland will have an obligation to provide a waste collection service to non-rural homes. Therefore, I expect all local authorities to play a role in collecting food waste. Of course, the best way that we can all contribute towards the target is just to finish the food on our plates, as I have done regularly throughout Scottish food and drink fortnight.

While I was in Fraserburgh for the Cabinet meeting on Monday 2 September, I jointly hosted a fishermen’s surgery, which was attended by around 50 vocal fishermen and industry representatives. We discussed a wide range of issues, such as the reform of the common fisheries policy, the allocation of fishing opportunities, the current state of the stocks and details of the £6 million support package that I recently announced to help the industry during these pretty tough economic times.

The great city of Aberdeen was of course built on its relationship with the sea. I believe that fish processing has a role in the local economy in Torry and throughout the city of Aberdeen, and I certainly hope that it will continue to have a role. The relocation of the existing businesses is primarily an issue for Aberdeen City Council, but if Maureen Watt feels that there is a role for me or input required from me as fishing minister, I ask her to contact me.

During the recent European negotiations, we were profoundly disappointed that the United Kingdom Government did not attempt to negotiate better budget allocations for Scotland, given our very poor share of CAP funds. However, we are, of course, currently negotiating Scotland’s share of the UK’s CAP budget with the UK Government and other devolved Administrations. We hope that the UK Government will finally recognise our case and agree to give Scotland’s farmers a much fairer allocation of available funds.

That is a very good point. Scotland went into the negotiations with the fourth-lowest level in Europe of direct payments for farmers and the lowest level of payments in Europe for wider rural development measures. Under the funding formula that was adopted during the recent negotiations, no member state will receive less than the average of €196 per hectare by 2019. If Scotland had been a member state, that would have delivered an uplift of around €1 billion to Scotland—an increase of around 30 per cent—by 2019-20. As matters stand, of course, we are part of the UK, so the UK will qualify for perhaps up to €60 million by 2020, rising from €10 million in 2014. At the very least, that money should come to Scotland because the UK qualifies only because of Scotland, so the money belongs to Scotland and Scotland’s rural communities. That is what we will demand, but it is nothing in comparison with the €1 billion that we will lose out on because we are not a member state in our own right.

I am grateful for the opportunity before the summer recess, which is near, to make a statement to update members on the reform of the common fisheries policy. Following intense negotiations, the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union have reached historic political agreements on the basic regulation of the CFP and the regulation that addresses the common organisation of the market for fisheries. Those agreements still remain to be ratified, but few, if any, further changes are expected. Formal adoption by the Council and the European Parliament is expected next month or this autumn at the latest. Before the end of this year, we also expect agreement on a new European maritime and fisheries fund, which will underpin the reformed CFP with financial support. I confirm that, within the constraints that we face, our key priorities appear to have been achieved. We have a better framework to support sustainable fishing and protect fish stocks and an ambitious but workable discards package to phase out the scandal of discards. We have secured a regional approach to fisheries management, which I hope will at long last bring key decisions much closer to home. In true European Union fashion, the CFP reform negotiations have been slow, tortuous and bureaucratic. Nevertheless, we have seen the process as a golden opportunity for radical reform that was to be grasped with both hands, given how badly the CFP has failed our fishing communities, our fish stocks and the wider marine environment. Our fishers are not short of challenges. Only last week, I chaired a meeting with the industry to address the acute pressures that our nephrops fishery faces as a result of biological changes in the prawn grounds. We are working on an action plan to alleviate those pressures where we can. That acutely demonstrates why we need a CFP that supports our fishers in facing those biological challenges—never mind the bureaucratic challenges—rather than hinders them at every turn. The agreement that has been reached is a product of compromise, and it was never going to fulfil all our wishes. We have had to negotiate with 754 MEPs and 27 member states, with their diverse views, and on a number of occasions we have had to fight with the United Kingdom Government for Scotland’s interests—for example, in ensuring that a strong position was maintained on transferable fishing quotas and on regionalisation. Although the deal that is on the table is not perfect, it could move us substantially forward. In short, if we realise the opportunities that it offers, it should allow us to take significant strides forward in developing a sensible and sustainable fisheries management framework for the whole of Europe. We are a nation whose identity, culture, heritage and economy are shaped by the seas that surround us. Those seas have long provided for our people, and they now support an industry that catches more than 70 per cent of the UK’s key quota stocks, provides more than 5,000 coastal jobs and contributes £500 million to Scotland’s economy. That is why I was determined that Scotland’s voice would be heard loudly during the reform process, to ensure that regionalisation, discards and the commitment to sustainable fishing were key features of the final agreement. Reducing micromanagement from Brussels and returning greater responsibility for fisheries management to Scotland have been my main priority from the start. That is why I expended significant energy in ensuring that the UK position stayed firm on our key objective of decentralising the one-size-fits-all CFP. Without that, we would not have the tools to do the job of moving to a discard-free fishery that is fished at sustainable levels. I am pleased to report that a regional approach to fisheries management has been agreed, which we must accept is historic. It does not go as far as I would like, and time will tell the extent to which it really will loosen the grip of Brussels on management of our fisheries, but I will work to make it a success. The agreed model should give member states more flexibility to manage their fisheries by working regionally to develop detailed management measures, in consultation with key stakeholders, that will deliver the high-level objectives that will be agreed at European level and set out in multi-annual plans. The Commission will then be expected to legislate to enable implementation of the actions that have been agreed at regional level, to monitor progress and to support member states in achieving the high-level targets. For example, with the agreement of member states in the region and the Commission’s support, we could establish our own rules for determining days at sea or fixing the composition of catches, which would enable us to cast off the hated straitjacket of the cod recovery plan. Crucially, that framework will focus on achieving outcomes by whatever routes member states believe are necessary. That is in contrast to the current inflexible fixation on micromanaging the whole process—down to the size and width of nets—from Brussels, as witnessed through the Commission’s current one-size-fits-all CFP approach. Key among those outcomes is the commitment to achieving discard-free fisheries. I hope that an end is now in sight to the scandal whereby a million tonnes or more of fish are discarded in Europe’s waters every year. We, the industry and our environmental groups all agree on that objective. Dumping perfectly edible fish is ecological madness and is horrendously wasteful. However, the issue is complex and challenging to tackle, which is why it was important to negotiate a discard ban that is ambitious but workable for fishermen and managers, particularly in Scotland’s mixed fishery. From January 2015, the discard ban will commence for all pelagic species, while the ban for other stocks, including nephrops, cod, haddock and whiting, will be phased in between January 2016 and 2019. It is important that the discards package is supported by a number of measures to aid practical implementation. Vessels will be able to bank or borrow up to 10 per cent of additional quota in a stock from one year to the next. They will also be allowed to transfer up to 9 per cent of quota from a target species to cover any unwanted bycatch of another species, although only if the non-target species is within safe biological limits. Additionally, there are exemptions for some species that are more likely to survive after being discarded, such as skates and rays, and for species that cannot be caught and landed, such as sharks. It is important that a maximum de minimis level of discarding will also be permitted, which will reduce from 7 per cent of the total annual catch in years 1 and 2 to 6 per cent in years 3 and 4 and to 5 per cent thereafter. However, that will be allowed only for species that are agreed at European level and when it is justified on the ground that total elimination of discards is unachievable scientifically or because of disproportionate costs to the industry. Importantly, as Scotland demanded, the discards package includes provision for an uplift in quotas. That is absolutely necessary as we move from quotas being based on what is landed to quotas being based on what is taken out of the sea. It also means that vessels can benefit from landing much of what would have otherwise been discarded. The anti-discards package will be challenging for our complex mixed fishery. It will mean moving to yet more new methods of fishing and more selective gear. However, we have some time in which to make the transition, and I firmly believe that the change is desirable—not only environmentally but also from an economic perspective—and deliverable. It is simply inefficient to catch unwanted fish that have to be thrown back over the side. By avoiding that, we can add to the environmental and the economic bottom lines. To their huge credit, our fishermen have a strong track record of achievement on discards. We will continue to work with them to make good on the new commitment. Moving to discard-free fisheries that are based on catches rather than landings will also help us to achieve our other key goal of fishing our stocks at what is referred to as maximum sustainable yield—that is, a rate that allows the stock to reproduce. It is important that fisheries management follows the best available science and is not driven by short-term self-interest or political objectives. I am therefore pleased that the reform agreement recognises the need to set fishing levels that will rebuild depleted stocks and maintain them at sustainable levels, which will sustain the fishing communities that depend on them. The limits will be applied by 2015, where possible, and by 2020 at the latest for all harvested stocks. In Scottish waters, we already fish at such levels across many of our commercial stocks and, in time, that will lead to better and bigger stocks and to more stable and plentiful seas. I remind colleagues that we have successfully fought off the unacceptable element of the Commission’s original proposals—the establishment of a mandatory system of transferable fishing rights across Europe, which posed a direct threat to our historical fishing rights. I hope that all members believe that our fishing rights belong to Scotland and that they must not be sold to those with the deepest pockets in Europe. We fought vigorously against that from day 1. We had to show forceful leadership not only to overcome a threat from Brussels but to make the UK Government see sense on the issue. We welcome its volte-face. I am pleased that our work has paid off and that we can move on to better debates. Our fishermen face not only a daily struggle while at sea but a bewildering and often contradictory tangle of European regulations. The existing CFP has been no friend to Scotland and I have no doubt that it will continue to make life challenging for our fishing industry. However, a door has been opened to better times through the reform. We might not have the giant leap forward that we wanted, but the reform is a big step forward that we should welcome. The Scottish Government will work in close partnership with stakeholders and the industry, onshore and offshore, to maximise the potential of our fantastic industry, protect our amazing marine environment and our rich fish stocks and bring benefits to all those connected with our fishing communities.

I thank Claire Baker for her comments and the way in which she has approached this important issue. First, regionalisation should help stock recovery because many of the measures under the current one-size-fits-all approach of Brussels are counterproductive. For example, vessels are often forced into areas where the juvenile fish are—the fish that we want to grow—as opposed to other areas of the sea. That is down to ill-fitting regulations. I hope that, if such details are decided at regional and local levels, we will get them right and we will not have counterproductive consequences for fisheries conservation. The targets will be laid down in the multi-annual plans, which will be agreed between the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament. I hope—and we take it from the reform proposals—that the high-level objectives will be set at European level but that the management and detail will come to the regions. In that way, we will be able to progress the debate.

In preparing for the discard ban, our first objective is to minimise the unwanted catches that are brought back to shore—that is why it is useful to have the flexibilities that the agreement provides for. When unwanted catches are brought back to shore, they will no doubt make their way to fishmeal and there will be cost recovery for fishermen, but we must ensure that there is no profit and that there is a disincentive to bring back unwanted catches. Most of the fisheries management measures will take place at sea, so that people avoid catching fish that are not wanted in the first place. As members know, Scotland is very much blazing a trail on closed areas, real-time closures and other forms of spatial management, catch quota schemes and so on, and we want to build on such approaches to minimise unwanted catches. On the interaction between the cod recovery plan and the nephrops fishery, we are currently experiencing a biological problem, in that the prawns are simply not appearing. That is particularly the case in the Fladen ground, but it is also a west coast issue, with landings 50 per cent down, despite the quotas there. We have found it difficult to find flexibility to offer vessels other fishing opportunities, because of the cod recovery plan. If such decisions are taken closer to home, we will be able to build in better flexibilities and to balance fisheries conservation with measures to allow vessels to fish elsewhere when the prawns do not appear. I hope that that is one big difference that the new approach can make.

I pressed hard in Europe on ensuring that we have the enforcement capability to ensure that the flexibilities in the agreement, in relation to the discards de minimis rules, are not exploited. Some countries wanted the biggest possible de minimis and the ability to discard a huge percentage of fish of all kinds of species; they also wanted some species to be exempt from the discard ban. I was pleased that those countries were defeated in the negotiations and did not get their way—I pushed hard on that. A compromise was reached, and in my statement I gave the percentages that we got to. The flexibilities will be useful, given Scotland’s circumstances, because we have a complex mixed fishery. Over the next year or two, before the bans come into place, there will be much effort and learning on how we monitor and enforce the discard rates. Of course, the de minimis rules are not a blanket provision. States that want to use flexibility must present evidence that there are good scientific reasons for doing so.

I can say to Claudia Beamish that those issues were discussed in the negotiations. A major priority for Scotland is to ensure that the funding is aligned with the need, to make the transition from where we are with discards to the discard ban and to help the fleet to adapt to the new circumstances. The resources that come from the fund should be aligned with the need to adopt new measures—new nets and gear and so on. It is also important that we support our onshore sector in adapting to where quotas might go in the future, in relation to different species, for example. We are taking account of not just the offshore sector but the onshore sector.

The member may be aware that the on-going scientific advice for spurdog is that the species has to be protected, given that the state of the stock indicates that it is under threat. We are working with the industry to develop measures to avoid that bycatch. On decentralisation, it is hoped that the detail of some measures will be decided at a more regional level. However, if the scientific advice continues to be that a stock is below safe levels, we will have to take that into account.

On the member’s latter points, I have continually said that, under regionalisation, member states must have the power to ensure a level playing field in their own waters. As the regional discussions and negotiations are taken forward, I will continue to press for that. Under European regulations, we cannot have vessels fishing side by side to which different rules apply, although member states have different stocks and different priorities, which we have to take into account. In the overall debate during the negotiations, it was clear that implementing the discard ban will be problematic in some circumstances, given the complexities of operating in Scottish waters, where we have perhaps 30 commercial stocks being fished together. That is why the flexibilities that were secured are important. As the Parliament will be aware, during the negotiations, some countries—which perhaps had a minimal interest in fisheries—said that they wanted no flexibilities; other countries wanted the maximum flexibilities, which would have amounted to no discard ban. We have reached a reasonable compromise, which the industry in Scotland has warmly welcomed as something with which it can work in the years ahead. The environmental non-governmental organisations to which I have spoken also recognise that there must be an element of flexibility, given the complexities of Scotland’s mixed fisheries.

The timetable for introducing the new CFP is 1 January next year, although it will take some time for some measures to be implemented thereafter. Labelling is a feature of the common market organisation regulation. The labelling of fish products must include the area of sea in which the fish are caught and the method of gear used—for instance, “Caught by trawl in west of Scotland waters.” There was a proposal to make the inclusion of the date and time of capture on labels mandatory, but we felt that that should be voluntary, given the bureaucracy involved. The origin of fish products is an issue that I am pursuing. In the average supermarket, it is difficult to tell where fish are from. That must be rectified, because it is unacceptable in this day and age that, when people buy fish products from supermarket shelves, they cannot tell where those products came from or in which country they were processed.

We have worked with the onshore sector through the sea fisheries partnership, which is the advisory group that we set up. The industry and NGOs are members of that group. Part of that work is to ensure that we have the marketing right. We have just received proposals from the group about how we can better market Scottish seafood and use the Scottish branding to more effect. The onshore sector is centre stage in those discussions. We have also had a lot of dialogue with the sector on moving forward with the discard ban and other fisheries management measures to ensure continuity of supply for our processors. We will ensure that that continues to be the case.

The short answer is yes. That is one of the flexibilities. It is worth pointing out that we have always had the ability to bank and borrow quota so that the take-up of quota from year to year is balanced efficiently. The new measure is that quota can now be swapped for quota to help with the discard ban. In other words, if fishermen do not have quota for what they catch, they can surrender other quota and convert it into the quota that they need to land the catch legally without it going to fishmeal, provided that the country meets its overall quota limits and the catch is within sustainable limits. There are some new flexibilities that will be important for implementing the discard ban in Scotland.

There is a genuine debate to be had on that. We recently commissioned research into quota management issues in Scotland to understand who holds the quota and how it is being used. No right is more God given to Scotland than the fishing rights for our own waters. That is the birthright of our fishing communities, and we do not want that to leave Scotland or get into the hands of the wrong people, who are not active fishermen. Unfortunately, the pre-1999 Administration introduced the current system, which is far from perfect. If we were starting with a blank sheet of paper, we would design a different quota-management system. Alison Johnstone raises legitimate issues for the debate moving forward.

I completely agree that, if the Tory UK Government had not taken Scotland into the common fisheries policy back in the early 1970s, the country would have many more thriving fishing communities. Although the reform package is welcome because it certainly improves matters—greatly, I hope, in some cases—we will still have the CFP to contend with, and the situation will still be complex and difficult. Much of that could have been avoided if the Tory party had not taken Scotland into the CFP and sold out our fishing communities.

Some 78.1 per cent of protected features on Scotland’s designated nature sites are in favourable condition, as published on the Scotland performs website on 17 May.

Mike MacKenzie is right that the most significant causes of unfavourable condition are overgrazing by sheep and deer, and invasive species such as various plant species. The member might be aware that, as part of the Scotland rural development programme, we have a number of instruments that provide funding to land managers to try to tackle some of those issues. The SRDP is certainly the major funding stream to support work to keep sites in favourable condition and to help with their management. Also, a range of legislation is in place with regard to non-native species and other matters. We keep a close eye on the issue but, as the member welcomed, the trend in the number of sites in favourable condition is going in the right direction, and we will continue to try to push it upwards.

I most recently raised that issue with the UK Government’s Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs at a ministerial meeting on 20 May, when I once again set out the case for the repatriation of more than £1.4 million a year of red meat levy income. Despite wide support from many sections of Scottish agriculture, the UK Government continues to ignore our well-reasoned case and instead protects the interests of its own red meat sector at Scotland’s expense. However, I will continue to press Scotland’s case and seek a resolution to this long-running injustice.

I guess that it depends on the definition of “short-term”. I recommend that all livestock producers vote yes in next year’s referendum. That will, perhaps, provide the quickest resolution to the issue, because it will guarantee that all the red meat levy that is raised in Scotland thereafter will stay in Scotland, which is the outcome that I believe all red meat producers in this country want. In the meantime, I understand that UK ministers are attending the Royal Highland Show later this month. I urge them to bring with them some good news for Scotland’s livestock producers and to say that they recognise the very strong case that has been put by our livestock producers that the levy that is paid on an animal that is born and reared in this country should promote Scottish produce, and not produce from other parts of the UK. That would be the only fair and reasonable solution to the dispute. I hope that the ministers will, when they attend the show later this month, bring the good news that they acknowledge the case, and that the levy that is raised in Scotland will stay in Scotland.

In addition to providing advice on forestry-related matters, the Forestry Commission Scotland is able to support social enterprises that contribute to implementation of the Scottish forestry strategy through its forestry development programme, through the delivery of programmes on the national forest estate, and through the sale or lease of land to communities, under the national forest land scheme.

As I said, the Forestry Commission is always keen to help social enterprises that want to promote health, wellbeing and community benefits. If Fiona McLeod feels that the project in her constituency—which sounds very interesting, so I am keen to learn more about it—fits the bill, I am sure that we can send her details and set up a meeting between the Forestry Commission Scotland and representatives of the project to which she refers.

Will the member give way?

I had thought that more members would have hung about for the highlights. For the purposes of rule 9.11 of the standing orders, I advise Parliament that Her Majesty, having been informed of the purport of the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill, has consented to place her prerogative and interest, in so far as they are affected by the bill, at the disposal of Parliament for the purposes of the bill.

I led discussions about emissions reductions and the draft second report on proposals and policies at meetings of the Scottish Cabinet earlier this year. During the discussions, I agreed with the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities a package of measures to help to reduce carbon emissions from transport.

The Government is always interested in ideas that might improve bus services and is looking at such ideas through the bus stakeholder group. In that context, we will study Iain Gray’s proposed bill in great detail. I hope that Scotland’s local authorities, which are largely responsible for delivering local bus services, are listening closely to his comments. I am thankful that emissions from transport have reduced by 1 per cent per year for three years in a row since 2010. Things are going in the right direction, but there is a big challenge out there. As Iain Gray pointed out, the more people who use buses, the better, in terms of reducing emissions in Scotland.

The United Kingdom national screening committee, which advises all four UK Administrations on health screening programmes, does not recommend that a specific melanoma screening programme should be implemented. The Scottish Government is, however, determined to address all forms of cancer and although farm workers are not singled out, they would be covered by wider initiatives including Cancer Research UK’s sunsmart campaign and the Scottish Government’s detect cancer early programme.

I thank Alison McInnes for raising such an important issue in the chamber. I agree with the sentiments behind what she says, despite the fact that there is no specific evidence that agricultural workers are at increased risk. I also congratulate the NFUS and NHS Grampian on their initiative, and acknowledge that Alison McInnes has an interest in the issue. If I can do anything to help to raise awareness among agricultural workers of the general issue, I would be happy to do that.

We are taking a number of steps to safeguard the health of the bee population in Scotland. I have announced £200,000 to support restocking by bee farmers, following this winter’s heavy losses. I will also work with stakeholders on the European Commission’s decision to ban the use of neonicotinoids and support further research into pesticide use and the health of bee populations in Scotland and elsewhere. We have also carried out the first Scotland-wide honey bee health survey to give us a better understanding of diseases and husbandry factors that affect honey bee health in Scotland, and we continue to work closely with the honey bee sector to implement Scotland’s first ever honey bee health strategy, which the Government published in 2010.

We can all accept that there is now an increased focus on the health of bee populations in this country and across Europe. The issue is of concern to us all, especially given its implications for biodiversity, food and the wider environment. The beekeepers and others whom I speak to who have an interest in the issue say that the biggest factors that have affected bee populations in recent years are disease—a lot of work, to which I have referred, is being done on that—and the weather, which is perhaps outwith our control. We are trying to deal with the consequences. The role of pesticides must also be analysed.

I have referred to the fact that we want to carry out more research. One of my concerns is that although beekeepers accept that the science on the impact of neonicotinoids is inconclusive, they are expressing concern to me that some alternatives that may be used could be worse. That justifies greater focus on the science by Parliament, by me as a minister, and by my ministerial colleagues throughout Europe, in order to gain a better understanding of the factors that impact on bee populations and of what we can influence and do constructively to address that. I appreciate that it is an emotive debate for many people, but I hope that we all accept that there is wide concern among all parties in Parliament about the health of bee populations. We must ensure that the public are made aware of the factors and that the parliamentary committees work together on the issue.

I suspected that Alison Johnstone might stand up and try to sting me on this issue. However, she raises a serious subject. If she looks closely at my comments from over the past few days, she will see that I differentiated the Scottish Government’s position from the position of the UK Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, and said that the lack of conclusive scientific evidence is not a reason for not implementing the necessary restrictions. There was a debate about the implementation date of such restrictions, but my position was different from the hard-line position that DEFRA adopted. That is an important point, especially given the wide representations that I was receiving from all sectors, which I had to take into account. However, we have the date of 1 December by which time the ban must be implemented, and we are willing to implement that. It gives us a wee bit of a breathing space, which we can, I hope, use for better science. A wide range of other factors must be taken into account. We will ensure that the ban is put in place and we will support the necessary science to ensure that we address the wider issues at the same time.

In the past few weeks, I have been keeping Parliament informed of the Scottish Government’s efforts on behalf of farmers who have been affected by the extreme weather. We have delivered practical help during and after the worst snowstorms, including £500,000 of financial help towards the cost of fallen stock disposal. Last week, I told Parliament that I was looking into what other support might be possible, and I am delighted to announce today a further weather aid package of £6 million. Clearly, the priority for that package will be the farms in the south-west that were most affected by the extreme weather of late March. However, I am aware that many farmers across Scotland have been affected by the poor weather of 2012 and early 2013. Some have potentially suffered substantial loss of income, and we know that the number of fallen stock collections for sheep is up by 50 per cent in April compared to April last year, and up by 25 per cent for cattle. I intend to set up a Government-industry group to set the eligibility criteria, and I hope that the first meeting will take place in the next few days. I hope that that demonstrates that the Government is willing to stand by our farmers in their hour of need and help them to cope with the aftermath of what was some of the worst weather in living memory.

I welcome Jim Hume’s welcome for the investment that I announced. His question highlights the complexity of the situation. As the severity of the impact of the weather is different in different parts of the country, the priority is to help those who are most affected by the severe weather, which will be in a few areas of Scotland. I will ask the working group that we are setting up with the industry—which, I hope, will meet in the coming days—to consider how we can help the rest of the sector. The budget is only £6 million and the cost of the impact of the weather may well be tens of millions of pounds throughout the country, but we are still measuring that cost and the industry is helping us with that.

Alex Fergusson raises an important issue, which is the social and health impact of the weather on the lives of farming families throughout Scotland. It is taking its toll in terms of the stress that many people are going through currently. He will also remember that we gave £50,000 assistance to one of the key charities working on that issue back in February. We continue to work closely with the charities that are most able to help the families who are affected in the farming communities. I will make a point of speaking to health colleagues in the Government to ensure that they, in turn, speak to the health authorities in the areas that are most affected.

On 24 April, the Supreme Court issued a decision in the case of Salvesen v Riddell, holding that section 72(10) of the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 2003 is outside legislative competence, because it is incompatible with agricultural landlords’ rights under article 1 of protocol 1 of the European convention on human rights. We were disappointed by the Supreme Court’s ruling. The court has given us a year to work out how to respond. Agricultural tenancy legislation is highly technical, as members are well aware, and the Government will need to consult carefully with stakeholders and the Parliament on what steps to take.

The number of tenancies that are affected is difficult to quantify, given the timescale involved. We estimate that between 120 and 350 notices to quit agricultural tenancies were served by landlords on tenant farmers in limited partnerships during the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Bill’s passage through the Parliament. That gives us a rough estimate in the context of the overall number of tenancies in Scotland; in 2012, 512 out of 6,775 tenancies in Scotland were limited partnerships under the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 1991. It is clear that tenancy agreements are affected. As the member said, the court declined to limit the retrospective effect of the judgment, although it suspended the effect of the decision for 12 months—or more, if required—to give the Parliament the time to take necessary steps to ensure that its legislation complies with ECHR. The court recognised that this Parliament is the right place in which to debate the way forward and acknowledged that a full consultation with all interested parties in the 12 months ahead will be vital. We will ensure that that happens, with all parties in the Parliament.

I will ensure that a briefing on the complex issues behind the case, including the relationship with section 73, is issued to the relevant parliamentary committee and other interested members. I am sure that the member has read the judgment and knows that it raises a number of complex issues. We are considering our options and want to take a little time to do so; we will make every effort to keep MSPs in the loop, because the Parliament must approach the issue on a cross-party basis, for the sake of tenant farming in Scotland.

In relation to ECHR and in light of the judgment, it is clear that ministers must carefully define and articulate the public interest, balancing that with the safeguarding of individual rights. As the judgment illustrates, the court took the view that Parliament overstepped the mark in trying to prevent avoidance measures. The court thought that the steps that were taken were disproportionate. We have to strike a careful balance, but I am sure that the Parliament wants to put the public interest first. How we do that will determine the extent of our success in taking the issue forward.

Clearly, that will depend very much on the extent to which we have to legislate. If, as seems to be the case, legislation is required, we will have to carry out a normal consultation, so all the stakeholders and the parliamentary process will be involved. At the moment, we do not quite know what options to take, as the member will imagine. Given the complexity involved, we want to take a few weeks to understand the options. If legislation is required, it will have to go through the full consultation process.

The Scottish Government met the European Commission as recently as 15 April to press our case for changes to the cod recovery plan and, in particular, for Scottish vessels that catch very little cod to be made exempt from limits on their days at sea. My officials will continue to discuss that issue with the Commission at every opportunity. I hope to discuss it with the commissioner when I attend the next Council of Ministers meeting in May.

The Scottish Government’s intention is to ensure that our fisheries remain open for as long as possible throughout the next year—indeed, we achieved that in 2012. However, the cod recovery plan is dysfunctional; it is made in Brussels and it is inappropriate for Scottish circumstances and Scottish waters. That is why more of these decisions have to be taken closer to home. In the meantime, we are arguing for the cod recovery plan to be much more appropriate for our circumstances and for it to be flexible. At the moment, it encourages vessels to target cod, not to avoid cod, which is counterproductive to the aims of the plan.

I have just said that the cod recovery plan is not fit for purpose; the huge sacrifices that have been made by the Scottish fleet over the past decade or so are paying dividends, as illustrated by the statistics that Tavish Scott just read out. We have to have conservation policies in place, but the cod recovery plan is not fit for purpose. The sooner we have regionalisation, which I hope will happen as soon as possible, the sooner we will be able to have appropriate policies in place in Scottish waters.

No one could fail to be moved by the pictures of the devastation that was caused to farming communities by the recent extreme winter weather, particularly in the south-west of Scotland. We provided £500,000 to the Fallen Stock Company to reduce the costs that were incurred by farmers for the disposing of lost animals, and dialogue continues with the industry as to what further assistance can be given. I hope to make a further announcement about that next week.

The member is quite right about the severity of the impact on Scottish agriculture. During the recent severe weather, we opened a hotline, hired seven tracked vehicles for use across the country and arranged with SSE to use its helicopter to drop feed in inaccessible areas at the request of farmers. As I indicated, we also made resource available for picking up fallen stock. I am willing to make further support available—as I said, we will make an announcement next week. We will stand by Scottish agriculture in its hour of need.

I commend the member for Angus North and Mearns, Nigel Don, for organising the debate and Tuesday’s farmers market event, which was held in the members’ restaurant and which many of us attended. It was an enjoyable event. Many people turned out to it and it showcased a wide variety of products that Scotland’s producers and processors have to offer. I was at the event and purchased some burgers and sausages. I even had a couple of the pork sausages from Gorgie City Farm, which is not too far from the Parliament, for breakfast this morning. They were absolutely fantastic. That sums up the quality that we get from our local producers. I noted John Mason’s comments about the food at receptions in the Scottish Parliament. Perhaps there is a case for making it more local. I am sure that the Deputy Presiding Officer is paying close attention to that point because it is a responsibility of the Presiding Officers. I am sure that he will take that point away. Each farmers market has a unique character. However, Nigel Don has previously made a valid point about the need for such events to be held indoors. We all know that the weather in Scotland is not always the best, and holding our farmers markets indoors may be a way to encourage the people of Scotland to buy even more local food directly from the producers. We will be keen to consider that as part of the new think local initiative that the Scottish Government is funding to encourage more local produce to be made available to consumers throughout Scotland, and to help to fund any local initiatives that come about with that aim in mind. Just over a month ago, we debated the achievements of our first ever national food and drink policy. In that debate, I was struck by the great pride that members from across the political spectrum took in highlighting the many success stories in their constituencies’ local food and drink sectors. I have visited many of the butchers throughout the country that have been mentioned in today’s debate. In the debate on the national food and drink policy, members were right to express pride in what businesses of all sizes the length and breadth of Scotland have achieved over the past few years. We all hope that the success story of promoting local food in Scotland—not only selling it locally but exporting it to other markets—continues in the future. The demand for local food and drink increases year on year, despite some of the myths and the economic climate. That is really good news and is a big vote of confidence in the quality and reputation of Scottish food. However, that trend, which has been established over the past several years, has been given fresh impetus on the back of the horsemeat scandal, as members rightly said. Since that scandal broke, the Scottish Government has been working hard in partnership with industry organisations to highlight the message that shoppers can have confidence in the “Scotch” label, for which provenance, traceability and quality are clear. I believe that that is why so many more people are now going to local butchers compared with only last year. A boom is taking place in local butcher sales in Scotland, as many of the anecdotes from members illustrate. Some butchers report that sales have gone up by more than a fifth since January. Others say that they have increased by 30 per cent. I have heard even higher percentages. That is really good news and reflects the fact that local butchers have a long-established relationship with farmers and know every step that their meat takes before it reaches their customers’ plates.

Many of our local butchers are certainly innovative. It is also encouraging that so many local butchers, as members said, continue to populate our high streets. That is certainly the case in my constituency—I visit all my local butchers regularly—as it is elsewhere in the country. Of course, one reason why butchers are still on our high streets despite some of the trends of recent years is that they innovate. They explain the story behind their produce to customers and take other steps, so they deserve their success. The supply of meat to butchers is important. That is why our livestock sector is so important in Scotland. Given the impact of the recent weather on some sheep farmers, I hope that we can use the debate to encourage Scottish consumers to get even more behind our sheep farmers and livestock farmers and to support them in their hour of need by purchasing even more Scotch lamb and Scotch beef. The uplift in demand for their produce is leading to an increase in demand for skilled butchers. Skills Development Scotland is turning its attention to the issue and is working in tandem with the Meat Training Council to deliver modern apprenticeships in meat processing skills. Let us not forget that the industry needs specific skills, so we must encourage our young people to take up training and opportunities in their local butchers’ shops. We are supporting 252 modern apprenticeship posts throughout Scotland, from Stranraer to Shetland and everywhere in between. That is good news. Other initiatives are being taken, too. The horsemeat scandal is not yet behind us, as cases of contamination continue to be uncovered by the extensive testing regime that we introduced. The Scottish Government is looking for further action at European level in that regard. I hope that consumers throughout Scotland will continue to support their local butchers. In a recent survey by Kantar, 46 per cent of consumers said that they would change their purchasing behaviour as a result of the horsemeat scandal. I hope that people will continue to give more support to their local producers. As food minister, I will continue to do what I can do to support the local food agenda. We are investing £1 million in the think local campaign. We have set up a community food fund, to help to promote Scotland’s rich larder throughout the country. We are making available £1 million in the next three years to provide targeted assistance to local food networks and communities, to give people the opportunity to show their wares to a wider audience and to build on the reputation that we have been celebrating in this debate. There is much more that I could say. I congratulate all our local butchers on their success. I will continue to send the message to consumers in Scotland that they should look for the “Scotch” label, and that by visiting their local butcher they can be assured of good quality produce, integrity on provenance, and food that tastes absolutely fantastic, as was clear from the food that was on show at the farmers market in the Scottish Parliament on Tuesday—of which I hope we see more in the future. I congratulate Nigel Don on securing this important debate.

I, too, congratulate Angus MacDonald on securing the debate. It comes as no surprise that the Scottish Association of Young Farmers Clubs is well regarded across Parliament and widely recognised for the key role that it plays in supporting young people in our rural areas. The Deputy Presiding Officer indicated that this is a matter close to his own heart because, like the rest of us, he was young once, too. The future looks bright for Scotland’s young farmers clubs in the SAYFC’s 75th anniversary year. With more than 3,000 members and with new clubs continuing to form, the association celebrates its 75th anniversary from a position of strength, and members across the chamber have acknowledged the many valuable roles that it plays. Of course, one of its roles, which we should not forget, is that of marriage bureau; indeed, I was reminded of that on my visit this morning to Whitmuir farm, where I spoke to Jamie Hope, who works there, and his wife Sue, who met more than 25 years ago at a young farmers club meeting. The association has morphed out of all recognition from its origins as a club where farmers’ sons and daughters could meet. It is now a highly modern, efficient and influential organisation, representative of all the youth of rural Scotland. However, I suspect that its agricultural roots are never far from the surface—and nor should they be. Although I am sure that John Robson, founder of the very first Scottish young farmers club, could never have foreseen how things would develop over time, I am also sure that he would approve of what has happened. From those humble beginnings, the association now produces individuals who are capable of representing young farmers on the world stage and provides opportunities and experiences that can last a whole lifetime. Of course, 75 years is a special anniversary. Why? The fact is that every organisation that reaches such a milestone will have endured setbacks and difficulties along the way, and I am sure that the situation has been no different for the association. However, the best organisations overcome such challenges and are stronger for them. Again, I am sure that the same can be said of the association. As the chamber is aware and as many members have pointed out, young people’s access to farming is a very important issue and has certainly been a pursuit of mine since I arrived in office. Every industry needs a steady stream of new blood. When I go around Scotland, visiting our rural communities and meeting the agricultural sector, I am always encouraged by the amount of fantastic new talent that is coming through the ranks in Scottish agriculture. It is a fantastic sign for the future. However, although there is already a lot to be proud of in Scottish farming, every vibrant industry needs to regenerate to meet future challenges. Members should make no mistake: although Scottish farming is vibrant, we still need more young people with the vision and entrepreneurial skills to build a successful and efficient business that makes best use of our natural resources. The Government is doing all that it can to assist in achieving that ambition. For a start, one of my top priorities in the current negotiations has been to get new entrants into the new CAP regime from day 1. We all know how new entrants have been disadvantaged under the historic payment model; that is not acceptable and I will not relent in arguing their case. As members have indicated, the position that has been reached in the current negotiations—all things being equal in their final stages—is that help will now be available for new entrants from day 1 of the new policy, with top-ups for some recent new entrants in certain situations. However, we are still trying to secure the ability to ensure that “new” new entrants under the new policy are also able to take advantage of the top-slicing to create a national reserve, and we are urging the UK Government to help us to make that a priority in the negotiations.

There is the current situation but, under the new policy and with the ability to top-slice funding for an on-going national reserve, we will have to change things and think about whether that reserve will need to be increased through the course of the new CAP. Although those who have been frozen out under the existing policy will be on a level playing field from the beginning of the new policy, we believe that anyone who joins in 2016 or 2017 should have the same opportunities, and we are urging the UK Government to help us to secure that in the final stages of the negotiations. I have implemented a succession of initiatives, from providing capital funding under the Scotland rural development programme to increasing advisory services, and from making starter units available on Forestry Commission land to changing farm tenancy legislation. All of those are making a contribution and are providing opportunities that previously did not exist. Coincidentally, today there will be a further meeting of the new entrants panel, which I established towards the end of last year. As we look ahead to the new CAP, the panel’s work will be crucial in identifying optimum support arrangements for farmers who are entering the industry. Recently, at the NFUS centenary annual general meeting, I also announced £2 million to support a package for new entrants who are frozen out of the existing CAP to help to bridge the gap to at least a small extent, because that is all that we are able to do between now and the introduction of the new policy. Along with the new entrants panel, we will work out the best way to deploy that funding. The panel members bring an array of talent from various farming backgrounds, but a representative from the Scottish Association of Young Farmers Clubs could usefully add an extra dimension, as it is plain that we will find among its membership much of the talent, skill and commitment that are essential for Scotland’s farming future. I have asked for that to be considered at the panel’s meeting later today. In my role as cabinet secretary, I am privileged to travel around Scotland and regularly to meet young farmers and others. I vividly recall visiting the association’s tent at the Royal Highland Show last year and taking the opportunity to join the association for a drink: it was a pint of milk as opposed to something else that members might expect of young farmers. I had to down the pint of milk as quickly as I could and, of course, my performance was absolutely pathetic and I did not win the competition, although it must be said that it was my second pint of milk that day. I will try to do better this summer. I cannot mention the Royal Highland Show or the young farmers clubs without saying a few words about one Willie Davidson, who tragically died on his farm near Moffat only recently. Willie was well known throughout the country, and his cattle had regular success at the show. He was also a national vice-president of the association, and a 75th anniversary fund has been launched in his name with the aim of raising £100,000 to support new and existing clubs. That is a worthy legacy if ever there was one. Prince Charles has just become patron of the Scottish Association of Young Farmers Clubs, and I add my personal congratulations and thanks—and those of the Scottish Government—for all that the clubs achieve from Orkney to the Borders and Dumfries and Galloway. I am pleased to inform the Parliament that, to recognise those achievements, I am working closely with Angus MacDonald to arrange an event in the Scottish Parliament for the clubs to celebrate this landmark year. May the association’s 75th anniversary be not only a cause for celebration but a catalyst and inspiration for further achievement in the next 75 years and beyond. 13:01 Meeting suspended. 14:00 On resuming—

To build on the recent upsurge in consumer demand for locally sourced meat, which has resulted in more than 90 per cent of butcher shops recording increased sales, the Scottish Government has provided an additional £1 million to Quality Meat Scotland to fund a number of promotional activities to further strengthen the visibility and provenance that underpin the Scotch label. I urge retailers and every outlet that serves food to buy local, and I urge consumers to buy and eat local.

Yes, I agree with those sentiments. Buying good-quality produce from local shops certainly means a shorter supply chain and, in the case of meat at local butchers, full traceability. That can only be a good thing for a number of reasons. For example, it involves fewer food miles, and Scotch beef has a smaller carbon footprint than beef from a number of other countries throughout the world. There are a number of win-wins, so I urge people to buy local and I urge retailers to source local.

I commend the work of Savour the Flavours in Dumfries and Galloway. I support people being able to sample and enjoy products from their local larder, which is promoted by such local food networks. There are also benefits for local tourism. To help to promote such initiatives throughout Scotland, the think local initiative will be launched this summer. Last autumn, I announced a number of initiatives, of which that is one, to help to promote the agenda throughout 2013 and certainly in the run-up to the major events in 2014.

Last Wednesday, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, the Minister for Local Government and Planning and I met representatives from the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Association of Directors of Education in Scotland, North Lanarkshire Council, Renfrewshire Council, Scotland Excel and the National Parent Forum of Scotland to discuss local authority food and drink procurement and school meals. At the meeting, we reiterated our intention to work with local government to give renewed impetus to the important hungry for success agenda to continue to drive up the standards and quality of school meals. I am delighted that the initiative is being refreshed and a working group called still hungry for success will have its first meeting tomorrow to discuss taking this work forward.

As I have explained to members on numerous occasions, traceability requirements are built into the procurement process. I should point out that Labour councillor David O’Neill, who is president of COSLA, said “Scotland’s councils are committed to excellence in all their services, including the standard of food served to those within their care.” I am disappointed not to have heard one positive comment from Labour members in the past few weeks about the enormous amount of progress that has been made with the quality of school meals during the past decade or so. That does a real disservice to the many good people who work in our catering services, including those who have helped with that progress. Of course, there are still lessons to learn, which is why the still hungry for success working group will meet tomorrow. I just wish that we could hear some warm words of welcome for that from the Labour members. Many Labour councils are doing a good job, and it does them a disservice that their Labour colleagues in the Parliament keep talking them down.

I discussed the mislabelling of meat products with the European Commissioner for Health and Consumer Policy, Tonio Borg, and United Kingdom ministers when I was in Brussels on 25 and 26 February. I conveyed the Scottish Government’s strong support for additional testing within the European food supply chain, and the need to extend labelling to processed meat products.

I agree with that. One of the benefits of shorter supply chains—which we all encourage following the horsemeat scandal—is that traceability is easier and more transparent. That can only be a good thing. On labelling, I have long advocated that labelling be extended to processed meat products, as well as fresh meat. I have lobbied for that in Europe and with successive UK secretaries of state, all of whom—Conservative and Labour—have been reluctant. I am glad that the Conservative Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs now seems to support the Scottish position.

If Claire Baker has any evidence of that, I would be pleased to hear it. The reason why there has been a decline in the number of meat and hygiene inspectors, who are part of the Food Standards Agency in Scotland these days, is that there are fewer abattoirs in Scotland, so fewer staff are required. Also, many of the tasks that the inspectors carry out are at the behest of European regulations. When those regulations change, the functions of those services also change. I am not sure exactly what Clare Baker is suggesting, but I am not aware of any evidence that there have been implications for food safety due to changes in the structures or formats of those services. Environmental health officers are the responsibility of local government.

I met Commissioner Ciolos when he visited Scotland in November last year, and I travelled to Dublin for a meeting with the Irish minister, Simon Coveney, who is now president of the EU agriculture and fisheries council. Common agricultural policy issues including convergence were discussed at both meetings. I have also had regular meetings with Owen Paterson, the United Kingdom Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, and at all those meetings I have stressed how important it is that Scotland get a fairer share of the UK’s CAP budget. I encourage Mr Scott to use any influence that he has with his colleagues at Westminster to help to deliver that, because there is as yet no sign of the UK Government’s being sympathetic to Scotland’s needs.

The best way to address the issue, which I know John Scott is interested in, is for Scotland to become an independent member state of the EU. If we were independent, under the current formula and the system that was agreed as part of the budget deal in Europe, we would qualify through our low share of direct payments for an extra €304.5 million by 2020. Because we are part of the UK, we stand to lose hundreds of millions of pounds for Scotland’s rural communities between now and 2020, unless we become independent and can negotiate for ourselves, rather than letting others do it for us. It is clear that, at present, they are not doing that.

The Scottish Government recognises the health benefits that participation in physical activity, including horticultural activity, can bring. As such, we have supported a number of initiatives to both deliver and develop on-the-ground therapeutic horticulture to the value of nearly £1 million since 2008.

I will take that forward in any way that I can. Of course, as we discussed in yesterday’s debate a lot of work is already under way in Scotland to make more allotments available. I also note that a number of partnerships, particularly involving the national health service estate, are taking forward therapeutic horticulture with Forestry Commission Scotland and other agencies.

These are crucial days for the CAP, what with the European Parliament agreeing its mandate as we speak and next week’s vital council meeting at which ministers will agree their negotiating position. We must use such opportunities to secure a future policy that works for Scotland, and I will be at next week’s meeting to ensure that our key priorities are covered. Perhaps even more important—and to answer Tavish Scott’s point about my getting round Scotland to speak to farmers, which I do regularly—tomorrow night I will attend an open meeting with Angus farmers in Brechin. The priorities that I will be pursuing next week in Brussels include securing a simpler CAP that treats new entrants fairly, recognises the special needs of farming in a country with 85 per cent less favoured area status and gets right coupled support and greening, both of which are important to Scottish farmers and crofters. It has never been so important to ensure that the red meat supply chain is supported; coupled support is key to that, and from the start I have argued that Scotland must have the option to use 15 per cent of our envelope in that way or at the very least have the same ceiling as every other country. Although greening is good in principle, it is still difficult to work out how it can be applied proportionately across Europe. However, Scotland has made good progress in discussions on the issue and things seem to be going slowly in the right direction. There is recognition of traditional grazing practices, including heather; moreover, the thresholds for crop diversification appear to be going in the right direction but to my mind they need to be nudged a bit more to ensure that there are no unintended consequences for mixed farming on the uplands. There also seems to be a recognition that permanent grass can be measured at a national level in countries where there is no evidence of significant loss of area. That leaves ecologically focused areas, on which much work still needs to be done before we can be sure that that will work in a proportionate manner. Although the CAP negotiations are under way, we must think about what the CAP itself will mean for Scotland. The move from historic to area-based payments will be essential if payments are to be linked to recent activity rather than activity in the early 2000s; indeed, that is why back in 2009 I asked Brian Pack to consider our options. When he reported in 2010, he recognised the difficulties for countries such as Scotland with diverse agricultural landscapes in moving to area-based payments. For a start, arable farming takes place alongside livestock farming; farms have good land in valley bottoms but poorer land up in the hills; and our parishes often include land that is capable of producing different things. All those factors create very special issues that we need to consider in the move to area-based schemes, and Brian Pack’s report and proposed payment regimes were based on extensive modelling by the James Hutton Institute. It is good to see that Wales is now catching up with Scotland and like Mr Pack is setting out its thoughts and possible scenarios. I point out that those are only preliminary thoughts, not firm forecasts because, as the Welsh consultation document makes clear, “there are too many uncertainties”. Many key aspects of the future CAP are still very unclear and new ideas are still going into the text. Only last month, ministers discussed what has been referred to as the Irish tunnel—which, before I lose members, I should explain involves moving from historic to area-based payments without going all the way by 2020. Last month, we discussed the French idea of a redistributive payment to top up payments for the first 50 hectares on farms, which, of course, will leave less money to be shared out in the basic payments. Those very recent examples of additional flexibilities were proposed just last month after the Welsh consultation document had been published and are not covered in it. However, we do not even know the exact size of our future CAP budget and the main CAP regulations will not be agreed in Europe before June. Those key issues must be addressed before we can paint exact scenarios that reflect Scotland’s circumstances. We are in the middle of another round of modelling in Scotland and stakeholders, who have been involved in that process from the start, will help us to whittle down our options at a conference on 17 April and take forward further work over the summer. Until we have all the details of the future CAP, that must be an on-going process. I said that we still do not know the exact size of our future CAP budget to be delivered through pillar 1, which funds direct payments to farms, or pillar 2, which funds the Scotland rural development programme, but we know that we have been let down in the multi-annual financial framework negotiations, despite Scotland’s budgets already being clearly iniquitous. The Scottish direct payments rate is less than half of the European average rate. On the other hand, England gets double the Scottish rate and roughly the average European rate. If Scotland was negotiating as a member state on our own behalf, we know that, by 2020, we would be better off to the tune of over €300 million per annum through pillar 1 alone.

I am not sure how the member can ask for higher payments for Scotland on the one hand, and then defend the status quo by saying that we do not deserve higher payments somehow. We are in virtually the same position as many other small countries in Europe, but we get a much poorer deal. We have been let down not only on direct farm payments, but on rural development funding. That funding is vital for our environment, our wider economy and the crofters to whom Tavish Scott referred. A number of Governments—16 out of the 27—fought for a larger rural development budget, but the United Kingdom Government did not. Therefore, there is no extra uplift for the UK, although Scotland started the negotiations at the bottom of the league and other countries are gaining even more funding for their rural communities. Scotland therefore has every reason to feel let down by the UK coalition Government.

I honestly suspect that this debate is a diversionary tactic by the Lib Dems to distract us from the fact that Scotland’s farmers, crofters and rural communities face losing hundreds of millions of pounds up to 2020 because the Conservative and Lib Dem Government refuses to make Scotland a priority. That is at the heart of this debate, and it is no wonder that stakeholders in Scotland are lining up to criticise the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. These are very important times for the CAP. Scotland is ahead of the game on modelling and thinking about payment scenarios. The coming weeks are vital for Scotland, and we need the UK Government to take heed of our requests and secure the best deal for Scottish farmers and crofters. I move amendment S4M-05898.3, to leave out from “believes” to end and insert: “welcomes the fact that the Scottish Government, building on the early modelling work on direct payments published alongside its 2009-10 inquiry into future farm support, has been consulting stakeholders since autumn 2012 on a second tranche of modelling, the results of which are due to be discussed at the Scottish Government CAP conference on 17 April 2013; notes that Scottish stakeholders are currently calling on UK ministers to stop ignoring Scotland’s views during the current EU negotiations; further notes that, under the current CAP, Scotland receives the lowest rural development budget allocation per hectare and the fourth lowest direct payments budget allocation per hectare in Europe; notes that, in the multiannual financial framework agreement of 8 February 2013, a large number of EU member states negotiated special uplifts to their direct payments and rural development budget allocations; regrets that the UK Government seems to have failed to negotiate any such uplift for the UK or for Scotland; calls on the UK Government, in the remaining discussions on the EU and CAP budgets and in the forthcoming discussions on budget allocations within the UK, to ensure that Scotland’s low share of CAP spending is rectified in order that the needs of rural Scotland can be properly addressed, and recognises that Scotland as an independent member state of the EU would benefit from significant additional CAP funds for the benefit of its farmers and wider rural communities.”

Will the member take an intervention?

Given that the amendment in Alex Fergusson’s name is at complete odds with UK policy, has he discussed it with his UK colleagues? What was the response?

An important dimension of the debate is that we all accept that Scottish agriculture is diverse, and it is unique in many ways as well. That is why we need a CAP deal that is good for Scotland. We need to know the EU framework before we know what decisions are best for our diverse agricultural sector. Tavish Scott made many good points, but he seemed to urge me to take decisions on behalf of Scotland by the end of March. We will not have an agreement by the end of March. We need to understand what the European framework will be before we can take final decisions on what the CAP will look like in Scotland. As I said before, even the Welsh document has been overtaken by events, because last month the French and the Irish proposals came forward. Only today, the European Parliament has been adopting its position on the new policy, and next week the ministers will be adopting their position on the policy. A lot of water needs to go under the bridge before we know exactly what the framework will be in which we have to live. I want a CAP in which we support productive agriculture in Scotland and do not simply give support or urge farmers to produce for support. We want to support production. There is a big difference between the two, especially when it comes to coupled support. There is a case for limited coupled support, as I said before, specifically given the importance of the livestock sector to Scotland—particularly in our more vulnerable areas, where there is a good case for targeted support for our livestock sectors. As regards the nature and extent of that support, we will have to make decisions in consultation with the industry in due course, once we know the final budgets and the wider framework. We cannot justify any farm payments that are based on 2002 levels of activity. However, we do not want the most productive farms in Scotland to fall off the edge of a cliff in the transition from where we are just now to where we want to get to. That transition is important and we have to plot it carefully in the years ahead, but going beyond 2020 to 2025, as some stakeholders and some individuals have suggested, is quite indefensible. The fact that anyone could be given a payment in 2025 based on what they were doing in 2002 is indefensible, unjustifiable and untenable, and it would attract no public support whatsoever. There is only a certain length that we should all be prepared to go in that debate. I have also said that we need support for new entrants from day 1 of the new policy. Once we get that assurance, it will help us to make decisions on the transition for other farmers. However, whether someone has been active for 50 years or five months, their support should as much as possible be based on their level of activity and how productive they are. On greening support, I have said that I support the principle of greening but it has to be practicable and it has to be capable of being implemented in the Scottish context, again taking into account our unique environment and geography. That is important. We all agree that we want a common agricultural policy that is flexible and has a regional approach in its implementation and its transition. However, it will be incredibly complex. We should not fail to understand that it will be difficult to implement. All member states called for a simplified CAP and the Commission promised it, but it is no closer to being delivered. However, we have to get the implementation right for the sake of food production and our environment. The issue of the budget is incredibly important. We went into this budget negotiation with the fourth-lowest level of direct payments in the whole of Europe. There is now a formula for all member states, but Scotland is not a member state; we are part of the UK. For that reason, we are not going to receive the uplift that other member states will receive. We have an average payment of €130 per hectare and we do not have the ability to gain from the formula by getting to €196 per hectare by 2020 because we are not an independent country. It is a fact that, if we were an independent country, we would get to the position in which we would be delivering an extra €300 million to Scottish rural communities by 2020. Because we are part of the UK, we are not getting that uplift. That is a fact: there is a fixed formula. The briefing note from European advisers states: “‘all Member States should attain at least the level of €196/hectare in current prices by 2020’. This is targeted at Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia – the bottom three of the EU27 in terms of direct payments per hectare – which should lift them up to reach the same level of payments received in” other countries. We do not have anyone negotiating on our behalf, so we are losing out because we are part of the UK. It is as simple as that. It is no wonder that the NFUS president said last week: “Recent Defra statements appear to focus solely on English farming priorities.” Similarly, it is no surprise that the president of the National Sheep Association, John Cameron, criticised DEFRA ministers for not recognising the case for coupled payments, given the challenges that the Scottish livestock sector faces. The European briefing note that I quoted from notes that 16 of the 27 EU countries got an uplift in rural development funding, which funds village halls, environmental schemes and so on. Again, no one was there negotiating for Scotland, because we are part of the UK, which attaches no priority to rural Scotland. Austria received a €700 million uplift, France received €1,000 million uplift, and the list goes on. It may be a case of “better together” on the part of the other parties in the chamber, but for Scotland’s crofters, farmers and rural communities it is a case of “better off in an independent Scotland”.

On the issue of support from Europe for Scottish rural communities, does the member accept that, if we were an independent country, under the current deal that has just been signed as part of the budget negotiations, we would receive a dramatic uplift in CAP funding for Scotland—yes or no?

Today we are discussing food policy. Given that in taking the issue forward I often deal with the James Hutton Institute, I use this opportunity to say how sorry I am to hear that the institute has lost two talented and valued colleagues in a recent tragic accident, as reported in today’s news. I know that I speak for the whole chamber when I offer our condolences to the families and friends of Dr Stewart Rhind and Dr Julian Dawson and to all their colleagues at the institute. Food is vital to all our lives, our environment and our economy. In the past few weeks, the horsemeat scandal has reminded society of that and has raised awareness of provenance and quality. Consumers are now asking more questions about what is in the products that they are buying and about what is on their plate. That can only be a good thing, because Scottish produce competes with the best. Retailers and food service companies should respond by sourcing closer to home, adopting ethical purchasing policies and acting more responsibly. This transformative moment in the food debate should change the way that we think about what is on our plate, what we are eating, where it is from and how it was produced. I want, as I am sure the rest of the chamber wants, Scotland to be a good food nation. In 2007, the Scottish Government started raising awareness of food policy. Back then there was no national food and drink policy and there was no joined-up approach to growing an important industry of huge economic importance. We wanted change, so Scotland’s first ever national food and drink policy was published in 2009. Since then, the policy has come alive through partnership working all over Scotland. We have made a difference, and I will pick out a few highlights. First, the sector’s economic performance has been truly outstanding. Food and drink companies have not been immune to the downturn, but a sector that in 2007 was worth £10 billion is now worth £12.4 billion and has been one of our fastest-growing sectors. It is a sector that relies on Scotland’s rich natural environment, of course. Back in 2007, there was no environmental strategy for the industry. Last month, I launched its first ever environmental strategy, which is an important step forward, given the sector’s carbon footprint. While we want Scots to enjoy even more of their own larder, we also want visitors to do likewise. In 2007, there was no focus on food in Scotland’s tourism industry. Since then, it has featured heavily in the 2009 homecoming; 2010 was a tourism focus year; and it will be a key theme in homecoming 2014. We also want our public sector to source quality food from our own country. In 2007, an estimated 34 per cent of food that was publicly procured for schools and care homes was sourced in Scotland. The estimated figure is now 48 per cent across the whole public sector, and the figure is growing all the time. Those are great strides forward. Of course we cannot be complacent—there is always so much more to do—but let us consider the bedrock of that fantastic success, which is the outstanding produce that Scotland can offer. Our Scotch beef and lamb, for instance, are second to none—a fact which is recognised by top chefs everywhere. The meat is traceable from farm to fork and the Scotch label is a standard for quality. Our seafood, from our pristine waters, is acclaimed worldwide. Scottish salmon was the first ever non-French product to be awarded the label rouge. Our soft fruit, cereals, vegetables and potatoes are also well known for quality and taste, and our Scotch whisky is a global success—we ship overseas an estimated 40 bottles per second. Why would anyone want to look elsewhere for what we can supply? Thankfully, local sourcing and celebration of Scottish produce are increasing all the time. I have seen that myself; a food revolution is under way throughout the country. It is under way overseas, as well. A recent trade mission to China and Japan gave us an insight into the massive opportunities in those markets. As a result, one buyer will now supply Scottish salmon to 90 Michelin-starred and other top-end restaurants in Japan, and an agreement with the World Association of Chefs Societies will see 10 million chefs—I repeat, 10 million chefs—worldwide commit to using Scottish langoustine and salmon in their cooking competitions and restaurants. That international success is borne out by the export figures, which are at an all-time high of £5.4 billion—up 52 per cent since 2007.

Jamie McGrigor will be aware that we are currently in negotiation on the allowance for Scotland’s venison producers. We have made available £2 million for new entrants over the next two years and we have opened discussions with Scotland’s deer farmers. They are at the forefront of our thinking. In the immensely important international markets that I have just referred to, provenance and quality really count, as does a well-organised industry that can service customers. All that needs well-organised public sector support. Since 2007, what was a disjointed approach by the industry has changed. The industry leadership body, Scotland Food & Drink, has delivered real results. Since 2007, what was a disjointed public sector approach has also changed. Scotland Food & Drink’s partnerships with our enterprise agencies are supporting growth. For example, the United Kingdom market penetration project has since 2011 resulted in an additional £5.38 million of sales for the Scottish companies involved in it.

I will return to some of those themes, but I will say that even 5 million people in Scotland could not consume all the whisky that we produce, so it is quite a wise decision to export 90 per cent of it. We have important export markets that we have to utilise for the Scottish economy. I will return to some of the themes that Patrick Harvie raised. We could debate endlessly the food system that relies on big retailers. I am the first to challenge them, as I did last summer over milk prices and as I am doing now over the horsemeat scandal. I am also a strong advocate of the new but long overdue groceries code adjudicator, because some retailers do abuse their power—I accept that. I am due to speak to the newly appointed adjudicator very soon. Supermarkets may not be popular with all politicians, but they are popular with the public and we need to work with them. They sell most of our food and are responsible for around 240,000 jobs in Scotland. Those are important jobs. Many retailers buy produce from Scottish suppliers and tens of thousands of Scottish jobs rely on those contracts. We work hard to encourage retailers to increase Scottish sourcing. The sales of Scottish produce have increased by 28 per cent—just under £400 million—since 2007. Of course it is not just retailers who buy and sell food. Food service companies also influence our food supply chains across the public and hospitality sectors. A major food service company recently informed me that it now turns over £60 million-worth of products from more than 100 Scottish suppliers. It sells to customers across the UK and Europe, and it will invest a further £30 million in its infrastructure in Scotland over the next two years. Retailers and the food service industry provide the products, but we must also remember, of course, that the choices that people make are their own choices, and those choices have a real impact on our environment and our health as a country. That is why educating our children about food is a passion of mine. However, it is not just my passion; whenever I speak to people who are interested in food policy, the first priority that they always mention to me is teaching young people about food. In 2010, we piloted projects in schools. As a result, we helped at least 800 schools and 55,000 pupils to learn about food, and around 500 teachers received additional professional development. Last year, I extended that programme with a further £2 million-worth of support. Since 2008, the cooking bus has visited 130 schools and community groups and helped 13,000 pupils and 5,000 teachers and community workers to learn to cook healthy and nutritious meals. That emphasis on community is key to the food revolution. A real appreciation of local food is at its heart. Thriving local food networks are now emerging right across Scotland. Groups such as Savour the Flavours in Dumfries and Galloway, Taste of Arran and Argyll Foods have a business focus and co-operate to promote and sell their outstanding produce. Farmers markets have boomed. They are up 50 per cent since 2007, and sales have increased from £18 million to £25 million. Because local food is fundamental to our reputation, I recently approved the think local project through Scotland’s Rural College. That project targets support to local food companies, networks and communities. A £1.5 million community food fund will promote local food tourism, farmers markets, food festivals and other community events. Communities want to grow their own food. Since 2007, the climate challenge fund has supported 280 food-related projects with more than £16 million, and we will soon consult on allotments legislation to help to inform the community empowerment and renewal bill. The affordability of food is also crucial. Community Food and Health (Scotland) supports low-income communities, promotes healthy eating and addresses health inequalities. I know that we all realise that that is a massive challenge. Since 2007, Community Food and Health (Scotland) has received £4.75 million and provided grants to more than 250 community projects. Those are just a few of the achievements of the national food and drink policy. A key theme is our high standards of provenance. That is the platform on which our food and drink success is built, and it has never been more valuable—as we have learned from the horsemeat scandal that has rocked Europe. Food fraud in any country is totally unacceptable. Since the food policy got under way, I have stressed that we should know where our food comes from, value what is on our own doorstep, and see that food is central to our wellbeing, our environment and society at large. The horsemeat scandal has brought the discussion to the forefront. People are stopping, thinking and questioning where their food comes from. The scandal has challenged those who control our food sources to step back and think, as they must now do. Tesco’s recent announcement about more UK sourcing is just one example that shows the renewed importance of provenance—although we are right to ask why it did not source closer to home in the first place. The Government acted to restore public confidence and ensure that we did not get complacent. We have worked with the Food Standards Agency, announced the consultation on the new food standards body, and commissioned expert groups. Last week, ministers met local authority representatives to discuss school meals. School meal standards, which were set by legislation in 2008, are high, and those standards must be met before any tender is considered. Across the Scotland Excel contract, which covers most councils, the total value of frozen processed red meat that was used in 2012 was £792,000. Members should compare that with the £3.7 million that was spent on fresh meat. We can strive to do more, of course, but we should take confidence in our school meals, the uptake of which has risen for three consecutive years.

There are a number of important issues in that regard that will no doubt feature in others members’ speeches. The hungry for success initiative, which was launched in 2003, heralded a revolution in school meals. A still hungry for success working group will meet this week to start to refresh the policy. All members will no doubt have the opportunity to put their views to that body. The horsemeat scandal has made us all pause and think. In my view, provenance is the underlining factor. It is a matter of knowing where food comes from and taking assurance from high standards. Scotland’s high standards are internationally renowned, and there will be even more to work with in the future. The year 2014 is just around the corner, and the eyes of the world will be on Scotland. The next homecoming, the Ryder cup and the Commonwealth games present fantastic opportunities for business. I have committed funding of £1 million to ensure that food and drink will be a key theme of homecoming 2014 and other events. From international attention to community food networks, food is at the heart of our lives. We must understand more, challenge more and expect higher standards. There is much excitement and vibrancy among those who produce food in Scotland. Food producers have high standards and are justifiably proud of them. I urge all Scotland to back our food producers, and I urge consumers to ask more questions about their food. People who provide and sell food should source from shorter supply chains and promote high-quality local food. There are challenges ahead. We will set up a new food council in summer to support our work over the coming years. However, there is much of which we should be proud. We are fuelling Scotland’s food revolution through education, grow your own and local food initiatives. Our £12.4 billion food and drink industry is a real Scottish strength, and we are supporting the industry like never before. From global to local, Scottish provenance is known for quality and trustworthiness, and 2014 will capitalise on that. We should back the people who do it well—and that means backing Scotland. The horsemeat scandal has taught us the value of those words. Let us make Scotland a good food nation. I commend the motion to Parliament, and I move, That the Parliament welcomes the significant achievements of the national food and drink policy and looks to build on this progress through increasing the number of consumers at home and abroad who enjoy and celebrate Scotland’s famous larder, especially in the run-up to the Commonwealth Games, Ryder Cup and Homecoming in 2014; notes the growing interest in food and drink reflected in the many initiatives underway throughout the country that recognise the different ways that the sector impacts on society, and believes that there remains much untapped potential to promote the high standards of sourcing and provenance in Scotland’s £12.4 billion industry that makes an enormous contribution to Scotland.

It has been an excellent debate, with many good points made from across the chamber. Although I do not necessarily agree with the amendments, I agree with the vast majority of the very good arguments made by members of all parties in the debate, which show that the Parliament wants to go in one direction in making the most of Scotland’s potential in being able to produce so much fantastic food. We want all our people, our environment and our wider society and economy to benefit from that. The debate got off to a good start when Alex Johnstone referred to me as a “young man”, which was the first time in a long time that that phrase has been associated with me. I very much welcomed it. We learned a lot about people’s eating habits. Jayne Baxter mentioned beetroot ice cream in Fife and Maureen Watt mentioned the alternative to an English breakfast, which is porridge followed by Arbroath smokies—that certainly got my stomach rumbling. Many other good products were mentioned by members across the chamber. Members also went to good length to praise the local food and drink businesses in their constituencies, which play a crucial local and national role. If members want to invite me along to visit those businesses to taste the fantastic food and drink around the country even more than I have been doing over the past few years, I will be very happy to take up their offers. The purpose of the debate has been to reflect on the recent horsemeat scandal and to talk about the wider food debate. The horsemeat scandal perhaps focuses our minds on some of the big issues, but the food policy goes back to 2007 and much has been achieved since then. Some of the achievements span the full width of the policy, from food education through industry growth, to health and the environment—all of which involve a huge range of people and partnerships. I want to use this opportunity to thank all the people the length and breadth of the country who are involved in making many of those achievements happen. Those achievements would not have happened were it not for the talents of the entrepreneurs, primary producers, fishermen, farmers, crofters, men and women who work in factories of all sizes—some may be multinational, some may be local, smaller factories and business—and the many people who work on the front line to deliver food and give access to good, nutritious food to many communities, particularly people on low incomes and the vulnerable. They are the people who are driving our food revolution and making our food and drink policy come alive. They are the people who are making our food and drink industry a huge success and by doing so they are helping Scotland’s sustainable economic growth. I am sure that all members will agree that there are many dedicated individuals out there, and we owe them a lot. I hope that today has given us the opportunity to recognise that there is a growing interest in food and drink, which is reflected in the many initiatives throughout the country. I was thinking about how any big agricultural show or event in Scotland these days usually has a waiting list for companies to get into the food tents, which are very popular locations. That is another sign of the food revolution that is taking place. Of course, the debate has allowed us to discuss the implications of the horsemeat fiasco and raise awareness of the high standards of sourcing and provenance that exist in Scotland today. It is important that we talk up Scottish produce and do not allow the Scottish brand to become collateral damage in a horsemeat fiasco, the seeds of which were sown on the European continent, not here in Scotland. We should not be complacent—of course we should not—but we have to recognise that that is what we are talking about.

Once the investigations are complete in Europe, we expect the European authorities to throw the book at those responsible for the food fraud that has been taking place. That is certainly something that I will support. I listened closely to Claire Baker’s speech. She made many important points, which I recognise, although it tended to dwell on the negative when there are so many positive things to celebrate in the Scottish food sector. However, I recognise that the Labour spokesperson highlighted serious issues. There is local food in our schools and we should recognise that. Still hungry for success is a very important initiative. I mentioned in my opening remarks that the initiative is being refreshed. It is meeting for the first time this week and I hope that it will pick up—as we expect it to—on many of the themes that have emerged in today’s debate. I should point out that the Association for Public Service Excellence says that Scotland spends more on food content per school meal than anywhere else in the UK. Even my own authority—Moray Council—has been in the newspapers in the past couple of weeks, explaining how the meat that is served in schools in my constituency is sourced from a butcher in Forres. It is important that we explode the myths about the scale of the issue that have perhaps infiltrated into the media and some members’ minds over the past few weeks.

As I have said, the still hungry for success initiative will look at how to continue the school meals revolution in the weeks and months ahead. Taking on board any lessons that can be learned from the past few weeks from the horsemeat scandal, sourcing and other factors were discussed at the meeting, of course, but we should recognise that the school meals that are served in Scotland are of quality and are traceable. We should celebrate that in this debate, and not perpetuate any myths that may be out there. I am, of course, delighted that members have mentioned the food for life initiative, which has been a standard bearer of quality in many Scottish schools.

A guiding principle should be that things are sourced in Scotland and close to home, and I will continue to support that principle. On the horsemeat scandal, Richard Simpson mentioned the issue of food safety and quite rightly highlighted the great progress in Scotland in recent years in addressing food safety issues. It is important that we remain vigilant, but we have made progress. The horsemeat scandal is not, in general, a food safety issue; rather, it is about food fraud in Europe. Twenty-three countries across the continent are now involved in the issue or have been affected by it. As I said before, we do not want the very popular and strong Scottish brand ending up having collateral damage because of debates that have taken place in this country as a result of a scandal in Europe. We should celebrate the Scottish label and brand, and I am glad that some members have done that today. The new food standards body will, of course, be consulted in addressing some of the issues, and all members will have the opportunity to have their say. I can tell members, as Michael Matheson did, that promoting and safeguarding food safety will, of course, be the central function of the new food safety body.

I will happily pass on those remarks to the health minister. Many members have called for more regulation. We cannot rule anything out at this stage, of course, but we must be careful when we talk about more regulation. We do not want Scottish companies, particularly small businesses in the food sector, being put out of business because of a burden of regulation resulting from criminal fraud on the European continent. That would not do our economy any favours, and it would not do our food sector any favours whatsoever. We do not want to put Scottish businesses out of business, and we must ensure that our response to the issue is proportionate. Many members have spoken about the value of brand Scotland to our economy. We have a fantastic image in this country and overseas. We have a clean, green image; we are seen to have a fantastic natural environment that produces fantastic raw materials that underpin our globally successful food and drink industry. Graeme Dey and other members have talked that up. We have also talked up the need to ensure that the common fisheries policy and the common agricultural policy negotiations that are under way protect food security in this country and throughout Europe. It is important that we get a fair deal for Scotland’s farmers, fishermen and crofters, who supply the raw materials that underpin our successful food and drink industry. The export markets to which many members have referred offer tremendous opportunities. When I was leading a food and drink delegation in Japan and China, I heard distributors, chefs and others in those countries saying that the best produce that they have experienced from anywhere on the planet came from Scotland. We should take enormous pride in that. That is fantastic feedback from those very important markets. When we consider that 70 per cent of people in China will be in the middle class by 2030, we can see that there is a big market opportunity for companies in our country. Members covered many other issues, but I have run out of time. We must recognise that there are many global challenges to be faced. The forecast increase in the global population from 7 billion to 9 billion by 2050 will increase demand on resources. We must safeguard our precious resources in this country and ensure that we can support our food and drink sector in the times ahead. Food and drink are a passion that I know many members share. That is why many positive stories have been highlighted in the debate, as well as the difficult challenges that we face. If we work together we can build on the success of Scotland’s first national food and drink policy and make this nation a good food nation. I urge members to support the motion.

It is vital that the people of Scotland have access to the fantastic range of food and drink products that we have right here on our doorstep, and this offering is also available to all those who visit our shores, of course. That is why, over the next three years, we will invest £3.2 million to support think local and the community food fund; to support Scottish food champions to encourage our tourism businesses to offer Scottish produce; to support sourcing for growth—which is about bringing together our local supply chains—and to support prestigious food and drink events across the country, such as our annual Scottish food and drink fortnight. We are ramping up our efforts so that our local food and drink sector is ready for 2014—and beyond—and all the opportunities that are presented.

That is an important point on a topical theme. It is, indeed, the case that families can have affordable, healthy and nutritious meals using local ingredients when they cook at home, and food education has a large role to play in that. Michael Russell, the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, and I are working together on a number of food education initiatives to ensure, at least, that the next generation is able to do that. However, we have to find ways in which to encourage all families to source more local ingredients. We are working through some of the initiatives that I mentioned in my original answer, as well as with retailers and our primary producers in the wider food industry in Scotland. The suggestion is certainly something that we support.

I want to update Parliament on recent developments with regard to horsemeat and food fraud. As a result of the revelation of horsemeat being found in mislabelled processed beef products in Europe, consumer confidence has been severely dented and shockwaves have been sent through the food industry. It is wholly unacceptable that consumers have been buying products labelled beef that turn out to contain horsemeat, and the mislabelling of food products through deliberate and illegal meat substitution will not be tolerated. It is the clear responsibility of those who supply and sell food to ensure that consumers are not misled, and Europe’s food industry now faces the massive challenge of rebuilding trust in its products. At least a dozen countries are now affected and, as exemplified by last night’s announcement from Nestlé, it is likely that there will be further revelations across Europe in the coming weeks and months. That is why the Scottish Government has been calling for strong action at a European level. That is now happening, with European Governments, enforcement authorities, food industries and agencies taking the necessary action to get to the bottom of the issue. It is important to note that, in Scotland, there is no slaughtering of horses for human consumption, and no food manufacturing firm has been implicated in the horsemeat scandal and illegal substitution of meat. Indeed, all the evidence points to the affected meat originating from outwith Scotland. It is also important to note that, to date, this is an issue of food fraud with no evidence of any implications for human health. The Food Standards Agency in Scotland and the Scottish Government are acting to prevent horsemeat from entering our food chain and to reassure consumers. As Parliament will be aware, even though it remains part of the United Kingdom FSA, the agency in Scotland answers to Scottish ministers and is responsible for food labelling. South of the border, Whitehall hived off aspects of labelling and standards to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. After being notified on 14 January by the Food Safety Authority of Ireland of its survey of horse and pig DNA in frozen burgers, the FSA put in place an action plan across the UK. The Tesco product in question had been on sale throughout the UK, including Scotland. Two plants in the Republic of Ireland and one in England were implicated in the survey, and the affected retailers immediately withdrew potentially affected products from sale. Parliament will also be aware that as part of the investigation products have been withdrawn due to trace crossover of pork, for instance, into beef products. Although that is more likely a result of poor practice rather than fraudulent behaviour, it remains an issue that the industry must take very seriously. Three strands of horsemeat surveillance, one of which was initiated in Scotland, are now under way. The first is a robust UK-wide authenticity survey, with 28 local authorities taking samples of beef products from all parts of the food chain. Two councils in Scotland are participating in that survey, the results of which will be published in March. Secondly, local authorities are carrying out inspection visits to all Scotland’s 229 approved meat-processing premises and 29 cold stores. I asked the FSA to instigate those inspections on 24 January. We were the first part of the UK to do that. Sixty per cent of the inspections have already started, and to date 47 per cent have been completed. No issues to cause concern have been detected. The vast majority of the remainder of the inspections are due to be completed by the end of this week, and the whole exercise will be completed by next Friday. Thirdly, the FSA instructed the food industry to test all processed beef products for the presence of horse DNA and to share the results with it. Last Friday, across the UK, the food industry published the first set of results. Some 2,501 results were published, and 2,472 of them—almost 99 per cent—were negative for the presence of horse DNA at or above the level of 1 per cent. The FSA will publish a further update this coming Friday. No new products were affected. All the positive results related to seven products that have already been reported and, where appropriate, action has been taken to remove relevant products from sale and to notify consumers. Of course, there have been further product withdrawals since Friday. Where products have been found to contain horse DNA, they have been tested for the presence of the veterinary drug phenylbutazone, which is known as bute. All the tests on food for that drug have come back negative so far. Since 30 January, the FSA has been testing 100 per cent of horse carcases for bute. I repeat: there is no horsemeat processing in Scotland. Bute is not allowed to enter the food chain, but in the unlikely event that people have eaten products that contain contaminated horsemeat, the risk of damage to health is very low. The chief medical officer for Scotland, Sir Harry Burns, has said that the samples found were “still at a level many hundred times lower than those previously used in humans on a daily basis.” We have also taken steps to check that no horsemeat is present in the food that is provided to our schools, hospitals and prisons. Assurances have been sought from all those who supply food to the public sector in Scotland. Significant testing and tracing are going on throughout public sector providers, and that is also happening throughout those who sell or manufacture food in the UK generally. To date, there is no evidence of horsemeat in public sector catering in Scotland. Sustainably produced food and drink is a high priority for Scotland, and food and drink contracts are awarded in a way that balances price and quality before they are awarded. It is not necessarily the lowest price that wins; quality is vital in the public sector. We should all take that on board. As well as taking those immediate actions, we are, of course, turning our attention to the future. Others must do that as well. Rules on the composition and labelling of foods are, in the main, set at a European level. Due to that strong European component, I have asked for a meeting with the European Commissioner for Health and Consumer Policy, Commissioner Borg, to stress the need for safe and effective controls being available to us at a national level. In the meantime, at last week’s meeting—which happened at last—of EU ministers, ministers finally set out plans to accelerate further labelling measures. The enforcement of European legislation is within the competence of the Scottish Parliament, but a strong and strategic voice in Europe is, of course, needed to co-ordinate action across the whole of Europe. I have long argued for a stronger UK line on labelling in European negotiations, and over the years I have written to the secretaries of state Hilary Benn and Caroline Spelman to press for quicker action and stronger legislation. I will continue to raise those issues with current DEFRA ministers. Indeed, I have been in regular contact with ministerial colleagues in England, Wales and Northern Ireland over the past few weeks, and I have also discussed the issue numerous times with retailers and the food industry and, of course, with Scotland’s farmers and primary producers. Yesterday, I was in London with the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, Owen Paterson, and met the chief executives of most of the major retailers and the food service sector in the UK. Tomorrow, I will host another industry stakeholder meeting in Edinburgh with the Minister for Public Health, Michael Matheson, with whom I have been working very closely in recent weeks. The minister is also taking forward our proposal for a stand-alone food standards body in Scotland. The consultation on the new body is imminent, and ministers are currently considering the implications for that process of the horsemeat scandal. The minister is seeking the opportunity to make a statement in Parliament next week to update members. I can also inform members that the minister will establish an expert group to advise on any changes that are required to the FSA in Scotland ahead of the creation of the new body. No matter how far we go, legislation and enforcement are only a small part of the picture. Responsibility lies with those who produce, manufacture and sell food. There is a clear need for the food sector to restore consumer confidence. Given the greater awareness that exists of the complexity of food supply chains, which is causing much concern, it is clear that the people of Scotland are now taking an even closer interest in where the food on their plate comes from. There is clear evidence that people are looking for provenance and the Scotch brand, which is associated with traceability and quality. Some butchers report that sales have gone up by more than a fifth since the crisis started, and meat-processing companies in Scotland are reporting an increase in orders for Scotch beef. I urge consumers to seek out the Scotch label. Although we cannot be complacent on enforcement and strong standards in this country, we must do all that we can to promote and protect our world-renowned Scotch brands, particularly beef. Fortunately, we do not have the complex and sometimes murky web of supply chains that stretches across Europe. We have farmers with traceability systems for their meat through the Scotch label. That is why many customers are realising that they can trust the Scotch label when they buy meat. I urge our retailers to shorten supply chains and to source closer to home. We must be ready to do that. I will announce another expert group to advise on how we can take forward the Scottish food industry’s work on traceability and provenance. In addition, I am asking Quality Meat Scotland to explore how we can extend the principles behind the Scotch label and assurance schemes to the processing sector in Scotland. To strengthen the Scotch label and boost consumer confidence, last week I announced £1 million for developing new markets for beef, lamb and pork, and the marketing of the Scotch brands. Consumers need to be confident that food is what it says on the label. When the issue first came to light in Ireland, the Scottish Government and the FSA in Scotland took urgent action and swiftly implemented additional inspections in meat-processing plants. Scotland was the first part of the UK to order those tests, which complement the new EU-wide testing regime that was agreed following a meeting in Brussels last week. The horsemeat scandal has undermined consumer trust in some parts of the food industry, but it might be a watershed moment in how people think about food, which could end up being a good thing. There is an absolute need for every step of the food chain to take responsibility for the food that it produces and to ensure that Scottish consumers can have total confidence that what they buy is what it says on the label.

I welcome some of Claire Baker’s comments, but I cannot take lessons on being slow to respond from someone who has not lodged an oral question, a First Minister’s question time question or a topical question on the issue over the past few weeks. We all recognise that the issue is an extremely serious one, which we should treat very seriously. Claire Baker makes a good point about processed meat, but we must bear it in mind that the finding of horsemeat in products relates to imported processed beef products and that there is no evidence that any company in Scotland is implicated in deliberate meat substitution. Therefore, the quality of imported processed beef products is an important issue. We have a processing sector in this country. We should take advantage of that and try to persuade retailers and the food service sector to source more locally, so that our meat processors can secure those contracts. Consumers want to see shorter supply chains, and I have mentioned some measures to take that forward. Claire Baker referred to the proposal to establish a stand-alone food standards body in Scotland, and I will explain to her why that has come about. In 2010, the UK Government decided to dismantle the FSA in the UK by transferring responsibility for nutrition and labelling to ministers in the UK Government and away from the FSA. Given that the FSA is a body that is at arm’s length from Government, so that it can give independent advice, we took a decision that would leave those responsibilities with the FSA. That is why the UK Government is being criticised for its decision south of the border, while our decision north of the border has been welcomed, and it is the reason for the consultation on the stand-alone food standards body. I am sure that Claire Baker will agree that it makes sense that the consultation should take into account some of the issues that the horsemeat scandal has thrown up. As I said, Michael Matheson will make a statement to Parliament next week about that.

Alex Fergusson asked a number of questions. I will address first the issue of staff numbers and the number of food tests in Scotland decreasing. To put the testing issue into context, in 2009-10, Scotland’s local authorities carried out 11.6 per cent of the UK total of food tests; the figure is now 13.3 per cent. Yes, there have been similar reductions in the number of meat and hygiene staff across the UK both north and south of the border. That is due to European legislation changing and the fact that in Scotland—unfortunately, some may say—some meat plants have closed down in recent years, so meat inspectors are no longer based in those plants. The staff numbers therefore fluctuate, but of course we must keep them under review in light of the horsemeat scandal as we move forward to a stand-alone food standards body in Scotland. Alex Fergusson asked what the benefit of such a body in Scotland would be. We would argue that it would be independent and more focused. As part of the consultation process and to take the debate forward, we very much look forward to Parliament’s input on the scope of the body’s area of responsibility. A stand-alone food standards body in Scotland could achieve lots of exciting things for the wider food sector and food safety in this country. On how long regulatory changes will last for, the horsemeat scandal is a wake-up call for the processing sector throughout Europe, with more than a dozen countries involved—the next few days’ headlines will undoubtedly show that even more countries are involved. It is therefore vital that European authorities sort out the situation, get to the heart of the matter and understand what caused the food fraud and how we can ensure that it does not happen again. I am pleased that effort is now going to be made to accelerate country-of-origin labelling for processed meat produce in Europe, which could help Scotland greatly.

Angus MacDonald makes a very good point, which I know all members take seriously: we are lucky in Scotland because we have a fantastic reputation for provenance and quality. The last thing that anyone in this chamber wants to see is the Scotch brand and our primary producers—those who produce the raw materials that go into local factories in Scotland and produce first-class products—suffering any collateral damage because of criminal activity in Europe. We have to make every effort to promote and protect the Scotch brand, which is why last week at the NFU Scotland conference in St Andrews I announced £1 million to help Quality Meat Scotland and the wider industry take forward the Scotch label. As I said, there is also an opportunity to extend the principles behind the Scotch label into meat processing in Scotland. There is huge consumer demand from retailers and food service companies to shorten the supply chain and source closer to home.

Hanzala Malik raises a very important point that we are looking at seriously. Indeed, Michael Matheson, the Minister for Public Health, spoke to faith groups yesterday to gauge their views on the issue. Clearly, the labelling system applies to halal and kosher foods in exactly the same way as it does to other foods, and we expect manufacturers of such foods to adhere to it. As Hanzala Malik mentioned, there has been an element of crossover of pork in beef products. It should be said that, through due diligence, the food manufacturing service and retailers routinely carry out tests to ensure that what is on the label is what is in the product. That includes testing for pork. Clearly, the issue of the past few weeks has been horsemeat, which is why extra testing has been taking place. Routine testing is very important to identify crossover. The lesson for all meat processors in all countries is that what is on the label must be what is in the product.

We will look closely at consumer protection and I am sure that Michael Matheson will take on board Dave Thompson’s comments on the membership of the expert group that will be set up in the near future to look at any changes to the FSA and how those will be guided.

I have spoken about the food service sector and retailers; in the context of Mr Hume’s question, it is the food service sector that supplies the public sector and other organisations in Scotland. The food service sector must play a role in sourcing closer to home. It has a fantastic opportunity to do that, which is why I am keen to expand the principles behind the Scotch label into the meat-processing sector, as well as the fresh meat sector. That is a big opportunity. There has been enormous progress in public procurement over the past few years. The standards in our schools, hospitals and prisons are much higher than they have ever been—there is plenty of evidence that that is the case. Of course, the procurement guidelines that have been issued by this Government have had an effect by persuading all procurement exercises to take into account quality and not just price.

Stewart Maxwell’s question largely relates to food safety as opposed to meat substitution and labelling, which is what my statement was about. Of course, those officers play a very important role because the majority of tests that are carried out by local government officers—including environmental health officers—relate to food issues, particularly food safety, so their role is essential in giving the public reassurance. Audit Scotland has just produced a report that covers food safety services. There has to be a plan for the years ahead as regards how such services are funded and how we work together with the FSA and environmental health officers, but the report contains some positive comments. Local authorities need to take food safety seriously, and I am sure that they are taking it seriously. There is no evidence that food safety has been compromised.

The good news for the Scotch label is that Scottish meat is not showing a decline; it is showing an increase in sales. Many butchers whom I have spoken to have said that they have had a 20 to 25 per cent increase in sales over the past couple of weeks; indeed, some meat companies in Scotland are getting more orders from outside Scotland for Scottish meat. That is good news. However, the member is quite right to raise the fact that primary producers—farmers in particular—are angry about the scandal because it has had an impact on consumers and their view of meat. In Scotland we do not supply the world with commodity meat; we supply high-value, good-quality meat. We have a distinctive message, and I will support our primary producers in the agricultural sector and in the wider food sector to promote that message as much as possible.

Yes, the spotlight will be on the horse trade in Europe as never before and on the associated welfare issues. I am happy to raise the issues that Christine Grahame has mentioned.

We are keen to discuss with the UK authorities trade through Scotland of horses. It is not a huge issue for Scotland in terms of trade routes but I am happy to investigate Graeme Pearson’s point to find out exactly the extent of the issue. I know that intensive investigations into the horse trade are going on at the moment, which will involve all of the UK and, indeed, other European countries. I am happy to look at those investigations. I should also mention that all member states have been asked to give any information that they have about that horse trade to Europol, which is co-ordinating efforts across Europe to make sure that we are on top of those issues.

As I said, I am keen to set up an expert working group to look at issues of provenance and traceability in Scotland, so I will certainly taken on board Rob Gibson’s comments. One small note of caution is that, in a context where illegal meat substitution—food fraud—has been taking place in Europe, with some products being imported into the UK, we need to be careful about introducing knee-jerk regulation that could have a detrimental impact on small food businesses in Scotland. We do not want those businesses to suffer because of the illegal activity that has happened on the European continent. However, the member raises an important issue that requires further investigation.

I do not think that we will ever be in the position of stopping food imports into Scotland—I do not think that consumers necessarily want that—but I certainly agree that all of us in this country want to support the principle and vision that the member has outlined. Over the past few years, we have put a huge amount of effort into that vision, since we started off Scotland’s first ever national food policy a few years ago. Over that time, among UK retailers the sourcing of Scottish brands has increased by a third. I want to continue down that road because I think that sourcing closer to home is the right way to go where we can supply the products. Clearly, there will appear on our shelves products that consumers want to buy that come from overseas. As long as those products meet the same standards as those that producers in this country are required to meet, I think that that is acceptable. I agree with the good work that the Soil Association has done in our schools. As the member said, we funded that through our food policy, and we will look for opportunities to support such initiatives in the future.

As I said, the consultation on the stand-alone food standards body for Scotland will take those issues into account. We are about to launch a consultation on an independent food standards body for Scotland against the backdrop of a European scandal relating to horsemeat, so it is important that we take on board any lessons that can be learned on the issue from across Europe. However, I reiterate that there needs to be a European response. The FSA in Scotland does a lot of good work and is working extremely hard at the moment. I pay tribute to the FSA staff and to our environmental health officers, who are carrying out the meat premises inspections at the local level. There is a lot of good work going on, so I do not want us to start disparaging our agencies here in Scotland because of international criminal activity elsewhere in Europe. Of course, there will be lessons to be learned, so the member is quite right that we need to review matters to ensure that we have a robust belt-and-braces approach to food standards and food safety in this country. We will ensure that that happens, and we look forward to the input on that from the other parties in the Parliament.

Jayne Baxter raises an important issue. I assure her that the product testing that is being undertaken by local authorities will be not just in relation to schools but in relation to care homes as well. As regards the food service sector, which may supply private care homes, a huge amount of testing is going on. I understand that, a week or two ago, one food service company even sent 400 samples to the United States to be tested because the laboratories in the UK were at full capacity. That just shows how seriously the testing is being taken, and such testing applies not only right across the public sector but in care homes. As yet, thankfully, no issues of concern have been highlighted, but the testing is on-going and we cannot be complacent.

Poverty is an issue that the Government is committed to tackling. It is affected by a range of factors, including employment, health, housing and access to central services. As Mary Fee will appreciate, action on those issues is the responsibility of all my Cabinet colleagues, but we have taken many steps within my portfolio to increase economic growth, to provide skills training, to safeguard jobs and to provide key services, particularly through the LEADER funding stream, and through the Scottish rural development programme.

I commend the authors for their very important report. The challenges that face lone parents, particularly in the current economic climate and given the welfare reforms that are impacting on them, are very great, so I welcome Mary Fee’s raising the issue. A number of projects to assist lone parents throughout rural Scotland are supported through LEADER funding, and we are always looking for ways to do that. As Mary Fee also highlighted, welfare reform is presenting huge challenges for lone parents, who might face additional challenges because of their rural location and isolation. The Tory-Lib Dem welfare cuts will have a significant and detrimental impact on vulnerable groups and individuals throughout Scotland, and will do nothing to tackle child poverty or to help lone parents.

Scottish farmers receive around €600 million a year in direct payments through the common agricultural policy, which includes €29 million in coupled payments through the Scottish beef scheme. The Scottish Government supports the need for those direct payments, which are vital for Scotland’s farmers, particularly those in less favoured areas, and we will continue to urge the United Kingdom Government to recognise Scotland’s distinct agricultural needs and to support our position in continuing reform of the CAP.

Yes. On many issues there are many hectares between the position that is adopted by Owen Paterson and that adopted by me regarding the future direction of agricultural support. As I said at the time, when he spoke at the Oxford farming conference—when, once again, he called for direct support for Scottish food producers to be phased out as soon as possible—he was perhaps speaking to farmers who live in the rolling acres of Anglia, but he was certainly not speaking to Scottish farmers, given the fact that we rely on that kind of support and given the additional challenges that farmers here, particularly those in the uplands, face. Thankfully, many other countries in Europe recognise that there is a case for continuing direct support. I noted that Sir Jim Paice, the former Conservative UK Government farming minister, said only in the past few days that the position of phasing out direct payments so quickly is utterly “ludicrous”, and that the rhetoric from his successor, Owen Paterson, appears to be taking us back to the position that was adopted by previous Governments—with that utterly ludicrous aim of removing farming payments.

Alex Fergusson is right that there is a proposal to cap farming payments across Europe. My position is that we should not waste negotiating capital opposing that. On the other hand, we want to ensure that it can be implemented on the ground and that it is not so full of loopholes that businesses just create new businesses to get round the cap. We support the suggestion that the cap should also take into account employment levels; that makes sense. I assure the member that we have made that point to the UK Government in the past.

In my meetings with the major retailers, I take every opportunity to highlight the fantastic Scottish products on offer, including our high-quality Scotch lamb. It is clearly important that supermarkets support our sheep producers, particularly against a backdrop of lower farm-gate prices. As a consequence of the current market conditions, I met the National Sheep Association Scotland on 23 January to discuss the short and long-term difficulties that face the sheep industry, and I hope to make an announcement shortly on possible support for the sector.

Gil Paterson rightly highlights that Scotch lamb benefits from traceability and quality, which I believe are criteria that consumers are looking for. I therefore hope that every retailer would ensure that consumers have the opportunity to buy that lamb from the shelves in Scottish supermarkets. Clearly, that happens in some supermarkets, but not in all. We want all retailers to get behind our sheep sector, given some of the current challenges. We are also working with the industry to look at new export opportunities. It is clear that there is untapped potential in overseas markets, so we want to make the most of that opportunity as well.

I know that Alison Johnstone and other members have a long-term interest in small abattoirs, particularly those in our more rural areas. We have supported new abattoirs in rural areas through some of our existing funding streams, but some of the challenges that face others are, of course, commercial challenges: if they are not making a profit, that is why they close down, unfortunately . On a future food body, I am not quite sure to what Alison Johnstone was referring. However, the role of the Food Standards Agency is under review at the moment. The FSA has a big role to play in regulating smaller abattoirs. We have certainly discussed with it in the past whether there is any way of alleviating the costs of regulation.

I meet regularly with farmers, and the impact of high input costs such as fuel and animal feed is raised frequently, so I am very aware of the consequences for agriculture in Scotland. Although commodity prices are set by international markets and are, therefore, beyond our control, the Scottish Government supports the industry in a variety of ways to help farmers to manage those costs as well as possible. Those and other challenges are why I was determined to get single farm payments to farmers and crofters as promptly as possible. On the first possible day, 70 per cent were paid, and we have now paid 98 per cent of recipients, thereby putting £437 million into the rural economy.

Bruce Crawford makes an important point about the impact of rising fuel costs on agriculture and other rural industries. At a time when households and businesses are facing rising fuel costs, further increases in fuel duty would clearly be the wrong approach. They would not only directly affect the farming businesses in terms of how much they pay for fuel, but their supplies and raw materials would increase in price as well, due to additional transport costs. As Bruce Crawford said, a fuel duty regulator would help to address the issue by automatically reducing duty in response to rising oil prices. We have repeatedly called on the United Kingdom Government to adopt such an approach, and its continued inaction simply highlights the need for Scotland to secure the powers to address the issue directly.

The recent extreme weather had an impact on agriculture across Scotland, including in Claudia Beamish’s region. I have had a number of conversations with farming organisations about that, and drainage has been raised with me several times. Given that addressing the issue could cost hundreds of millions of pounds, there is no easy financial solution to helping to improve drainage in our farms. However, we are thinking about how the next Scottish rural development plan could take into account the need to improve drainage on our farmland. Of course, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency has also spoken to farmers to find out how it can be of more assistance in terms of regulation.

At a time of cut-throat competition between retailers who want to increase their profits and perhaps squeeze suppliers’ margins, retailers should recognise that they have a responsibility to protect food security in Scotland and ensure that all our suppliers get a decent return. That is something that I and many other members constantly raise with retailers in Scotland. We should keep raising it. I am sure that consumers are on our side in the argument.

On behalf of the Scottish Government, I say that I regularly meet representatives of NFU Scotland to discuss a range of important issues affecting the farming sector in Scotland. Indeed, only last week I met a number of NFUS senior representatives while visiting a farm at Longniddry to see at first hand the extent of the impact of the recent bad weather.

The member is right. I did not meet the NFUS but I met some local farmers in my constituency earlier this week and it was a fascinating insight into the success of an organic dairy farm in Moray. I was very pleased to hear that at the moment demand for organic milk outstrips supply. That is a rather healthy sign, which is I hope an indication of things to come in the demand for dairy products, particularly in the organic sector, in Scotland. As part of our work to support a sustainable dairy sector in Scotland, we are undertaking a review led by James Withers, the chief executive of Scotland Food and Drink. The review will consider how we can make more of the Scottish brand for dairy products and capture some of the more exciting export opportunities, particularly in Asia and other markets, all of which could add significant value to dairy production in Scotland, offer new economic opportunities and, I hope, give dairy producers confidence for the future.

Claire Baker raises an important issue. We have said all along that we would listen to the views of the tenant farming forum, which is currently considering the report that the member refers to. I have to keep an open mind until that cross-industry representative body tells me its views on how the report should be implemented. If the member favours mandatory action in terms of legislation, I can give her comfort by telling her that I have an open mind on the matter at this stage.

I have to say that I cannot recall such a conversation in recent times. I am, however, aware that the issue of dog fouling on agricultural land is important. The current legislation does not prevent the fouling of agricultural land by dogs, but I believe that the outdoor access code asks dog owners to be responsible when visiting agricultural or rural land. We hope that they take that on board. I confess a limited knowledge of the issue. I would be happy to look into the issue that is raised by the member in order to understand it better and see whether there is a need for research.

Tavish Scott raises an important issue, and I know that his constituents have strong views on the sledgehammer-to-crack-a-nut approach that has been adopted by the European authorities in relation to the common agricultural policy. We raised the issue during the on-going negotiations. As I have indicated previously, I am unable to give members any comfort at the moment that Europe recognises that the approach that is being taken is wholly disproportionate and could be interpreted as a disincentive to produce agricultural products. It should be addressed as part of the on-going negotiations. The Scottish Government, with I hope the support of the UK Government, is still pushing for that. On the level of penalties, I can only refer to last year, when the level of penalties—in relation to the electronic identification of sheep, for example—was a lot less than people were anticipating. We have worked closely with sectors, including the sheep sector, to ensure that our approach is proportionate. We have to adhere to European regulations, but we will do what we can to be proportionate. We will continue to adopt that attitude.

When I visited a farm in East Lothian last week and, previously, during a separate visit in September, I saw at first hand the difficulties facing farmers and producers due to the adverse weather conditions I have been working closely with farming stakeholders to identify ways to support those affected. I have taken steps to ensure that support payments are made even more quickly than last year and to allow farmers more time to complete capital works under some of our grant schemes. In the opening of the payment window, we settled around 78 per cent of all single farm payment claims—up 7 per cent from last year’s achievement—which resulted in £370 million of immediate support to around 16,200 farmers. That is down to the dedicated hard work of agriculture staff in offices across Scotland, who have been working overtime and at weekends at a time when European regulations have asked for more inspections to be carried out before payments can be made. It is a sign of their dedication and professionalism that they have broken last year’s record in order to help the cash flow situation in farms in Scotland.

I am working closely with officials to ensure that we can help and support farmers in and outwith nitrate vulnerable zones who are affected by the weather. On the level of penalties, the fact that the vast majority of the farmers who have contacted us have been able to avoid penalties shows that we are taking a constructive approach. I hope that Alex Johnstone is not suggesting that, because of the bad weather, there should be no penalties under any circumstances. If there is no relation to the weather, we cannot have a policy of imposing no penalties at all. We have a regulatory regime that must be adhered to, but we are doing our best to be proportionate and reasonable. I will certainly keep an eye on the matter and I am happy to keep the Parliament up to date on the level of penalties.

Our woodland expansion advisory group included representatives of the Forestry Commission Scotland and NFU Scotland, as well as other representatives of farming, forestry, conservation and communities. The group recommended that the focus of woodland expansion should be away from prime agricultural land but that it should be recognised that there are important opportunities for small-scale tree planting, for example, on field margins, along water courses or to improve the environment in and around towns. We have accepted that recommendation, together with all the others from the group.

I have recognised for some time that the matter is a concern of farmers throughout Scotland. That is why we set up the advisory group in the first place. Now, we have decided to accept its recommendations. It is worth while putting the issue into context. Since 2006, Forestry Commission Scotland has purchased 44 farms and around 10,000 hectares. At the time of the announcement just a few weeks ago, we were committed to buying a further six farms in Scotland. That is a total of 50 farms, which is a small number in relation to Scotland’s 25,000 farms. So far, tree planting is complete or under way in accordance with the agreed plans on only 19 of those farms. I recognise that the issue is important for many farmers, as it is for the Scottish Government, and I am confident that we have a way forward. The advisory group has pointed to ways in which Mr Robertson’s constituents can be much better consulted by the Forestry Commission. They will be consulted in the future through the establishment of local reference groups, which will include farmers from each region. There is also revised guidance for staff, and the undertaking of consultations and community engagement in relation to land use on farms is required. Of course, we also have set up new starter farms within Forestry Commission Scotland. I hope that, as far as the future is concerned, the Forestry Commission will be creating new starter farms as opposed to preventing new entrants from getting into agriculture.

Last week, I delivered a statement on fisheries in which I outlined our approach to the crucial end-of-year fisheries negotiations. I am grateful to the Parliamentary Bureau for allowing us more time in scheduling a debate on the same subject this week. I fleetingly thought that colleagues might have been so taken with my eloquence last week that they wanted to hear a repeat performance, but I suspect that the reality is that the Parliament values the crucial significance of fisheries to our country and the importance of debating the subject at such a pivotal moment in the year for Scottish fisheries. Last week, my officials negotiated for Scotland in the EU-Norway talks in Bergen, so there have been developments since last week. Perhaps I should say that there have been non-developments because, somewhat unusually, those talks ended without a clear resolution and will recommence in January. That means that we will be unable to agree the position on all our fish stocks at this month’s fisheries council. Therefore, I am afraid that there is more uncertainty for the fleet on the shared stocks with Norway and other issues, but I think that we have the industry’s support in postponing the talks, because that may result in a better outcome for the industry. I understand that it is therefore relaxed about that postponement. No one can deny that the Scottish fishing industry has experienced challenging times recently. It has had to deal with not only a deeply flawed common fisheries policy but the legal straitjackets of a deeply dysfunctional cod recovery plan. As members know, I believe that it is essential that we understand and engage with our fishermen’s concerns. Only yesterday, I met all our industry leaders at the fisheries management and conservation group, which brings together the Government, industry, non-governmental organisations and others in a collective forum to oversee the management of Scotland’s fisheries. At that meeting, we had an extensive discussion about Scotland’s priorities for this month’s fisheries council, to which I will travel on Monday. The take-home message was the urgent need for radical reform of the cod recovery plan and of regulation that has failed our fish stocks, our wider marine environment and, of course, our fishing communities. Above all others, that is the message that I will take with me when I travel to Brussels on Monday for the vital end-of-year talks which, for me, will be about putting sustainable fisheries and common sense before the arcane and rigid world of legal technicalities. “Lawyer says no” is a mantra that I will simply not accept, especially when “no” means trampling all over our shared objectives for conservation and sustainable fisheries management. I will also take with me to Brussels next week the knowledge that the Scottish industry has shown a vigour and resilience that has delivered remarkable achievements in recent years. The produce that our fishermen bring ashore is, of course, second to none. Between 2007 and 2011, our landing values increased in real terms by a fifth, culminating in 359,000 tonnes of seafood being landed last year, which was valued at over £0.5 billion. As I said last week, that is the highest value in real terms this century. In addition, all that was delivered against the backdrop of an unprecedented recession. That trend reflects rising quotas in many of our key stocks. We have seen increases in recent years in stocks such as west coast haddock, nephrops and prawns, and North Sea haddock, whiting and herring. As I pointed out last week, the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea’s advice for next year points to further increases across many of our most important stocks: up 15 per cent for North Sea haddock, 11 per cent for North Sea whiting, 15 per cent for North Sea saithe, 53 per cent for North Sea megrim, 15 per cent for North Sea herring and 18 per cent for west of Scotland nephrops.

We have attempted to address that in recent years by building our scientific knowledge about some of the high-value stocks that are important to the Shetland fishery and others. That is beginning to pay off. We have also had to resist the European Commission’s attempts in recent years to slash automatically those quotas where there is, in its view, a lack of data. Thankfully, we have managed to resist that to an extent in recent years. Once the catch to which I have referred is landed, our onshore sector then does a tremendous job in adding value to it. As Claire Baker’s amendment notes, this month’s negotiations will be crucial for the processing interests as well as for our catching sector. While our catchers struggle with EU regulation, our onshore interests face new challenges as well. We should not ignore them as they attempt to market our produce successfully around the world. They continue to fly the flag for Scottish-caught produce overseas despite tough trading conditions and they are to be commended for maintaining such a strong track record of Scottish exports. Our seafood sector therefore needs our support. Nearer to home, I urge our colleagues in the chamber and all fellow Scots to include Scottish-caught seafood in their plans for the festive period and enjoy some of the fine produce harvested from our own pristine waters. That produce comes from one of the most varied fisheries in Europe, which makes it a fantastically rich asset for Scotland, but it also means that the advice on quotas is often a mixed bag: while some stocks are up, others point downwards. This year is no exception, and the ICES’s advice is a 20 per cent reduction in North Sea cod, a 48 per cent reduction in west coast haddock, a 20 per cent reduction in Rockall cod, a 20 per cent reduction in west of Scotland and North Sea monkfish, a 21 per cent reduction in North Sea nephrops and a 40 per cent reduction in west of Scotland megrim. In addressing some of those issues, our approach will be driven by three well-established principles, which I will repeat and on which we have been consistent over the years: the science on stock sustainability; supporting the social and economic wellbeing of the industry and the communities that depend on that industry; and seeking to reduce discards in line with our pledge to achieve discard-free fisheries in Scottish waters. Those principles are all underlined by our firm belief that conservation and the stability of stocks go hand in hand with the long-term wellbeing of the industry. We believe that those are sensible and laudable aims, if only we could be allowed to get on and deliver them unhindered. Unfortunately, the EU’s deeply flawed fisheries regulations continue to thwart us at every turn. Europe’s approach to sustainable fisheries should be responsive to the changing biology in our seas, with the flexibility to react sensibly and swiftly to the constantly moving dynamics of our marine ecosystem. Instead, Europe is bound by constraints of rigid regulations, such as the cod recovery plan, and trapped within unbending rules that were imposed years ago through political deals. At last year’s December council, we saw the worst of that and got a taste of it when we did battle with the Commission’s lawyers. We won that battle in favour of conservation measures. Scientists, fishermen and even the Commission all agreed then that the cod recovery plan is flawed, but the Commission stubbornly insists on imposing a rigid requirement for further automatic cuts in days at sea this year. The Commission at least promised us a review of the plan by spring, in response to our demands, but, again, it did not deliver proposals in time. The review proposal was not delivered until September, and that delay means that a freeze could not be approved by both the European Parliament and the council until well into next year.

We expect the support of up to 22 member states for our proposed measures in relation to effort freeze and in relation to cod, which I will come on to. I hope that that alliance will hold throughout next week. As Tavish Scott’s amendment makes clear, securing an effort freeze this month is key to the continued health of the industry and it would be deplorable if our fishers were to become collateral damage in a bureaucratic falling-out between EU institutions. I am thankful that other member states share that view. We have been able to develop proposals with the European presidency—not the Commission—to deliver what everyone agrees is necessary, but we are in danger of becoming embroiled in the dispute between the European Parliament and the council over who has the right to approve vital amendments to fisheries regulations. That is another extraordinary example of self-indulgent legal bickering between EU institutions, which pick legal fights with each other while fishers’ livelihoods are endangered and our industry is placed on the critical list. The squabble is blocking the passage of crucial technical conservation measures. If EU ministers do not defeat the Commission’s lawyers in Brussels next week, many vessels in our fleet will face economic chaos and our stocks will be damaged in 2013. I call on all key players in EU institutions to see sense and to work together to ensure that technical conservation measures remain in force next year and that other amendments that are required are delivered.

Dennis Robertson is right. There would be a huge knock-on impact on our onshore sector. Quite apart from all the legal wrangles, we are contending with rigid rules in the cod recovery plan, which require a 20 per cent cut in the North Sea cod quota in 2013 even though the stock has more than doubled during the past six years and our fishers and scientists are seeing cod in ever-greater numbers. There has also been the greatest reduction in cod discards in Europe, with the rate falling from 43 per cent in 2009 to around 25 per cent last year. A 20 per cent cut will undo all that good work and is a recipe for massive discards, which would be tragic. Try as they might, our fishers will find it impossible not to catch ever-more plentiful cod. They will have to dump all the cod for which they have no quota back into the sea, dead. Our innovative discard-free catch quota scheme will be left with little cod quota to make it viable, which could mean 23 of our biggest white-fish vessels having to start discarding cod again. As I said in last week’s statement, the cod recovery plan is supposed to promote conservation but threatens to leave long and winding trails of discarded fish across Europe’s seas. I took the opportunity to speak to our scientists about the matter again yesterday. They assured me that there is a good scientific case for rolling over the North Sea cod quota. The approach would avoid an explosion of discards while still achieving a healthy recovery of stock by the target date of 2015. The reality is that the cut is driven not by sensible science but by an arcane legal rule that is buried in the plan. On that basis, I will make a rollover of this year’s cod quota a top priority at next week’s council. Beyond the December council, we need to push reform further, demanding more responsive regulations that recognise and reward our fleet’s cutting-edge conservation efforts. Jamie McGrigor’s amendment rightly lauds the enormous and highly creditable conservation efforts that our fishers have made in recent years and refers to the need to promote and encourage initiatives, rather than undermine them or allow Brussels lawyers to undermine them. The North Sea prawn fleet and other fleets have been taking good steps, by adopting new selective gear during the past year. We should welcome that. We must recognise that the flexibility that we require to achieve at next week’s council will be important for many of our fleets, particularly on the west coast of Scotland, where fleets have faced challenges in recent months and will continue to face challenges, as a result of the effort problems that we have experienced in Scottish waters due to the lack of flexibility in the cod recovery plan. There are many other issues that I could speak about. I will happily take comments from the floor and try to respond to them in my closing speech. All that I can say is that we will continue to keep our eye on all the various important issues that will be discussed at the council next week. There are issues relating to high-value stocks such as megrim and monkfish, as well as issues with some of the other key stocks that I have mentioned. The negotiations boil down to the fact that next week, once again, we will have to decide on these crucial issues with other exhausted ministers at some ungodly hour of the early morning in Brussels following hours of rather grubby horse trading. I am determined to see decision making brought closer to home and to do away with the micro-management from Brussels that has been so damaging to fisheries conservation and to our fishing communities in Scotland. That is why Scotland has been the first country off the blocks to promote regionalisation.

I will if I have time.

I apologise to Hanzala Malik. That is why we have to secure the radical reform of European fisheries policy throughout 2013 as that is negotiated. Let us hope that this is our last experience of the broken CFP, which is so damaging to everything that we stand for in this Parliament. We have other issues to contend with in 2013 as well, such as how to break the deadlock over the mackerel stock, which is Scotland’s most valuable stock and which has been endangered by irresponsible behaviour by the Faroe Islands and Iceland. In 2013, we will be thinking out of the box about how we can have a game changer in the negotiations. Otherwise, we will be left without a mackerel stock and without a pelagic sector in Scotland, and thousands of livelihoods will be endangered. I look forward to hearing the comments of members around the chamber so that we can go to Brussels next week and secure the best possible deal for Scotland. I move, That the Parliament supports the Scottish Government in its efforts to achieve the best possible outcome for Scotland during the important annual fisheries negotiations; endorses its calls for the EU to replace the deeply flawed and discredited Cod Recovery Plan with a plan that respects mixed species fisheries, and agrees that there is a need for the EU to deliver radical reform of the failed EU common fisheries policy by bringing decision making on managing fisheries closer to home to promote sustainable fisheries, tackle the problem of discards and protect fishing rights for the benefit of Scotland’s fishing communities and the marine environment.

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. I welcome Tavish Scott to his first fishing debate in his new role as his party’s rural affairs spokesperson. I trust that the supportive sentiment for the Scottish Government’s position is a trend that he means to continue in future speeches. I welcome his reference to the fact that many fishermen now tweet. He referred to a tweet that he received from a Shetland fisherman. I assure him that I receive many tweets every day from Scotland’s fishermen, but I do not think that I will quote them in the chamber, because I am not sure that I would be doing myself many favours. I welcome Stewart Stevenson’s speech. He said that he has now made more than 400 speeches in the Parliament in the past decade or so, and I think that I can remember every single one of them, for one reason or another. I particularly noted the lawyer bashing in his speech today, which of course followed the speech from the eminent lawyer Rod Campbell, who I am sure did not take it personally. There are good lawyers as well as some of the perhaps more unpopular ones who are based in Brussels. The debate has been good. As ever, prior to the difficult end-of-year negotiations, there is a lot of unanimity in the chamber and unity across the political parties. I believe that that unity is reflected throughout Scotland, and that Scotland is speaking with one voice ahead of next week’s negotiations. The political parties in Parliament, the industry, environment groups, scientists and the wider fishing communities all want to see a successful outcome at next week’s negotiations, and all share the same concerns about some of the issues. Indeed, it has been very noticeable that we are all concerned about the many outside influences that are threatening our country and our fishing communities. Of course, as many members have reflected, that tells a story in itself; perhaps I will return to that point later in my speech. This debate has been about Scotland’s economy, our marine environment and our communities. As Clare Adamson and Rhoda Grant said, it is also about ensuring that there is food on our tables. A fishing debate is always an appropriate opportunity to recall that too many fishermen have paid the ultimate price when bringing food to our tables over the years. The debate is also about real families and livelihoods. Families want to enjoy Christmas knowing that they will still have a livelihood in 2013. It is about the livelihoods of families who work on our fishing vessels, in our processing factories, on the quaysides as painters or electricians, or in the local cafes. We are talking about the livelihoods of all those families in communities throughout Scotland whom we all represent and who rely on there being a successful outcome at the end-of-year negotiations. They will be biting their nails during the next few days and wondering what on earth lies around the corner for them. As ever, I have been struck by the fact that cod stocks have been the central thread running through many of today’s speeches. Cod makes up just one stock in our rich waters. It is by no means our most valuable stock, but it is still important, and it dominates the debate because the cod recovery plan’s wide-ranging impact dominates and frustrates the ability of the rest of our fishermen in Scotland to catch other stocks in the same waters.

That is an important point. I recently spoke out about some irresponsible headlines in some of Scotland’s newspapers, because they do not help the public’s perception of the good work that is being done in Scottish waters thanks to the sacrifices of Scotland’s fishermen. The cod recovery plan has now turned into an altar on which our fleet is being sacrificed. We all want the cod stocks to recover, and they are recovering—I will return to that point shortly—but the cod recovery plan is frustrating our ability to catch other stocks in our waters. It simply does not work in the mixed fishery that we have in our seas, which are rich in many different stocks that swim together and are caught in the same nets. The cod stocks are recovering, all thanks to the fleet’s sacrifices. However, the cod recovery plan is unresponsive to the biology of our seas, it is inflexible and it does not respond to circumstances or the needs of other fisheries in the same waters. It is also counterproductive, because although it seeks to conserve fish stocks and stop discards, it is causing discards and might be damaging stocks as well. Discards will result from the cod recovery plan because we cannot cut cod quotas when the stocks are recovering and are ever present in more areas of our seas. Cod is more difficult for the fleet to avoid because it is just about the biggest fish that swims in the North Sea. The plan is deeply flawed. The automatic cut in the number of days proposed by the cod recovery plan is also counterproductive because, as Tavish Scott said, our fishermen need time at sea if they are to be able to catch their legitimate quotas. They have to catch those quotas in the right area of the sea while—we hope—avoiding the cod stocks, but they do not have time to go to where the fish are that they can catch, so they end up catching the fish that they are not meant to catch. That is counterproductive. To avoid the cut in the number of days at sea and the cuts to quotas, we have to overcome the obstacle of the legal dispute in the European Union between the Council of Ministers and the European Commission. Our key interest is to ensure that we protect ownership in Scotland of our fishing rights and that future generations of fishermen will have access to those fishing rights. That is really important for the future of Scotland’s fishing communities. We have a legal view from the Commission on how we can achieve a freeze in days at sea, which is that the issue should be referred to the European Parliament, which would take up many months going through the co-decision process. We also have a legal view from the Council of Ministers, working with the member states and the presidency, which says that there is a way round that and that we can achieve a freeze by splitting the regulation, allowing one part to go to the European Parliament and keeping at the Council of Ministers the part that we want to use to get a freeze, rather than a cut, in days at sea in the council next week. That dispute is not helping anyone.

As I said, this is a dispute between the Council of Ministers and the European Commission. Our fishermen do not want to hear about disputes; they want to hear about solutions so that they can have a livelihood in 2013. I ask members to think about this. The scientists, the politicians, the fishing communities, the environmentalists and everyone else who has an interest in the issue agree that the cod recovery plan is not working and that it is damaging, yet we have a common fisheries policy that cannot provide a means by which we can fix it. The situation is an indictment of the common fisheries policy. The EU-Norway talks were postponed until January because of an inability to agree a roll-over of cod until the council, at next week’s negotiations, finds a mechanism that can allow that to happen legally. The postponement of the EU-Norway talks is a welcome development because it is much better to have a productive outcome in January than to have had a damaging outcome last week. The key issue is that cod stocks are recovering. Thanks to the fleet’s sacrifices, cod stocks have more than doubled since 2006. Our fishing fleet is taking a lead in Europe on fisheries conservation. Real-time closures were introduced by the Scottish fleet. The catch quota schemes that stop discards were introduced by the Scottish fleet. Much of the new and innovative selective gear to reduce discards and avoid certain stocks was introduced by the Scottish fleet. That is all good news. Jamie McGrigor asked why the catch quota schemes are not being expanded. That is something that we have argued for vigorously in recent years but unfortunately we do not have the support of the Norwegians in relation to the stock that we share with that country. Despite all the cuts in days at sea, the conservation credit scheme introduced by this Government in tandem with our industry has allowed our fleet to get back 70 per cent more time than would otherwise have been the case if Scotland had not led the way with those innovative measures, which are now being emulated by other countries in Europe. The scientists say that we can avoid the 20 per cent cut that is being proposed by Europe. We can have a roll-over of cod stocks for the next two or three years, which will get us to where we want to be by 2015, with sustainable cod stocks. That is what we will fight for next week at the negotiations. I turn to the west coast issues. The flexibility that we want to get at the fishing negotiations is desperately required on the west coast of Scotland. We will pay close attention to the impact on the west coast of Scotland of next week’s negotiations. We must maximise our valuable stocks in those waters—we are paying close attention to monkfish and megrim opportunities—and protect the haddock fishery there. One area on which we all agree is that we need a fresh start for fishing policy in Scotland and Europe. The CFP reform that is taking place now must deliver for Scotland. The European Parliament will vote on Monday and Tuesday. There was talk by some members of that vote being postponed until next year. My understanding is that it will now take place on Monday and Tuesday. Members will be glad to know that the 2,000 or so amendments have been whittled down to 104. However, some are daft: the proposal to close 10 per cent of Scottish waters, with no justification or scientific backing whatsoever, for example. We hope that Scotland’s MEPs and other MEPs will vote those daft amendments down. I ask all parties in this chamber to lobby their MEPs.

I apologise, but I am running out of time. Many other issues face Scotland’s fishing communities. We want to make discards history. A lot of really good work is taking place, but we have to market Scottish seafood a lot better. We are working with Seafood Scotland, the Scottish Seafood Association and other bodies to achieve that and to protect the interests of fish processors in Scotland. Claire Baker’s amendment talks about quota management and what has been agreed between the UK Government and Scotland. At long last, we have a step forward, in that Scotland will now have some ability to control how quota is allocated to our fishing vessels. We have been arguing for that for many years.

On the mackerel dispute, I have said many times that the behaviour of Iceland and the Faroes is absolutely outrageous and must not be rewarded. We will resist any attempt by the European Commission to reward irresponsible behaviour. This month’s end-of-year negotiations will, as usual, present us with significant challenges. Our top priorities are clear: we will seek a freeze in the cod plan’s annual effort cuts, and we want a mechanism to deliver a roll-over of North Sea cod quota. There is much to play for. We will strive to gain the maximum for Scotland so that our fishermen are given the best possible platform for making 2013 a successful year. When I go into these end-of-year negotiations, I have a great weight on my shoulders. I will do my best in these vital talks to deliver success not for Brussels lawyers but for Scotland’s fishing communities.

Currently, there are five Scottish food and drink products that have protected geographical indication status. That number goes up to six if you include Scotch whisky, which is protected under a separate regulation. A number of products—Scottish wild salmon, Stornoway black pudding and Orkney Scottish island cheddar—are nearing the end of consideration for the award of PGI status. The PGI for Scottish wild salmon is imminent, and we are hopeful that we will hear good news about the other applications in the very near future.

As the member will be aware—because, like other members, she has taken a close interest in Stornoway black pudding—that is something that we have devoted extra resources to over the past year or two. For instance, we have funded the Scottish Agricultural College to work with producers to work up their applications. I am pleased that new applications are coming through. Scotland has many iconic, world-famous food and drink products, which should be protected from fakes and should, as Rhoda Grant quite rightly outlined, enjoy the marketing benefits that such status brings. I encourage all members who have iconic, well-known food and drink producers in their areas to bring to their attention the benefits of European protected status. We will certainly give all the support that we can to get them through the process as quickly as possible.

I am happy to do so. I am sure that the member might wish to take up his concerns directly with Quality Meat Scotland. However, I should say that I was at Tesco in Elgin just a week or so ago to promote Scotch lamb as part of a joint venture between QMS and Tesco. Therefore, QMS is promoting Scotch lamb, and the Scottish Government is keen to support that. It would make sheep farmers’ lives easier if Jamie McGrigor’s colleagues in the United Kingdom Government would listen to the Scottish industry, the Scottish Government and QMS and, as we have requested, repatriate some of the meat levy that results from lamb that is produced in Scotland, which goes to English abattoirs and supports English lamb. That would enable millions of pounds of extra funding to be used to promote Scotch lamb over the coming years.

I am pleased to make this statement on fisheries as we approach the crucial end-of-year negotiations. As I speak, my officials are negotiating for Scotland at the European Union-Norway talks in Bergen, which precede the December fisheries council that will determine Scotland’s fishing opportunities for 2013. No one can deny that the Scottish fishing industry has been going through extremely challenging years in a period most recently blighted by the legal quagmire of the cod recovery plan and, as always, overshadowed by the deeply flawed common fisheries policy, which we debated here back in June and which has failed fish stocks, our wider marine environment and, of course, our proud fishing communities. I want to change that, as I know many of my colleagues in the chamber do, because we care passionately about this industry, which I have worked alongside for many years. When we look back, we cannot fail to be impressed by the Scottish fishing industry’s achievements in recent years. Between 2007 and 2011, the value of our landings increased in real terms by nearly a fifth, culminating in the 359,000 tonnes of seafood landed last year being valued at just over half a billion pounds, the highest value in real terms this century. All that was, of course, delivered at a time of recession. That is a big endorsement of the wonderful seafood that our fishermen bring ashore and to which our leading onshore sector adds value. However, we must never forget that in bringing seafood to our tables, many fishermen have made the ultimate sacrifice. As well as increasing value, there are many other positive trends in the sector. We have seen increased quotas in recent years in a number of key stocks, including west coast haddock and nephrops and North Sea haddock, whiting and herring. The International Council for the Exploration of the Sea’s advice for next year points to further increases across many of our most important stocks: up 15 per cent for North Sea haddock; up 11 per cent for North Sea whiting; up 15 per cent for North Sea saithe; up 53 per cent for North Sea megrim; up 15 per cent for North Sea herring; and up 18 per cent for west of Scotland nephrops. However, as happens every year in the varied mixed fishery that we have in Scottish waters, the advice also points to reductions in a number of other stocks: a 20 per cent reduction is suggested for North Sea cod; a 48 per cent reduction for west coast haddock; a 20 per cent reduction for Rockall cod; a 20 per cent reduction for west of Scotland and North Sea monkfish; a 21 per cent reduction for North Sea nephrops; and a 40 per cent reduction for west of Scotland megrim. it is fair to say that, as usual, we will have our work cut out fighting to protect Scotland’s position this December. Our approach will be guided, as in previous years, by three cardinal principles: first, science and stock sustainability; secondly, protecting the socioeconomic wellbeing of our industry and the communities who depend on it; and thirdly, acting in line with our commitment to achieve discard-free fisheries. Driving all those key principles is our conviction that conservation and stability of stocks will deliver long-term economic health for the industry. I am sure that most members in the chamber share my view that it is immensely frustrating that the EU’s deeply flawed fisheries regulations so often get in the way of many of those aims. For example, although the cod recovery plan is about cod, it greatly impacts on our ability to fish other stocks. Members may recall that at last year’s December council, we came away from one of the toughest negotiations that I have experienced with a victory over the European Commission’s lawyers in favour of conservation measures and Scotland’s fleets. However, despite everyone, including the scientists, our fishermen and even the Commission, agreeing that the cod recovery plan is flawed, the Commission stubbornly insists on the plan’s rigid requirement to impose further automatic cuts in days at sea this year. Commissioner Damanaki promised a review of the plan by spring this year to address Scotland’s and other countries’ demands, but she did not deliver any proposals until September, meaning that we could be well into next year before any freeze is approved by the European Parliament and the European Council. After all the waiting, we owe it to our fishermen to secure a freeze this December and we are working tirelessly with the United Kingdom Government, other member states and the European presidency to achieve just that. We are now aware, however, of a potential squabble between the European Parliament and the Council about which has the right to propose vital amendments and other technical conservation measures. That squabble could delay improvements that we desperately require and is an unfortunate example of legal navel gazing by EU institutions that we could do without. They are picking legal fights with each other while our fishers’ livelihoods are endangered and an industry is placed at risk. Without those technical conservation measures, the EU will find itself unable to comply with its international obligations on fisheries conservation and a number of stocks will be put at risk of serious damage. The internal dispute within Europe threatens to play havoc with our fisheries, so today I am calling again on all key players in the EU institutions to see sense and allow those technical conservation measures to remain in force next year and—this is important—allow the changes, which we want, to proceed. As if that were not enough to contend with, the rigid rules built into the cod recovery plan some years ago now require a 20 per cent cut in the North Sea cod quota in 2013. However, that stock is steadily recovering—thanks to the huge efforts of Scotland’s fishermen it has more than doubled over the past six years. Our fishers are seeing ever greater numbers of that stock—a finding that is backed up by our scientists. Scottish fishermen have delivered Europe’s greatest reduction in cod discards, with rates plummeting from 43 per cent in 2009 to around 25 per cent in 2011. Imposing a 20 per cent quota cut is simply a recipe for massive discards. Our fishers will not be able to avoid catching ever more plentiful cod, for which they will have no quota, and they will once again be forced to dump dead fish back in the sea. Our innovative discard-free catch quota scheme will be placed on a knife edge, which will likely force 23 of our biggest white-fish vessels to start discarding cod again. The cod recovery plan is supposed to promote conservation, but it threatens to leave long and winding trails of discarded fish across the North Sea and Europe’s seas. Back in the real world, we have made the scientific case for maintaining North Sea cod landings at this year’s levels, which would avoid an increase in discards and still achieve a healthy recovery of the stock by 2015. A rollover of this year’s quota will be another top priority at this month’s negotiations. I will demand a way out of the legal straitjacket that threatens to cause yet more obscene waste in our seas. Our fleet’s cutting edge cod conservation efforts should instead be rewarded and recognised. Scotland’s innovative real time closure programme leads the way in protecting abundances of cod and has been lauded by international scientists and others throughout Europe and beyond. This year, our North Sea prawn fleet adopted gears that ensure unwanted catches of fish are kept to an absolute minimum. Given those innovations, we want to see fundamental changes to the cod plan now, not later. We are calling for more flexibility where there are progressive changes in fishing practices. For example, if fishermen use gears that reduce cod catches, wherever they are, member states should be able to move allocations of fishing effort from one sea area to another to reflect changes in fish stock biology. Members may be aware that we saw the need for such flexibility this year when more plentiful prawns in the west led to greater fishing effort there while much of the North Sea effort allocation remained unused. That has led to a shortage of effort on the west coast, to the point that we could run out of days-at-sea allocations there by January. However, I assure our West Coast prawn fishers that they will be provided with options to stay active through to the end of this effort year. We will also work in other ways to protect our west coast fisheries in this month’s negotiations. We want to maximise our valuable monkfish and megrim opportunities and safeguard the welcome recent expansion of the west coast haddock fishery. Our key priorities will be to increase monkfish flexibility in the west of Scotland and to mitigate the proposed megrim and haddock quota cuts in the west in ways that support long term stability. Of course, we can expect these crucial decisions to be taken in Brussels by bleary-eyed ministers at some ungodly hour of the morning, following hours of unseemly horse trading. It is clear that that is not the way in which Europe should do its business and govern our fisheries, which is why we all believe that a radical overhaul of the CFP is vital. We have got to move away from Brussels-based micromanagement and bring decision making closer to home—to those who best know how to govern and manage our rich and diverse waters. Scotland has been the first country out of the blocks to promote regionalisation of the flawed and broken CFP. We have been lauded for taking that initiative and we will continue to champion radical reform in the months ahead. It is now vital that the Council agreement reached in June is not watered down by MEPs. We have to seize this once-in-a-decade chance for the sake of our fishermen, fishing communities and the wider marine environment. Just as the CFP has failed Scotland, I am afraid that it is a similar story with the international mackerel negotiations where we face the dispute with Iceland and the Faroe Islands, and where the same old stale talks grind on without moving forward an inch. It is clear that the process is simply not working. For five years, Iceland and the Faroe Islands have set their own arbitrary and irresponsible quotas, and for five years, the same negotiators have failed to agree while Iceland and the Faroe Islands have massively overfished the stock. The EU and Norway have made offers to Iceland and the Faroe Islands that were far in excess of their previous shares because we recognised recent changes in the distribution of the stock, but Iceland and the Faroe Islands have dug in their heels and refused to negotiate sensibly. We will not be held to ransom, and I have made it clear that we will not resume talks until they come to the table with realistic and concrete proposals on which we can have a sensible discussion. It is also vital that the Commission makes clear to us what trade sanctions it proposes to impose on Iceland and the Faroe Islands. We have been waiting to see those sanctions for more than two years while the same old logjam festers. Believe it or not, the Commission’s lawyers now tell us that we must give up an extra share of the mackerel quota that has been allocated for 2013 over and above the sizeable reduction in quota that the scientists have already advised. Our message to them is very clear: we cannot and will not accept such an absurd situation in which responsible fishermen are hit with a double whammy to benefit irresponsible fishermen. We have to be guided by natural justice, fairness and common sense throughout the negotiations, rather than the arcane reasoning of Brussels lawyers. We simply cannot reward bad behaviour by giving up that extra share. We must also challenge ourselves to think more radically about how we can change the game to find a breakthrough. That is certainly the message that I will send to the United Kingdom Government and the Commission over the coming weeks and months. We have stiff challenges ahead as we prepare ourselves for this month’s end-of-year negotiations. Our sights are firmly set on achieving a freeze in the cod plan’s annual effort cuts and a rollover in the North Sea cod quota, but we will not lose sight of other important objectives, mainly on the west coast, where we will work hard to mitigate potential cuts to quotas that we think are not justified. We will ensure that Scotland’s priorities are uppermost in the minds of UK ministers, and we will do our utmost to fight for Scotland’s interests across the board. Our aim throughout will be to maximise the opportunities for our fishers and thereby create the platform for Scottish fisheries and the stocks that they rely on to thrive and survive in 2013 and beyond.

I thank Claire Baker for her comments and certainly agree with her sentiment that it is now time for our fishermen to be given more reward, given the trailblazing conservation measures that they have adopted in Scotland’s seas. Those measures have meant that many stocks are now fished at maximum sustainable yield, which means, in effect, that they are sustainable. That is a huge step forward, and the Commission would be wise to take that on board in this year’s negotiations. The member mentioned the changes that we desperately need and the potential delay in getting them that may arise over the next few weeks as a result of the internal wrangling between the European Parliament and the European Council. It is certainly my view and that of many other member states whose representatives I have spoken to that we need the European presidency, the relevant MEPs on the various committees of the European Parliament, and the Commission to get into the same room and hammer things out prior to the December negotiations, or soon thereafter, so that we do not have unnecessary delays that are down to competition over who has the right to propose amendments. Everyone should put the interests of our fish stocks and our fishing industries first at this crucial stage. Claire Baker is quite right about the mackerel dispute: we need to balance sustainability needs with getting fairness for the Scottish sector. The best way forward is not sanctions, although they are necessary. The best way forward is for the parties to come back to the negotiating table and to be sensible. We cannot have a situation in which one side of the table is making all the offers and the other side of the table is making none. That is not acceptable; it is not fair; and, as I said in my statement, we have to have natural justice. Therefore, in that negotiation I will not allow the Commission to ask Scotland to deliver a double cut as a condition of imposing sanctions, but I will continue to urge all parties to come around the negotiating table.

Jamie McGrigor highlights an important issue on the west coast of Scotland. Although I can be accused of many things, I was unable to predict the lack of prawns appearing in the North Sea a few months ago, which of course led to the unprecedented amount of fishing effort being transferred from the east coast to the west coast. That gives us all a big challenge on how to manage the days at sea that were available for the west coast because the European Commission does not allow us to transfer days at sea from the east coast to the west coast. We are asking for that flexibility to avoid that problem in the future. I assure Jamie McGrigor and other members in the chamber that we worked closely with the west coast fisheries interests and the compromise that we arrived at allowed fishing to continue. As far as January is concerned, we are working closely with the west coast sectors to make sure that there is economic activity for the fleet on the west coast and that they do not have to tie up much more than they normally would at that time of year. We are paying close attention to that and we will do what is best for fishing communities on the west coast. We will keep members across all parties informed about how we take that forward. Jamie McGrigor quite rightly says that it is very difficult to achieve maximum sustainable yield for all stocks at the same time in a mixed fishery. That is why we are looking for the appropriate flexibility within the common fisheries policy negotiations. We are trying to persuade other member states and Europe that we have this mixed fishery in Scottish waters and that we cannot simply command biology. We have to have flexibility, because not all stocks will be at the same level at the same time in a mixed fishery. The member raises an important point.

The member refers to the co-decision process that now takes place between the European Parliament and the European Council over the common fisheries policy, which means that MEPs now have a crucial role in shaping future European fisheries policy. It is important that MEPs table sensible amendments. It is indeed the case that there is one amendment on the table just now that would in effect close down Scottish waters at an arbitrary figure of 10 to 20 per cent for a number of years. That is a ludicrous proposal. I expect that many member states will oppose that amendment and I hope that all MEPs will also seriously oppose it, given the damage that it would inflict on Scotland’s fishing communities. I assure Angus MacDonald that we are putting a great amount of effort into putting Scotland’s case across to all MEPs who have a role in those negotiations. I have met many MEPs in recent weeks and months. Only yesterday, I spoke on the telephone to Pat the Cope Gallagher—the renowned Irish MEP—about some of those issues.

I have worked closely with north-west and Mallaig fishermen over recent months on that issue. As I said in my answer to Jamie McGrigor, in an unprecedented situation, fishing effort transferred from the North Sea to the west coast because, for the first time in many years, the prawn stocks did not appear in the usual numbers in the North Sea and some of the bigger vessels went to fish on the west coast. Because the European Commission gives us only one pot of days for the west coast, we do not have flexibility between the east and west coasts and that, of course, gave the industry and the Scottish Government a very challenging management situation. That highlights why we need radical reform of not only the common fisheries policy, but the cod recovery plan, which is the root of the problem. I have worked closely with the industry, which is why we reached an agreement with it that took into account its fishing patterns between now and the end of January, and they have been able to fish each week since that issue arose. As I said to Jamie McGrigor, we are working to ensure that there is economic activity for the west coast fleet in January.

That highlights one of the big concerns that we have had throughout the CFP negotiations: the original proposal by the Commission to introduce individual transferable concessions. That, in my book, is individual transferable quotas, which is also the privatisation of our historic fishing rights in Scottish waters. I opposed that, as did the Scottish industry and most Scottish fishing communities. Thankfully, that proposal seems to be off the table and that threat has been removed. Scotland was in the vanguard of highlighting the threat that that posed to the future of our fishing communities. Of course, some MEPs are tabling amendments for that to be reintroduced and to be part of the common fisheries policy. Angus MacDonald mentioned Chris Davies, the Lib Dem fisheries spokesperson for the European Parliament, who is a leading advocate of that approach as a measure to reduce fishing fleets. Scotland’s fishing fleet has paid its fair share in recent years. It should not be cut any further and we do not want to see the privatisation of Scotland’s fishing rights.

I totally agree with Tavish Scott’s sentiment on the danger of the lunatics taking over the asylum in Brussels, should we have a situation in which internal legal wrangling between the European Parliament and the European Council prevents what is right for Europe’s cod stocks and Scottish fishermen. That is why it is important that we bang heads together and that the various key players in the dispute get into a room and sort that out before the December negotiations, otherwise Scotland’s fishing communities will pay a potentially painful price because of factors outwith their control. I put on record that the Shetland fishermen have made a huge contribution to the conservation of cod and other important stocks. That shows that Scotland is leading the way and that our fishermen should be rewarded, not punished, by the negotiations.

I am thankful that, in recent years, Scotland has negotiated some flexibility that has enabled us to cut discards in Scottish waters. The Scottish fleet should be commended for cutting discards more than any other country has achieved in its waters. That is a huge feather in the cap for Scotland’s fishing industry and for our conservation credentials. As I said in my opening remarks, the biomass in the pivotal cod stock is now double what it was in 2006. That is a huge step forward. I hope that it will be fished at sustainable levels by 2015, which would be a massive breakthrough. We must now guard against ill-informed measures being adopted at the fisheries negotiations this month, which would lead to an increase in discards, not a further reduction.

That is a good point. I hope that I can offer comfort to members by saying that many other member states share Scotland’s concerns about some of the proposals that are on the table because of the clear recognition that a cut in cod quota when the cod stock is recovering would make it more difficult for the fleet to avoid the fish and, therefore, discards would increase, not decrease. That would be of no benefit at all to cod mortality. Other member states that fish the same cod stocks that we fish recognise that as well. I hope that that will be an effective alliance to help the Commission to see sense.

I recognise the importance of the prawn fishery to the west coast fishing communities. We have worked closely with the west coast fishermen and I commend them on adopting a number of new selective gear measures in recent months and years, which will help to cut down discards of other stocks for which they do not have quota. That is a big step forward, which should help us to strike the balance to which Dave Thompson refers. I point out that some quota increases are happening on the west coast, which is good news. However, when we consider the west of Scotland haddock quota reduction, we must remember that that stock went up by 200 per cent last year, so it is still a substantial increase compared to two years ago.

I thank Alex Fergusson for highlighting the success of the catch quota trials, which are innovative and which arose through a joint initiative between the Scottish Government and the industry in Scottish waters. The trials prevent any discards but, of course, require cod quota for the participating boats. The matter has featured heavily in the negotiations between the EU and Norway in recent years. It has been frustrating and disappointing that we have not been able to expand the scheme. It seems to me cruelly ironic that, due to other negotiating issues that are at stake, not all the negotiating partners support a scheme that stops discards and promotes fisheries conservation. That is unfortunate. We should put conservation and what is best for the cod stocks first. The scheme remains on the table and we want to expand it. Unfortunately, at the moment, the threat of a 20 per cent cut in cod quota threatens the scheme; it does not support it.

That is a huge issue for thousands of families in Scotland whose livelihoods depend on Scotland’s most valuable fish stock, mackerel. Therefore, it is very frustrating that the international negotiating framework has virtually broken down, meaning that the previous 10-year agreement has not been replaced. Instead, we are seeing unilateral quotas being fished by Iceland and the Faroe Islands. I continue to urge those countries to come back to the table so that we can have a sensible negotiation. If we have to go down the road of sanctions, we want those to be in place as soon as possible in order to show those countries that we mean business. It is in no one’s interest—not the interests of the fishing communities in those countries or the interests of our countries—if the stock is fished out and all our respective industries lose thousands of livelihoods. It is really important that we all get back around the table as soon as possible. As I said previously—I say it again to Stewart Stevenson because I know that it is an important issue in his constituency—we are now trying to think out of the box to find new ways that could lead to a breakthrough in the international negotiations.

It is right to highlight the dangers of delaying the technical regulations. If they are not renewed because they are being held up by the dispute between the European Parliament and the European Council, some existing closed areas will no longer be closed, which would not be good for fisheries conservation, and other technical measures that are supposed to be in place to promote conservation will not be in place for 2013. That will lead to damage to very important fish stocks throughout Europe, including in our waters. Also, some of the changes that we need to see to improve the current regulations, through the amendments, would be delayed. I therefore repeat that I hope that all parties will support the legislation. We need all the key players in Europe to bang heads together, get in a room and sort this out for our fishing communities and the fish stocks.

The member will not be surprised to learn that I agree with his comments. No country will make our fishing industry more of a priority than Scotland, which is why we should lead all these negotiations and be at the top table in our own right. I note with interest how Europe takes some comfort from the fact that the Irish are about to take over the presidency for both the crucial stage of the common fisheries policy negotiations and the crucial stage of the common agricultural policy. The word around the Council of Ministers and throughout Europe is that it is good that a small country that knows what it is doing, has a key interest in some of the issues and makes them a priority will be in the driving seat for those negotiations. That shows the power of small nations in Europe.

We are pushing for a rollover of the cod quota because a cut in the cod quota will not conserve any extra cod but will only increase discards. The fact of the matter—which I know that the member will welcome—is that the cod stock in the North Sea has doubled since 2006 and is very much going in the right direction. It is very much recovering thanks to the magnificent efforts of the Scottish fleet. However, we continue to work with all our fleets on more technical measures and selective gear. As I said, in the past 12 months we have seen new gears adopted by many of the fleets in Scottish waters. That must be welcomed, as it will contribute even more to the recovery of the cod stock.

Liam McArthur rightly mentions some of the stocks that are of high value, particularly to the industries in Orkney and Shetland. It is important that we take them into account during the negotiations. We are not happy with the current proposals for the cut in the megrim stock. There is a proposal for a decrease in the west coast waters and a substantial increase in the North Sea. Of course, there is an arbitrary line in our waters, and we think that there should be a much more sensible split of those stocks. We are putting together a scientific case to make that argument. We recognise that fishermen in the west of Scotland in particular would suffer if there were too drastic a cut in the west of Scotland megrim and monkfish catch. On monkfish, Mr McArthur will be aware that there is a long-standing issue around flexibility with regard to the North Sea and the west coast. The more flexibility that we have, the more the fishermen will be helped with their day-to-day activities.

As is set out in the revised statement of public participation, it is expected that the national marine plan will be adopted towards the end of 2014. We will formally consult on a draft plan next summer. The timing allows for an integrated consultation that includes marine renewable sectoral plans and proposals for marine protected areas.

One reason why we want to take a little more time before we consult on the draft national marine plan is that, in discussions with us, stakeholders said that they want everything to be looked at in the same context, in an integrated way. The plan will influence developments in Scotland’s waters for the next few decades, so we must get it right. We must look at all the issues in the round. I am confident that we will end up with a regime that balances all interests in the way that our waters require, and that the developments that go ahead in the meantime are taking account of environmental and other considerations.

Prior to the establishment of the Scottish Parliament, Scotland’s recycling rate was under 5 per cent. Today our recycling rate exceeds 40 per cent and the zero waste plan has set Scotland on a path to 70 per cent. This year, zero waste Scotland is providing funding to help roll out household food waste collections. The Scottish Government has also made available a further £1.2 million to support improvements to household waste recycling centres and to improve other measures, such as glass collections. Those are only highlights of the broad programme of support that zero waste Scotland is providing to businesses and local authorities.

If the member is able to grab the occasional spare moment, he might see the good television advertising campaign that is currently under way and which encourages people to cut down on their food waste, given that one fifth of our household food waste ends up in the bucket, which is a cost to the budgets of homes across Scotland and to the environment. It is also worth saying that zero waste Scotland is making £5 million available to local authorities to help them to roll out household food waste collections. That will help to ensure that, by the end of the year, an additional 485,000 households will have their food waste collected, with more to follow over the next two years. Given that, only a couple of years ago, virtually no home anywhere in Scotland was part of a food waste collection scheme, I hope that the chamber will recognise that that is significant progress in addressing the scandal that has developed over many years of how much food we waste as a society. We take the challenge seriously.

The Schmallenberg virus is a relatively low impact disease spread by midges, although infection during particular stages of pregnancy can lead to problems around lambing or calving time. Helping producers to make informed management decisions is key to minimising the impact of the Schmallenberg virus. The Scottish Government has therefore funded enhanced surveillance and delivery of guidance to veterinary practices, and it has worked with the industry to facilitate the testing of animals that are imported from affected areas.

I should point out for the record that, so far, four premises in Scotland have been confirmed as having the virus, which compares to about 300 south of the border. Clearly, we must pay close attention to the issue. A vaccine could offer a solution to the issue for livestock keepers. As the member might be aware, vaccines are usually developed by commercial enterprises, which must seek a licence from the United Kingdom Government before they make a vaccine commercially available. As things stand, no vaccine has yet been approved for use on these islands, but I understand that a submission has been made to the UK Government’s veterinary medicines directorate for a provisional licence for a vaccine. The uncertainties that are associated with vaccine licences as a result of the rigorous nature of the testing that is required before they are put on the market mean that it is difficult to say exactly what the timescale will be for making that available. However, we hope that a vaccine is available in the near future.

As the member might be aware, no decisions have yet been taken on the recommendations of the review, which we will consider in the months that lie ahead. Cases such as the outbreak of Schmallenberg virus—no doubt, that is the context of the member’s question—highlight the importance of our surveillance infrastructure in Scotland and why we have to get those decisions right.

I highlight the point that the virus is midge borne, but I am happy to speak to our scientists to investigate Iain Gray’s point. I will perhaps drop him a note to explain the background on the suggestion that he makes.

Agriculture plays a central part in Scottish life. It is the foundation stone of our food and drink industry and a key sector in our economy. Not only do our farmers and crofters put food on our plates, protecting food security, but they manage the landscapes for which our nation is famed. They are the backbone of rural communities throughout the land. With all the benefits that it delivers to society, agriculture is not just a business like any other. That is why supporting it from the public purse is fully justified, especially here in Scotland. Production costs for our farmers can be high, thanks to our land quality, remoteness from markets and, of course, the weather. As I am sure that all members are aware, and as this week has reminded us, bad weather has disrupted farming operations throughout most of this year. Some crops have been damaged and conditions have been challenging for hay and silage making, and for the harvest. Grazing livestock have also been affected by the difficult conditions. I am sure that all members want to pay tribute to the professionalism with which our farmers have endured those challenges. The particular challenges that we face emphasise more than ever the crucial importance of getting things right for Scotland as we negotiate the common agricultural policy for 2014 to 2020. It is timely for the Parliament to debate the CAP today. November, only a few weeks away, will be particularly important. In the European Parliament, the agriculture committee will vote on its amendments.

My understanding of the unintended consequences issue is that it is mischief making, not for the first time, by one particular member of the European Parliament. Alyn Smith MEP has made it clear—with, I understand, the support of tenant farmers—that the purpose of that amendment is to curb the trading of entitlements to avoid slipper farmers having their own way under the new system. Clearly, that is a big issue for many members in this chamber and throughout Europe.

No, I want to continue. I will take an intervention later. Also in November there will be the Council of Ministers, when the presidency will try to reach partial agreement on the new CAP in areas in which there has been some consensus so far. However, I expect the single most important event in November will be the European summit on 22 and 23 November. An extra meeting has been arranged specifically to try to agree Europe’s budgets. Agriculture ministers will not be present for those discussions, even though that is where the size of the CAP budget will be decided—not just that, but the split between the different pillars of the CAP budget and how the CAP budget will be distributed between different member states. Those are crucial issues for Scotland, given our pitifully small allocations in both pillars at present, so the November summit could be decisive. It is no exaggeration to say that the future of thousands of farming businesses across members’ constituencies and across Scotland, and our nation’s ability to produce food, will be influenced by some of those crunch decisions. After November, the remaining steps in the process will be final decisions on the CAP regulations, under the Irish presidency in the first half of next year, followed by detailed European Union implementation regulations. In Scotland, we will go through the procedures to introduce the new CAP, consulting our stakeholders and Parliament, drafting all the legislation, designing the information technology systems, and so on. That process is clearly complicated, which is why it is important that the country focuses on a clear set of Scottish priorities. Our priorities, which result from the distinct nature of our agriculture, are different from those of other member states or, indeed, of other ministers in the United Kingdom. Speaking of UK ministers, I was sad to see the departure of Jim Paice, a genuine friend of farming, although I look forward to working equally well with his successor, David Heath. On Monday, I was pleased to have my first face-to-face discussion with the new Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, Owen Paterson, who was at his first European council. He clearly has strong personal views, which he expressed to the council—shall we say—very forcefully. I look forward to working with Owen Paterson, although he was at great pains to point out his view that agriculture should generally be left at the mercy of the free market. It may be that we have said goodbye to a farmer’s friend and hello to a free-market crusader. I hope that he is prepared to listen to Scotland’s views as well as his own, and that he recognises our distinctive needs that flow from the nature of farming here. Eighty-five per cent of agricultural land in Scotland has less favoured area status, and we have an industry that is dominated by the livestock sector. However, we also have highly productive land, with producers at the cutting edge of 21st century farming. Food and drink are a big part of our economy. Our needs also reflect the wider benefits that farming delivers: our landscapes and biodiversity, and farming’s economic role. The Government has scored some successes in having our needs reflected in the CAP negotiations. For example, the so-called Scottish clause will enable us to clamp down on slipper farming. We have ensured that heather-clad hills are eligible for payments—provided, of course, that genuine farming activity is taking place on them. We have convinced Europe that protecting permanent grassland must not prevent Scottish farmers from reseeding fields periodically, and that the proposed three-crop rule must not impose ludicrous constraints on mixed farms in this country. On other important points, we still need to press hard—especially on the budget. We cannot condemn Scotland’s farmers to another decade of unfairly low CAP receipts. As I have said many times, Scotland has the fourth-lowest payments per hectare in pillar 1 and the lowest in Europe in pillar 2. For pillar 1, the Commission has proposed a mechanism to close the gap, which will help the Baltic states and Romania. We can easily justify similar treatment for Scotland, given our producers’ costs of production. However, we will not get it, because we are not a member state yet. If we were, we would eventually receive between €100 million and €200 million a year extra according to the Commission’s methodology.

Rather than respond to the member’s scaremongering, I point out that there were a number of raised eyebrows around the table at the council earlier this week when the secretary of state was speaking. It is certainly not Scotland that the member states would want to eject from the EU. I turn to pillar 2. The Commission wants to allocate at least some of the budget by using objective criteria, which would be good for us. However, member states are resisting and, unfortunately, putting their vested interests before fairness. That means that there is a real risk that, after this reform, Scotland could have the lowest payments in Europe in both pillar 1 and pillar 2. The UK Government should not allow that to happen, but our difficulty is that it is fixated on budget cutting, not budget fairness. We need the UK Government to devote more of its negotiating capital to Scotland’s priorities. I urge the Parliament to join the Scottish Government in pressing the UK Government on the budget and, of course, Scotland’s other priorities, such as new entrants.

I certainly recognise the importance of the current less favoured area support scheme to Liam McArthur’s constituents and to those of other members. That is a key priority and, if I have time, I hope that I will be able to give the member some reassurances about the areas of natural constraint regime, which might be in place pretty soon. As well as protecting LFASS, Scotland is faced by a number of other priorities, such as helping new entrants. Of course, the Government’s new entrants panel met a few weeks ago and we have now set up an advisory panel that is made up of new entrants whose views will help to guide us during the CAP negotiations. We have said that we want support for new entrants to be available from day 1 of the new policy. Another priority is the issue of coupled payments. The Commission’s proposal lets some member states have up to 10 per cent of their national envelope for coupled payments, but the figure for Scotland is only 5 per cent. As I said when the census figures for agriculture and livestock were published this week, the trend in livestock numbers shows why coupled payments are essential in some circumstances. The proposals are unfair, and we must secure a level playing field. If other countries are entitled to 10 per cent coupled payments, we should also have that option. The issue of greening the new CAP is another priority. The principle of greening is a good one, and I am sure that we all support it, but there are big problems in how it has been proposed by the Commission. I remain disappointed that climate change—the predominant environmental challenge of our time—plays hardly any part in the proposals. That is a missed opportunity, and I shall continue to raise it, as I did in Brussels this week. A real worry is that the existing greening proposals risk hitting the wrong target. It is right to insist on environmental improvements in the arable deserts that exist in some parts of Europe, but Scotland is not like that. Could anyone really claim that the famous Scottish Highlands, rich in semi-natural vegetation and biodiversity, are not green? In fact, if the greening proposals are badly designed, they could reduce biodiversity in some parts of Scotland—for example, if they result in less mixed farming. Therefore, it is vital that we do all that we can to improve the greening proposals. Ecological focus areas have the potential to be a positive step, as they will help to ensure that even the most intensive farmers leave some space for nature. However, the current proposals are a nightmare for the officials, Governments and bodies throughout Europe that will have to implement them. The mapping alone would require Governments across Europe to recruit thousands of extra civil servants—I am sure that none of us wants to go down that road. We have made those points to the commissioner time after time.

Again, I am delighted by the growing consensus in this debate, as I was about to deal with that point. I agree with Mr Scott. One of the problems that we face with the greening proposals is that, if they are incredibly difficult to implement and hard for our farmers and crofters to adhere to, there will be penalties; unfortunately those penalties will continue to be disproportionate, as none of the member states appears to be making inroads on that area, in terms of the commissioner’s response. We still face a disproportionate penalty system. That is another on-going battle that we have to fight in the important weeks and months ahead. I see that I am running out of time, so I will touch quickly on a couple of issues. On timing, the commissioner has at last accepted that it is impossible to have the new CAP operational on 1 January 2014. With regard to pillar 1, although the delay is deeply disappointing for new entrants and excluded sectors, it is relatively straightforward to deliver. However, the situation with regard to pillar 2 is more problematic, because the legislation ends in 2013. At this stage, we are reaching the end of the Scotland rural development programme under pillar 2, and we will do our utmost to minimise any gap between any of the programmes. Last week, I talked to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee about the situation with regard to the LEADER programme, LFASS, help for new entrants and so on. We will have to ensure that some of the current schemes continue, but there will eventually be only a proportion of the overall schemes, given the resources that are left in the budgets. In drawing to a conclusion—

The negotiations are incredibly important for Scotland. Agriculture varies across the United Kingdom. Although I respect the right of the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs to have views that are different from ours in Scotland, I cannot accept it retaining control over a devolved area of policy by the back door. One unfortunate aspect of devolution at present is that, on agriculture issues that are decided in Europe, where we are represented by the UK Government, UK ministers have the ability to press the devolution override button, and they are using it. We agree a policy here in Scotland, but it does not use up any UK negotiating capital because it so happens that UK ministers do not agree with the policy, which is the will of this Parliament. UK ministers and DEFRA have the ability to water down or ignore policies that are agreed in Scotland and which we feel are best for Scottish agriculture because, philosophically or for political reasons or whatever, they disagree with what we are doing. We do not have the ability to ensure that we can pursue our priorities in Europe. The issue of how Scotland is represented in Europe is, no doubt, a debate for another day. However, the situation explains the importance of our speaking with one voice, as a Parliament and as a country, in the weeks and months ahead. We have a devolved Scottish Parliament and we must ensure that its will is reflected in the UK Government’s negotiating priorities. If we do not do so, we will not be able to deliver the bright future that we could deliver for our rural communities, farmers, crofters, the food and drink sector and everyone else who is involved in our fantastic Scottish agriculture sector. I am sure that we all share that aim and want to deliver it. I hope that members will support the Government’s motion. I move, That the Parliament notes the progress to date in the EU negotiations on the future Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) (2014 – 2020); supports the Scottish Government’s commitment to press, in partnership with stakeholders, for a CAP that has sufficient flexibility for it to be implemented in Scotland in line with the Parliament’s devolved responsibilities, ensuring that agriculture remains a dynamic and competitive industry that makes sustainable use of Scotland’s natural resources, and believes that the UK Government’s negotiating position must take account of the priorities of devolved administrations, which should play an appropriately full role in the negotiating process.

Given that I returned late yesterday afternoon from three days in Brussels, which I spent speaking to MEPs, commissioners, other member states and the UK Government—as I have been doing for the last few years—will the member at least accept that we are doing our utmost to influence European negotiations?

I thank all members for their contributions to what is an extremely important debate at a crucial time, given that we are in the middle of the CAP negotiations. There has been a great deal of consensus around the chamber, not least in paying tribute to Stewart Stevenson for his tenure. I would echo all the positive comments that have been made. He was a good support to me, and he made an excellent contribution to the portfolio, particularly on the climate change agenda. There is also consensus in welcoming Paul Wheelhouse to his new post. He did not speak in the debate, but I can tell members that he is looking grateful for all their compliments and warm welcome, as he is sitting next to me. I also welcome James Kelly, who said that it was his first attendance at an agriculture debate. Well done—it is fantastic to see urban interests being represented in what is a debate for the whole of Scotland, not just rural Scotland. He made a good point. Most important, of course, he said that this has been his first opportunity to witness at first hand the cuddliness of Alex Fergusson. I am not sure whether “cuddliness” is a word, but if it is, it certainly applies to Alex Fergusson and will no doubt lead to a lot of curiosity and get us a full house for the next agricultural debate in Parliament. It is important that there was consensus over the fact that Scotland has some unique qualities and is making some unique asks in the current negotiations over the new common agricultural policy. Our land quality, our climate and the nature of agricultural activity in Scotland are all unique; for that reason, we need a policy that suits Scotland and a policy that has the flexibility to allow us to tailor the regulations to Scotland’s needs. That is very important. It is my job and the job of the Scottish Government to take our case to the EU. I was there for three days this week doing just that. It is also our job to take our case to the UK—which of course we will be doing as well—and to the other 26 member states, as we have also been doing in recent years in terms of CAP negotiations. Rob Gibson and others said that it is important that we invite the new secretary of state at DEFRA, Owen Paterson, to Scotland so that he can see for himself the unique challenges that we face in Scottish agriculture. That is exactly what I did at our meeting earlier this week. I explained to the secretary of state that he is most welcome to come to Scotland to visit a hill farm to see some of the unique challenges that are faced in many parts of Scotland. I said that I would offer him as temptation a dram distilled using good Scottish malt and barley that have been grown by our farmers. Of course, it would be a Speyside dram. The Scottish Government will, in the spirit of consensus, support all the amendments, which all make points with which we agree. I will, however, direct some specific comments towards Jim Hume’s amendment. I want to point out to the Liberal Democrats—and others—that we will, of course, be carrying out more modelling in the future. Jim Hume used the example of modelling that is taking place in Wales. I gently point out to him that the Welsh are doing that to catch up with the modelling that is already carried out by Scotland on the impact of future agricultural policies.

Of course we will make the results of any modelling available to the industry in due course, but first we need to find out exactly what the new common agricultural policy is going to look like. In terms of some of the issues that were raised—

I will just make this point. In terms of some of the issues that were raised, the transition period is a major concern to many members. There are two dimensions to the transition. First, there is the potential gap year when we do not have a new common agricultural policy—the old one will have to be extended for a year and, essentially, we will not have a rural development programme for a year. Therefore we will have to look domestically at extending some of the existing programmes to allow continuity. Expenditure will continue on agri-environment schemes. I mentioned before that LEADER will continue as well, as will help for new entrants and the important LFAS scheme. We are confident that that will continue through the gap year. The other dimension that is important to the industry, as many members have pointed out, is the transition from the historic payments to area-based payments, which I appreciate is causing a great deal of anxiety.

I can only repeat what I said to Alex Fergusson during his opening remarks, which is that when I sit at the Council of Ministers in Brussels and Luxembourg, it ain’t Scotland that the other member states want to eject from the room. We have a lot of good friends. When the EU is welcoming Croatia to join, the idea that it would not want Scotland at the same table is absolutely preposterous. The transition from historic payments to area-based payments is a source of big anxiety. We have to change to the new system because of currently excluded sectors and—more important—because of new entrants. The length of transition will be guided by the extent to which we can allow new entrants to benefit from farming payments that are available to other farmers who carry out the same kind of activities. It is unfair that farmers are currently paid based on what they were doing in 2002. The NFUS’s briefing, to which many members have referred, laid out the idea that we should extend the transition until, in effect, 2022-23. Can anyone seriously look their constituents in the eyes and say that CAP support should be paid to a farmer in 2022 based on activity that they carried out in 2002? I do not think so, and it would be unfair to new entrants who join in the intervening period. We have to have a level playing field as soon as possible. Of course, if new entrants get help from day 1 of the new CAP, clearly we can have a transition period for the rest of the industry. However, eight years or so is not a realistic timescale; we have to do it a bit quicker than that. We will be guided by our negotiations.

Clearly, there are important issues and we will take them all into account. The challenges that are presented by the transition from a historic basis to an area basis for payments will all pale into insignificance if we do not have a budget. Right now, we have a Conservative-Lib Dem Government in London that is arguing for “a substantial reduction” in the CAP budget—which is opposed by farmers and crofters in rural communities in Scotland. The negotiations, like all European negotiations, will boil down at the crunch point to political fixes and political horse trading. We must ask ourselves as a country, a sector and a Parliament: who will be in the room to carry out the political fixing and horse trading on behalf of Scotland? At the moment, it will be Owen Paterson, who has two political motivations. First, he does not believe in public intervention—he wants a free market. His second motivation is to cut the UK budget. Missing from those motivations is his wanting to stand up for Scotland. That is the big threat. Those who think that Scotland has had adequate representation through the UK in the past need only look at some of the themes of today’s debate. Currently, thanks to negotiations by past UK Governments, we have the fourth-lowest pillar 1 direct payment support in the whole of Europe and we have the lowest pillar 2—[Interruption.]

Members in the Labour Party who are laughing at the fact that Scotland gets the fourth-lowest level of pillar 1 funding in Europe and the lowest rural funding in the whole of Europe should bear it in mind, please, that those were negotiated by previous Labour and Conservative Governments. We are looking for a better deal next time round.

I am sorry—I am running out of time. The question of who is speaking up for Scotland at the negotiations really is important. We will do our utmost to influence Europe, other member states and the UK Government, but the best deal for Scotland would be achieved by being in that room speaking for ourselves—for Scottish farmers and crofters. We would have a voice and a better budget; that would be the result for rural Scotland. The process will be complex. We have spoken about co-decision between the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers, which will take place for the first time. We have spoken of the fact that there are 7,000 amendments before the European Parliament, which we will have to wade through in the coming weeks and months. That will not be a simple task. We will not get everything that we want and we will have to compromise with 27 member states in the European Parliament, with their various requirements. However, we will do our best to fight for Scotland. This is not just about negotiations; it is about the future of Scottish agriculture. It is about the fact that we want to be able to continue to feed the people of Scotland and help to feed the rest of the world, as well. It is about supporting our rural economy—not just our farmers and crofters, but the marts, the hauliers, the meat-processing industry and the other sectors that have been mentioned today. We would deliver a much better deal for Scotland if we had a bigger say in Europe. That would help us to deliver a better common agricultural policy for Scotland. However, in the meantime, the Scottish Government will fight tooth and nail for farmers and crofters in Scotland. We want the support of the whole Parliament so that we can get the best possible deal for the future of Scotland, our rural communities and our agriculture sector.

The Scottish Government has provided support to egg producers through the Scotland rural development programme, including through the food processing, marketing and co-operation grants scheme. The latest rounds, announced on Sunday 16 September 2012, include a grant for almost half a million pounds to egg producers A J Duncan in Turriff, for building upgrades and the purchase of grading, packing and other equipment.

Joan McAlpine raises a good point. It is certainly the case that Scotland meets some of the highest animal welfare standards in the world. That is something that we should perhaps shout about more. The pig industry has done so with some success, in conjunction with the RSPCA, in recent times. A number of organisations are speaking about making the most of the opportunities. I will happily give the matter some more thought and update the member.

I will do whatever it takes to ensure that our primary producers in Scotland receive a fair price. Hopefully, the Scottish Government demonstrated its commitment during the recent dairy crisis, when our dairy farmers, quite rightly, were shouting about the fact that they were getting a very raw deal on their share of every pound spent on milk in the supermarkets and elsewhere. If that applies to other products, I would be right behind any campaign to ensure that there is fair trade for Scottish producers. If there is any evidence that that is not the case at the moment, I will want to hear about it.

This year’s weather conditions have been challenging for some Scottish farmers in the arable sector due to localised flooding resulting in some crop losses. Overall, yields are lower in many cases, with reports suggesting a reduction of 10 to 20 per cent. However, cereal prices are up by around 20 per cent on last year. We will have a clearer picture of the financial and market effects on this year’s crops following our annual crop report meeting with key stakeholders, which will take place on 8 October. We will publish yield estimates shortly thereafter.

I thank Iain Gray for his supplementary question and the constructive way in which he presented it. I also thank him for bringing to my attention the circumstances that face East Lothian Produce. I am sorry to hear about those circumstances, which is why I am keen to meet the company first hand to hear about its experiences. I hope that the member is able to make it along to that meeting. Governments do not provide, and have never provided, financial support to industries in Scotland for the impact of severe weather conditions. However, if there are other ways in which we could help the industry, we are keen to hear about them. We will do all that we can. We acknowledge the challenging circumstances that face many businesses. Of course, potato growers in Scotland—as well as vegetable growers such as East Lothian Produce—face particular difficulties. I look forward to the meeting and to hearing any constructive ideas about how the Government might be able to help.

We are doing our utmost to promote the consumption of Scottish food produce in Scotland and beyond because, if more and more people enjoyed fantastic Scottish pork and other products, that would be the best way in which to help producers. I know that all members of the Parliament support that approach, particularly given that, at the weekend, Scottish food and drink fortnight—when we made a particular effort to promote Scottish food and drink—drew to an end. I am in regular contact with pig producers in Scotland about a range of issues. We are discussing some initiatives that may be of assistance in future. However, it is too early to determine which will be the best ones in light of rising food prices, which are a global issue—not particularly a Scottish one—that affects producers everywhere.

The Scottish Government has an intensive and on-going engagement programme with key agricultural organisations across a wide range of policy areas.

I assure the member that the issue is certainly on the Government’s radar. Indeed, only last week the Scottish Government hosted a new entrants summit for the agriculture sector, at which a range of ideas came forward from the—thankfully—quite young new entrants who were there and want to build a career in agriculture. I will certainly take some of those initiatives forward. Given that he has raised the subject, I tell the member and the chamber that Angela Constance, the Minister for Youth Employment, and I hope to host a rural skills summit soon, because we recognise that there is a demand among many in rural sectors to attract the next generation into them. We want to discuss the skills gaps so that we can encourage more young people, more apprentices and so on to, I hope, build a career in our rural sectors.

We have had a range of engagement and have discussed a range of issues.

The member raises a concern for many farmers and crofters. He will be aware of the disallowance by the European Union, which meant that we recently had to pay tens of millions of pounds. The auditors wanted more stringent application of the regulations in Scotland, to ensure that money from the public purse is spent correctly. It is therefore unfair simply to lay the responsibility at Scottish officials’ door. We are doing the work because it is in the wider interest of Scotland and of farmers to ensure that future payments are available. I agree with the sentiment of what the member says in that we are disappointed that the European Commission is not saying more in the current common agricultural policy negotiations about changing the cross-compliance regime and the penalties regime in particular, which is a sledgehammer to crack a nut in many cases. We are still making the case to the Commission for making that regime more proportionate and reasonable.

Continuing to help local authorities to meet recycling targets is a priority for me and for zero waste Scotland. That is why we announced in the previous budget that we would invest almost £80 million over the next three years in an effort to reduce waste and recycle more. This year, zero waste Scotland is making £5 million available to help local authorities to roll out household food waste collections. Funding is also available to help councils to roll out recycling services to tenements and for the recycling on the go initiative, communication and engagement work, service improvements and staff training.

The member raises the important issue that different local authorities in different parts of Scotland face different challenges in rolling out kerbside recycling. As Gil Paterson was right to point out, tenements face particular challenges. In relation to that, Glasgow City Council and other local authorities have tried new and innovative methods in recent years. We will shortly publish kerbside best practice guidance that will provide councils with detailed information and examples of best practice from across the country on the design, implementation and delivery of waste services, including services to flats and tenements. We recognise that we must roll out those important services across Scotland.

As the real cabinet secretary, I have pleasure in saying that, for the purposes of rule 9.11 of the standing orders, I advise the Parliament that Her Majesty, having been informed of the purport of the Long Leases (Scotland) Bill, has consented to place her prerogative and interest, so far as they are affected by the bill, at the disposal of the Parliament for the purposes of the bill.

I met the UK and other devolved ministers in London on 2 May to discuss, among other things, the common agricultural policy negotiations. I also have regular discussions with UK ministers ahead of each agriculture council meeting in Europe, and will be meeting them again on Monday when I attend the next agriculture council meeting in Luxembourg. In addition, Scottish Government officials are working closely with UK officials to ensure that Scottish views are fed into the process.

The crofting communities are taking a close interest in a number of issues, and we are paying close attention to the situation. However, in theory, the move from the historic way of paying single farm payments based on area could benefit the crofting counties and crofters who qualify. The reasons for that are obvious, and concern the taking into account of the amount of land that is involved. I could go on at great length about a range of issues in this area. If the member is aware of any specific concerns, he could ask for a meeting with me, or he could write to me, and I will investigate the matters.

Alex Fergusson has raised a very good point. The issue is one of our top priorities for the negotiations. I know that ministers tend to respond to all concerns by saying that they are priorities, but I am sure that Parliament is aware that the matter is a key priority for Scotland. We must ensure that we have a much fairer system for delivering agricultural support. Irrespective of when someone became an active farmer, they should qualify for the payment if they are active. We are trying to convey that clear message to the European Commissioner for Agriculture and Rural Development. There has of course been movement, which allows new entrants who pass a test in the draft regulation to qualify for support, but we do not think that that goes far enough for Scotland’s circumstances and many new entrants would still be excluded, so we are still pursuing the issue.

That relates to the previous question about ensuring that genuinely active farmers receive the single farm payment and other related support. That issue is one reason why we were pleased to secure in the negotiations what we are calling the Scottish clause, which is in the draft regulations and which the Scottish Government communicated, with industry support, to the European Commission. That provision will allow us some leeway to define activity in Scotland in due course, once the new policy is in place. We clearly want active farmers to benefit from the payments—not inactive farmers. In the situation that was highlighted in Margaret McDougall’s question, tenant farmers should qualify for the payment.

In the absence of a seat at the top table, I suggest that the first solution is the election of an SNP Government. Thankfully, that happened not too long ago, so we are in the best possible position to try to influence the UK Government and Europe in the interests of Scotland’s farming communities. Of course, we must negotiate not only with other member states and the European Commission but with the UK Government. That dilutes our priorities to a certain extent, because a member state can have only so many priorities and we need to share priorities with the rest of the UK when it comes to negotiations. However, I believe that Scotland is punching above its weight. In my answer to the previous question, I gave the example of the so-called Scottish clause in the draft agricultural policy, which is a solution that has been made in Scotland and which the Scottish Government persuaded the European Commission to adopt.

We are driving forward that agenda with a range of measures. Just this morning, I was delighted to help to launch an innovative pilot project across four local authorities to recycle disposable nappies—450,000 of which are disposed of in landfill each and every day in Scotland, believe it or not. It is a staggering figure. Other innovative programmes include the recently announced deposit return and reverse vending initiative, which will test opportunities to improve our collection of used packaging. More generally, of course, we have the new Waste (Scotland) Regulations 2012, and our targeted investment in collection and processing will continue to support increasing levels of recycling from homes and businesses.

The Scottish Government supplies funding to local authorities, and between 2010 and 2013 we are funding zero waste Scotland to the tune of almost £70 million, much of which goes to local authority initiatives the length and breadth of the country. We also give support for individual initiatives. For instance, we gave an additional £5 million this year to support food-waste collections, which I know many members support. A number of initiatives are in the pipeline. The recent regulations, which I mentioned, will take Scotland to the next stage towards becoming a zero waste country. I hope that Inverclyde Council will be able to benefit from that. There are different challenges in different parts of the country, and how far an area makes it towards its targets often comes down to leadership and determination at local level. We will continue to work closely with local authorities.

I am well aware that there are many excellent social enterprises in Drew Smith’s area and elsewhere in Scotland, which help with Scotland’s recycling agenda. Many such enterprises benefit from a range of support, for example through zero waste Scotland’s various funding streams and the climate challenge fund. Members who want to raise specific issues that relate to their constituencies should feel free to write to me.

Yesterday morning at 4.20 am in Luxembourg, European Union ministers finally reached agreement on some of the big issues that will help to determine how our fisheries will be managed in the future. I was there to the bitter end, along with other bleary-eyed ministers and officials. It is certainly not a rational way of reaching decisions that will affect the sustainability of our fisheries and the very future of our fishing industry and our coastal communities over the next decade or so. We need a new way of doing things and, thankfully, the agreement goes some way towards delivering just that. For the past six years, I have attended fisheries councils and, of all the ministers who have been involved over that time, I think that only my Swedish and Maltese counterparts, who were in Luxembourg yesterday, and I have endured. Perhaps the pace and sleep deprivation have taken their toll on all the others. In reflecting on my experience, I firmly believe that we have an agreement that lays the foundations for the most significant reforms in the history of the common fisheries policy, even if a lot of work and negotiation lie ahead before the new policy becomes law in Europe. I am pleased that the new agreement has been influenced by Scotland’s efforts to radically change European fisheries policy, which I think have been supported by all parties in the Parliament over a long period. Last week, I set out my top priorities for reform of the CFP. I explained that the current CFP was broken and that the only means of rescuing our fisheries was to empower member states to work together at regional level; that sustainability must be at the heart of everything that we do, as must our stakeholders; and that the obscene waste of discarding, in particular, had to be addressed for the good of all and the credibility of the EU. Given the starting point of the reform process and the constraints that Scotland faces, Parliament can be satisfied with what Scotland has achieved at Luxembourg. It is important to understand that it is one important step on the long road that lies ahead. Yesterday’s agreement involved member states agreeing a position—not law—to present to the European Parliament. Failure to have reached agreement would have been a disgrace. In the event, it was a close-run thing—agreement was achieved only by qualified majority and, at times, it looked as though no deal would be secured. That would have meant that reform of the CFP would have been delayed and, no doubt, that it would have been dictated by the Commission and the European Parliament, which would have left member states and our industries facing the unknown. However, in the face of the significant and entrenched views of others, we got a deal and it is one that the people of Scotland can welcome. Let us be clear. Scotland was negotiating within the boundaries of the diverse views of the other 27 member states, including the United Kingdom Government, with which we also had to negotiate. Reaching a deal involved ironing out priorities that were often conflicting. There are those in Europe who are stuck in the past and who are reluctant to take tough decisions, and there are landlocked member states that have no direct interest in the marine environment, but which still wish to use the negotiations to further their national interests. I will provide the Parliament with some details of the agreement. I will focus on the two key priorities that dominated the discussions in Luxembourg: regionalisation and discards. As Parliament acknowledged again last week, the current CFP is characterised by centralised micromanagement. We all recognise that we need to change fundamentally how decisions are made in the first place if we are to achieve better outcomes in the years ahead. For instance, real and meaningful regionalisation can help to deliver a tailored discards reduction plan. That is why I have been doing my utmost to promote the decentralisation of the CFP and to empower member states. Devolving decision making to those who are most knowledgeable about particular fisheries and allowing them to develop tailored management measures was my top priority ahead of the discussions. For as long as we are in the CFP, the role of Brussels should be limited to setting the overall framework and key targets. Within that, member states should have the freedom to manage their fisheries. The agreement delivers a commitment to regionalisation, and within that I am delighted to say that we also achieved a key Scottish priority. We successfully tabled to the UK and the council a Scottish clause to allow member states to take their own measures, in agreement with their partners in a region, without having to continually refer back to the Commission. That clause was accepted. In practice, that should mean that management decisions can be made more quickly and that they can be tailored to local management needs. An important issue on which regionalisation will enable us to make progress is the scandal of the discarding of good-quality fish. Like many, I want to see an end to discarding, but it is a complex issue that takes many different forms and has many different causes. Understandably, that controversial issue was the key battleground at this week’s council, and in the dead of night it nearly caused the whole deal to break down. The deal that has been agreed proposes to end discarding in pelagic fisheries by 1 January 2014 and to phase in stock-by-stock transition to discard elimination in mixed white-fish stocks and nephrops between 1 January 2015 and 2018. The provision to land all that you catch is part of a wider discards package. It is a complex package that includes an uplift in quotas to reward fishermen, which is important, and a move from the current land-based quotas to catch quotas—in other words, a focus on what is taken out of the sea, not simply what is landed. Another big win was a commitment to review the technical conservation fisheries management measures that get in the way of discard elimination, as we all know to our cost. That will be done before a landing obligation kicks in. Again, that is good news for Scotland and the challenges that we face. The outcome is challenging for our industry, but I believe that it will be deliverable. Scotland has made great strides on discards reduction and I am pleased that the momentum is now set to continue. Let us not forget what we have achieved in Scotland in recent years. Our co-management approach to fisheries is something from which the rest of Europe can learn, and it is doing so. I draw the Parliament’s attention to two other important elements of the deal. First, taking the science into account, fishing rates must support what is referred to as maximum sustainable yield—a level of mortality of fish stocks that ensures that the stocks are not compromised. Agreement was reached that the necessary exploitation rate will be achieved by 2015 where possible, and by 2020 for all stocks. There is also provision to deal with the complexities of our mixed fisheries. The second element is on our historic fishing rights. The Commission’s original proposal to establish a mandatory system of transferable fishing rights across Europe has been rejected. We in Scotland fought against the proposal from day one, and I am pleased and relieved that our work has paid off, with only a voluntary scheme now being proposed. I welcome the UK Government’s movement on that issue over the past year or so. Although we would have liked the reference to the issue to be removed from the agreement, the change is still an important victory. In summary, there has been a significant step forward in the reform debate. I recognise that many, including the Scottish Government, would have preferred a more rapid path to the ending of discards, but I believe that what was achieved was a good result, especially under the circumstances. I reiterate that it is far from being the end of the story. Under the co-decision process, the focus will now move to the European Parliament, which will have its say in the reform negotiations. The processes are complex and extensive negotiations are expected to last well into 2013. We have gained from the round, which I firmly believe has put Scotland on the front foot. We will use that advantage and our growing reputation and profile to drive forward the gains throughout the remainder of the reform process. The agreement was welcomed by many Scottish voices yesterday and today. I recognise that some might believe that the UK is not being ambitious enough. On the other hand, other voices believe that it is going too far, too fast. However, after presiding over the appalling scandal of discards for more than three decades, ministers have signed up to beginning the elimination of discards from day one of the new CFP, and after years of painful and damaging micromanagement that has been centralised in Brussels, ministers have signed up to meaningful decentralisation. Although the council agreement is not perfect, it is a big step forward that will help to meet the aspirations of our fishing communities and safeguard our stocks and marine environments. This is an opportunity to reflect before heading back into the fray encouraged—I hope—by the support and recognition of the Scottish Parliament and our stakeholders. There is much still to do, but the agreement is a good and important start for Scotland and maybe—just maybe—we can begin to steer our industry, our fishing communities and our marine environment into calmer waters.

I thank Claire Baker for her questions, and I will attempt to answer as many as I can. I welcome many of her comments, although at times I thought that I was listening to the Conservative spokesperson; I am sure that that was inadvertent on her part. On other member states, as I said in my statement, it is important that we now have an agreement that, for the first time, involved fishing ministers sitting round the table in Brussels and achieving the two major outcomes to which I referred, on regionalisation and tackling discards. Clearly, the detail of how that will be enforced in each region or across Europe will be hammered out over the coming year or so. I accept that we must pay close attention to that. Ultimately, each fishing minister will be held to account by their Parliament and their people, as we will be in Scotland. On the timetable for banning discards, because we have a mixed fishery in Scottish waters, that is an unbelievably complex issue. However, we have shown that we can cut discards and we are convinced that, given a few years, we can eliminate discards from our fisheries. We must therefore have a timetable in place, but we cannot make a law simply by writing dates on bits of paper—and at the end of the day, this is about a law. We cannot set unrealistic dates that simply cannot be achieved in a mixed fishery. We need a bit of time. We need to develop the gears, the science and so on before we can get to where we want to be. We can perhaps be a bit more ambitious than the provisional timescale that was laid out in the agreement yesterday, but we must be careful that we do not get ahead of ourselves and that we have the ability to reduce discards before the dates are set in law. We want to ensure that the regulations take into account the fact that we have a mixed fishery. We ensured that that was the case with the regulation that aims to achieve maximum sustainable yield by 2015 if possible. We welcome the 2020 date, because that will give us an extra few years. We cannot say that all stocks in a mixed fishery will be at the same level at the same time, because there are interdependent relationships. The 2020 date was a commonsense proposal. On the timing of regionalisation to ensure that we can have discard bans and that other measures are put in place that are suited to Scottish waters, I think that regionalisation is the big prize. Regionalisation can lead to discard bans, but they cannot lead to regionalisation, so we must get regionalisation in place. That is why having all member states sitting round the table and signing up to such an agreement for the first time in 30 years is a major breakthrough.

I join Jamie McGrigor in congratulating Scotland’s prawn fleets for adopting measures this month that will lead to a reduction in discards of white fish of between 60 and 70 per cent. That is a massive step forward, and a big challenge that the industry is willing to meet. I am sure that we all want to congratulate it on doing that. That approach shows that we can reduce discards. If we adopt measures today that will reduce discards by 60 to 70 per cent, perhaps there are other measures—indeed, there are other measures—that we can adopt over the next few years to reduce discards by 100 per cent. That is the objective. I know from attending the council yesterday morning that there are a number of member states that would probably prefer not to go down that road. That is why we need to have a timetable in place, and why it is good that we address the discard issue not only in Scottish waters, but across all Europe’s waters.

Yes, I believe that the agreement takes us down that road. Of course, that is why a commitment to meaningful regionalisation is so important, as we have shown in Scotland. Indeed, yesterday morning, others—particularly from the Commission—were stopping me regularly to tell me that they had heard that good things are happening in Scotland. The rest of Europe is talking about Scotland and the co-management process that we have in place. The process means that we have to take really tough decisions, but the measures that the prawn fleet has adopted to tackle discards show that we have a brave industry that is willing to make bold decisions. That takes us down the road of better co-management and more local decision making.

There is no doubt that we can settle for 2016. The agreement is 2017 for the phased approach of white fish and nephrops stocks. Clearly, the European Parliament has to have its say and more negotiations have to take place. However, other countries wanted the timetable expedited, even from 2016, to perhaps 2014 or 2015. For the reasons that I have outlined, that could be counterproductive and might not get us to where we want to be.

The method of regionalisation that is being proposed, albeit with detail still to be negotiated in the coming months, is that member states will agree measures on a regional, fishery-by-fishery basis. When the member states agree those measures, the Commission will effectively adopt them. That is a far cry from where we are at the moment. Clearly, there is still a big role for the Commission and a common fisheries policy. I would have preferred to see more radical reform from the negotiations, but we had a point from which we had to start. That might not have been the starting point that I would have liked, but I recognise that it is a big step forward from where we are at the moment and it will lead to better decision making and outcomes for our fishing communities and stocks.

A number of regional bodies that advise on fishing policy in Europe are already up and running. Those bodies feel that they are toothless or powerless, and they are, ultimately, just advisory bodies. What we are talking about when we talk about regionalisation are effective decision-making bodies. As long as there is agreement at the regional level, the European Commission will be empowered to adopt what is agreed. That is a much more powerful position for decision makers in each fishery. In my response to Dave Thompson, I should have mentioned that adoption of the Scottish clause, which we tabled, will mean that national Administrations will be able to propose measures to regional bodies and, if there is agreement on those, to implement them without consistently having to go back to the Commission, which can take months and sometimes years. Again, that should expedite good decision making and give member states more power directly.

I could, of course, agree with the member’s opening comment as well as the rest of her comments. Of course Scotland would have more influence if we had our own seat at the top table. I pay tribute to the UK Government, which worked with us on a number of important issues. We tend to win UK Government support when our interests coincide with the interests of the industry elsewhere in the UK. That is fair enough. It is a good thing, and it reflects the current constitutional set-up. It should not, however, distract us from the fact that we could have much more influence and say over the future of fishing policy with our own seat and negotiating machinery as a member state within Europe. At yesterday’s council, I sat and watched with admiration how the Danish Government was able to carry out its role as president in getting European fishing policy to a much more radical place than it has ever been before. That country is, of course, the same size as Scotland.

Tavish Scott raises a number of important points. One really important victory in the negotiations was the fact that we were adamant that, if discard bans are to be put in place in Scottish waters, the result should be more quota for the Scottish fleet when the science backs that. Otherwise, the fish will stay in the sea, even when maximum sustainable yield is achieved and our fishermen could sustainably land some of that fish. If the fish was over quota, it could be landed but then sent for non-human consumption, when it could be commercially landed by the fleet in return for a discard ban. That objective has been secured and is now an important principle of the policy for the future, provided that the European Parliament supports it, which I am sure it will. Tavish Scott’s question about science is a good one. As I said in my statement, some of the detail is still to be hammered out in the coming months. The regional bodies will have to have scientific advice and, at the moment, that is carried out on a European basis. Marine Scotland is part of that. That might well continue to be the case, but there should be much more leeway for regional bodies to access their own scientific advice. The European funds that are being discussed just now should also be used for better science.

There has been no decision yet on the future of the Shetland box and that was not one of the key issues discussed at the negotiations. As members can imagine, that was due to the fact that this week’s negotiations were on the general approach to the reform process. Many of the individual measures within the regulations will be negotiated in the future. We have, however, asked the European Commission why the Shetland box was missing from the draft regulations that it published, and we await an answer from the Commission.

I understand the sentiment behind the member’s question, but the objective is to reduce discards in the first place. All vessels fishing in Scottish waters will have to adhere to the discards ban and they will all, therefore, fish in conservation-friendly ways by definition. That is the place that we want to get to and I am confident that we can get there. The industry is working on a lot of new measures and will continue to do so over the next couple of years because it is in its interests to have the most sustainable fishery in Europe just as much as it is in the interests of the Parliament and everyone who is involved in the debate.

There was a good argument for putting into the agreement yesterday morning the fact that the target should be 2015 “where possible” because we simply cannot achieve by law a 2015 deadline for all the stocks in our mixed fishery. We have more than 30 stocks in the North Sea, for instance, which relate to each other in terms of biology. There is no way that we can make it a law that they should all be in the same place at the same time by 2015. That was recognised many years ago in the Johannesburg agreement, which also set the deadline as 2015 if possible. What we agreed yesterday reflects the international commitment and, as the member says, we have until 2020 to get the science together to ensure even better decisions in the future about what we do to get all stocks to MSY by that date. At the moment, we have good science for only about 40 to 45 per cent of our stocks, and all countries must work together to improve on that.

That is an important point. Here we are, in Europe, talking about the conservation of our key stocks, yet Iceland and the Faroes are behaving irresponsibly. I hope that they will come back to the negotiating table soon in the interest of protecting our mackerel stock. This year, there may be a chance of negotiations earlier than in previous years. The European Commission is looking into that at the moment and we will see how that progresses. We are keen to get those countries back to the table as soon as possible. In the meantime, I hope that they are paying attention to how Europe is getting its act together on other stocks. They should get their act together on the valuable mackerel stock.

That is another important point. We must remember the interests of the processing sector in the debate. I welcome the declaration—which was agreed yesterday morning as part of the deal—that a European advisory council for the fish-processing sector will be set up. That is a new initiative, which we welcome. In Scotland we have our seafood partnership, the purpose of which is to ensure that the processors are sitting round the same table as the catching sector so that we are much more joined up. Scotland is being held up internationally as an example because our fishing industry is much more joined up than those elsewhere in Europe.

In a matter of days, and after months of discussion and decades of campaigning by many fishing communities against the damaging common fisheries policy, ministers will gather in Luxembourg with the opportunity to agree the most radical and fundamental shift in European fishing policy in more than 30 years. Europe has a chance to inject some long-awaited and long overdue common sense into what has until now been a disastrous policy for Scotland. It has left much pain and economic dislocation in its wake, destroyed proud communities and undermined fisheries conservation in Scottish and European waters. Last December, I stood before members as we prepared to engage in an intense series of negotiations, which would lead to a new CFP regulation—a regulation that our industry might have to live with for the next decade and will certainly live with for as long as we find ourselves within the common fisheries policy. During that debate, I highlighted our key priorities and warned of the consequences of failure to achieve them. I reaffirm my commitment to straining every sinew to achieve the best outcomes for Scotland. I need hardly remind the Parliament of the vital importance of commercial fisheries, aquaculture and the fish processing sector to Scotland. Scottish vessels landed some £0.5 billion-worth of fish last year, and during the past five years alone the value of our farm-gate aquaculture sales doubled, to more than £560 million in 2010. Let me be clear: those industries matter for Scotland, and we care passionately about ensuring that they continue to do so. That is why, behind the scenes, in the offices and meeting rooms of Edinburgh, London and Brussels, the Scottish Government has been working with the utmost vigour on this most crucial of European Union policies. We have reached a critical milestone in the debate on the reform of the CFP. Next week I will travel to a Council of Ministers fisheries council in Luxembourg, to negotiate the council agreement on the reformed CFP that will be presented to the European Parliament. We should be in no doubt: the CFP has failed. Even the European Commission has admitted as much, and I give the Commission its due by acknowledging that it opened its door to radical reform at the start of the process. Scotland was the first through the door. Now is the time to review what we have achieved and identify what more we must strive to secure in the crucial weeks and months ahead.

Tavish Scott makes a fine point. I will come on to that theme. The common fisheries policy comprises a multitude of strands, which range from conservation measures such as fishing at maximum sustainable yield to the extension of the CFP into the aquaculture sector. Each issue is of great significance to Scotland and merits a separate discussion. I am sure that the debate will touch on many issues, but I will focus on three core challenges on which Scotland has taken a leading role: regionalisation and decentralisation of the CFP; the elimination of discards; and the future of our fishing rights. We have striven to promote decentralisation of the CFP to regional and member-state level. We want to return decision making to the people who are the most knowledgeable about particular fisheries, as Tavish Scott said, thereby allowing people to develop tailored management measures on a fishery-by-fishery basis and avoiding the wider political interference and race to the lowest common denominator that have blighted European-level decision making in the past. It really is a no-brainer, and the Scottish Government, working with fishermen—Bertie Armstrong, from the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation, is in the gallery—and environmental stakeholders, is winning that argument in Europe. Here in Scotland we have squeezed every opportunity out of the little flexibility that we have in an overcentralised and micromanaged regime. I am proud that our internationally acclaimed conservation credits scheme has shown what regionalisation, operated through co-management with the industry and others, can look like in practice. Rather than concoct detailed restrictions in the dead of a Brussels night, we have agreed common objectives with fishermen and other stakeholders. We have allowed the people who have the expertise and the experience to lead on developing solutions. We have been able to use the limited incentives that are available to us to design innovative measures that are beginning to achieve significant recovery of cod stocks in the waters around Scotland. We developed the approach through our fisheries management and conservation group, at which we sit down with all stakeholders to agree how our fisheries should be managed. The approach has sparked positive innovation and groundbreaking accords to bring about sustainable fishing, stability and growth for the industry.

As the member and the Parliament are aware, this Government and other Governments in Europe—and indeed the Norwegians, outwith the EU—have been making a Herculean effort to persuade the Faroe Islands and Iceland to come back to the negotiating table, so that we can get a fair regime in place for Scotland’s important pelagic sector. Here in Scotland we are making great progress and because of what we have been doing in this country we have a pioneering agreement in place for 2012: more than 130 prawn vessels and a mixed fishery have moved to fish exclusively with new highly selective gears developed by fishermen here in Scotland. That will reduce unwanted cod catches, for instance, by a staggering 60 per cent at least—drastically reducing the level of discarding in our waters. That advance is made in Scotland and shows what we can do with the powers that we have. Our message to Brussels is frank. Give us the powers and let us get on with the job. Nowhere are the gains of decentralised decision making more desperately needed than when it comes to discards. The CFP’s one-size-fits-all approach may be a farce, but the issue of discards is an absolute tragedy. If things stay the same for the North Sea stocks of haddock and whiting—and indeed cod, to an extent—discards of those stocks alone could amount to £350 million-worth of fishing being wasted over the next decade. That would mean more anguish for our fishermen and for our processing sector. To be clear, I want an end to discarding as soon as possible. However, it is not a straightforward matter. It takes different forms and has different causes. We must have tailored regional solutions that are appropriate to each fishery. I want to forge workable solutions that make sense to us here in Scotland. Well-meant but ill-fitting, top-down policies simply exacerbate discarding. Overquota discards from a lack of quota to land catches is one big problem. In Scotland, our poor quota share of some stocks means that our fishermen have no alternative but to throw dead fish overboard back into the sea. However, believe it or not, in 2011 around 17,000 quota tonnes of our main white-fish stocks remained unfished while at the same time our fishermen were being forced to discard over the side of the boat. It is hard to believe that despite the Scottish fleet catching virtually all of our cod quota, more than 6,000 tonnes of the North Sea cod quota was uncaught last year—another demonstration of how the CFP does not work. We need a more effective quota swap system put in place as soon as possible. There are many other causes of discards, but our route has four broad stages: first, take a fishery-by-fishery approach; secondly, minimise the unwanted catches that are removed from the sea by avoiding them in the first place; thirdly, optimise quota management to match the actual catches; and finally, devise a sensible arrangement to deal with the unavoidable residual amount of overquota, undersized fish that will have to be landed. My third priority is to protect Scotland’s historic fishing rights and to prevent the imposition of transferable fishing concessions. Member states distribute fishing opportunities according to their own national priorities. Some members may want to promote the pure economic efficiency of their industries. Others want to focus also on the wider socioeconomic factors. The European Commission’s original proposal to establish a mandatory system of transferable fishing rights right across Europe represented a significant extension of its competence into fisheries management. We in Scotland were among the first to stand against that. That whole theme runs counter to our key priority of making decisions closer to home that are right for our industries. We do not want a scheme to be put in place that allows the transfer of quota from small-scale fishermen to big-profit organisations and those with the deepest pockets. That would be a real danger to our fishing communities—perhaps our fishermen would be unable to catch their own stocks in their own waters. That would be unacceptable. We have fought against that since day one. I am pleased that the Commission appears to be listening—as do other ministers in Brussels. The current version of the draft CFP regulation only proposes a voluntary scheme, so at least we have moved forward on that issue. We have taken the lead in promoting regionalisation and discard reduction and we are in the vanguard of protecting our historic fishing rights. Our innovation and our determination are recognised by the Commission—and, I believe, by Governments right across Europe. We have worked hard to ensure that the United Kingdom position protects Scotland’s interests. I welcome the fact that the UK Government has moved its ground on many of the key issues over recent months and has seen the merit of some of the arguments that we have put forward and the validity of our strong cause. However, there is still some way to go. We have pushed these issues to the top of the list and we must continue to push them to keep them there in the weeks and months ahead. I look forward to an animated debate and I hope that the Scottish Parliament will agree that Scotland has made a significant difference to the debate on the reform of the common fisheries policy. We have made ground on a whole lot of issues of crucial importance to this country. This is a once-in-a-generation opportunity to bring decision making on the future of our fishing communities and the marine environment back to the member state level, the Scottish level and the regional level and to ensure that there is better decision making on behalf of Scotland. I hope that the Parliament supports the Scottish Government in seeking outcomes that deliver a secure future for our fishing industry in Scotland, and, of course, the sustainable management of fisheries across Europe and the globe. I move, That the Parliament calls for the current European negotiations to deliver radical reform of the failed Common Fisheries Policy to provide genuine decentralisation of decision making that empowers fishing nations and stakeholders to work together, including on a regional basis, to promote fisheries conservation, tackle discards and safeguard Scotland’s historic fishing rights for the benefit of its fishing communities, seafood sectors and wider marine environment.

Scotland and this Parliament must speak with one voice on an issue of such importance to our nation. Alan Coghill, the SFF president, and Bertie Armstrong, the federation’s chief executive, are sitting in the gallery this morning and I hope that they and their members have been impressed by many of the speeches that have been made. Our common cause is to protect the future of fishing communities, an industry that is very important to Scotland and, of course, our precious marine environment. This issue is of importance not only to Scotland and Europe, but globally. For many centuries, fisheries have provided a vital source of protein and income to people from every part of the world and they now contribute an annual $274 billion to the global economy; in fact, the figure is even higher if we factor in boat building, fish processing and so on. Nevertheless, we face major challenges. For a start, the world’s increasing population is making even greater demands on seafood consumption. In 2008, more than 3 billion people across the world consumed 115 million tonnes of fish, an all-time high that equates to nearly 17kg per person. However, we are also struggling with what is in many parts of the world a declining and somewhat endangered resource. Indeed, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation estimates that around a third of global fisheries are suffering the ill effects of overfishing or bad management. If we add to that climate change, ocean acidification, marine pollution and that ever-increasing population, the size of some of these enormous challenges appears quite daunting. As a result, there is a huge obligation on Parliaments in Scotland and throughout Europe to get their own house in order and the current attempt to reform the CFP offers a major opportunity in that regard. As I have said, we are talking about a variety of factors that are of importance to Scotland, from the seafood sector, which contributes so much to our economy, to our marine environment. I agree with Claire Baker, who I think was the first to point this out, that we must not allow the lawyers in Europe or anyone else to bamboozle ministers and Governments with legal speak and potential obstacles to achieving real change. What will matter over the important weeks and months ahead will be political will and what is right for Europe’s fishing communities. Of course, next Tuesday will not be the end of the story by any means—indeed, it will barely be the beginning of it—but Europe’s ministers will have the opportunity to sit round the table and outline a general approach to the important issues that we have been discussing this morning. For the first time, we will have to go through the co-decision process, a major policy move in its own right, and we are heavily engaged with Scottish MEPs and others in the European Parliament who will now have a major role in reaching the endpoint that we all want. I have met the chairs of the two European committees to which Rob Gibson referred and which are playing a major role in the negotiations. A lot of water has still to flow under the bridge, but Tuesday is a very important staging point and I hope that Europe’s ministers will sign up to the outline approach. The debate has been dominated by the issue of regionalisation and bringing more decision making closer to home to regional bodies—and, I would argue, member states. I was slightly disappointed by comments attacking the concept of nationalising the CFP and should point out that the European Commission, the European presidency and other member states have a degree of sympathy with the idea of passing powers back to member states, not just regional bodies. For a long time now, this Government and Scotland’s fishing industry have argued for such an approach, and I think that we have to grasp the opportunity. Decision making should come back to regional bodies but we also want member states to have real and genuine powers in that respect to ensure not only that Scotland can enjoy them when it becomes a member state but that, in the current devolved set-up, this Government and Parliament have more decision-making powers and can work in partnership with our fishing communities.

I am content that many people in Europe, including in our fishing industry in Scotland, welcome the fact that the partnership between our fishing communities and the Scottish Government has never been closer. Perhaps if the member’s Administration and previous Administrations in Scotland had followed that example we might be in a better place today. I think that there is general agreement in the Parliament that if the CFP is limited to Europe’s ministers setting the high-level objectives, all the detail should be brought back to regional and member state level. The Parliament is sending out an important message to the rest of Europe and the European Commission ahead of Tuesday. A number of specific subjects have been raised, one of which is the concern that exists about our ability to achieve maximum sustainable yield for many of the stocks in Scottish waters. We must persuade Europe not to repeat past mistakes and not to dictate from the top what should be achieved by certain dates when that is unachievable. Alison Johnstone mentioned that we need to ensure that all our decisions are based on good science. I certainly agree with her on that, and I assure her that that will be the case as we move forward. However, I am unaware of any science that says that the 30-odd stocks that we manage in Scotland and which form part of the mixed North Sea fishery can all reach maximum sustainable yield at the same time in 2015, given the interrelationship that exists between those stocks. I do not want to see past mistakes repeated, whereby Europe puts into law regulations that simply do not make sense and which cannot be achieved but, of course, I agree that a timetable should be in place for achieving MSY for Scotland’s key stocks.

I am confident that if the ministers take the right decisions next Tuesday and beyond, we will achieve what the member wants us to achieve. One reason why we need to bring back responsibility for some of the decisions to a more local and regional level is so that we can tackle the scandal of discards, to which many members have referred. That issue is of crucial importance to consumers and the public, as well as the scientists and the fishing industry. There is huge public concern about discards, which we should recognise. However, it is an extremely complex issue, on which we are already being proactive. I pay tribute to the 130 prawn vessels that, in the coming weeks, will adopt highly selective gear for the first time, which could reduce discards in Scottish waters by up to 60 per cent. That is a huge and brave step forward by that sector, and I commend it for taking such responsible action. Given that we have a complex mixed fishery, we must adopt a stage-by-stage, fishery-by-fishery approach to discards. I agree with those members who said that we cannot simply transfer the problem onshore. That would lead to fish mountains onshore, which would be just as much of a waste as the discarding of fish overboard into the sea. As well as being a complete waste, it would be the wrong way to go and it would be completely impracticable. The best solution is not to remove the fish from the sea in the first place, which is why good progress has been made in Scotland with measures such as the conservation credit scheme and catch quota trials. They represent the way forward. We have shown by example what can be achieved when such decisions are taken closer to home. Jamie McGrigor quoted something that he said in the past, which led to a few murmurs from other members; I guess that someone has to quote him. Earlier today, he said that it does not matter who sits at the table in Europe. I think that it does matter—it is much more important for a Scottish minister who treats fishing as a priority to sit at the top table in Europe than it is for Tory ministers to do so, given that the Tory party once said that fishing in Scotland was expendable in the interests of wider European negotiations. I turn to the Labour Party’s record. It is important for Scottish ministers to represent Scotland at important fisheries meetings elsewhere in Europe. I cast my mind back to just before the UK general election in 2010, when the Scottish Government offered to send a minister to attend a key meeting of fisheries ministers in Vigo in Spain, because the UK fisheries minister could not make it. The Labour Party said no and decided to send an unelected peer who was responsible for bees in the UK Government instead of the Scottish minister. I think that Scotland’s fishing communities would have much preferred it if Scotland’s minister had attended that meeting. Claudia Beamish rose— I was given 13 minutes, but I see that the Deputy Presiding Officer is now hinting that I should draw to a close. We are paying close attention to many other issues such as aquaculture, the common market organisation and the European maritime and fisheries fund, on which we will represent Scotland’s interests. Lewis Macdonald mentioned that we have been debating the damaging impact on Scotland and Scotland’s fishing communities of disastrous fishing policies from Brussels since 1999. Here in 2012, we are on the cusp of achieving radical reform that will bring back decision-making power to Scotland and the member states and will allow them to work together on regional fisheries. That will be much better for Scotland’s fishing communities and for the future of our proud industry in this country. I hope that we all support the motion and the amendments.

The Scottish Government is committed to tackling the toxic legacy of nuclear power. With that in mind, I have made it clear to the nuclear decommissioning authority that the decommissioning and clean-up of Dounreay and other nuclear sites in Scotland should proceed as quickly and effectively as possible. The transportation of nuclear material and fuel is a matter reserved to the United Kingdom Government. We have, however, urged the NDA to take all necessary steps to ensure that any future movements of Dounreay fast-reactor breeder fuels or other exotic nuclear materials from Dounreay to Sellafield are managed in a safe, secure and responsible manner, fully in line with regulatory requirements.

Of course, I expect the NDA to consult adequately all potentially affected communities, and it will release further details of its policy in due course. If Jamie Hepburn has any specific concerns relating to his area, either that there has been no consultation on the fuels or that the NDA has not fulfilled its obligations, he should please write to me about them and I will raise them with the NDA. I have no evidence, at the moment, of any gap in its consultation process, but I am always willing to listen to members’ concerns.

It is really important to recognise that neither the Scottish Government nor the NDA plans to create a single facility for the storage of all radioactive waste generated in central and southern Scotland. The Scottish Government’s policy is clear: higher activity radioactive waste should be stored as near as possible to the site at which it was produced. Again, the NDA will release in due course details of its policy on storage in that part of Scotland.

The member will be pleased to know that, just today, the tenant farming forum has announced the establishment of a rent review working group to consider specific aspects of agricultural rent review procedures in Scotland. The group will produce its report and recommendations to both the tenant farming forum and the Scottish Government in November 2012. Thereafter, the tenant farming forum will have to consider the report and its findings and put forward proposed actions to the Scottish Government by mid-2013.

I congratulate that committee on its visits. It is, of course, a big disappointment when rent reviews result in animosity between the parties. It is fair to say that we tend to hear about only the bad examples, but there are many good examples out there. That said, there are bad examples. As the member said, people can go to the Scottish Land Court in such cases for resolution or enter into voluntary arbitration as an alternative. On the tours that the tenant farming forum should undertake, the forum is, of course, an industry-led body, not a Scottish Government body. I will pass on the member’s suggestion to the members of that group, as it is always a good idea to get out and about and learn first hand about the big issues out there in tenant farming in Scotland.

As the member will be aware, we are considering the impact of the Moonzie case, which is why the tenant farming forum is taking such an interest in the issues that arise from the case. Once again, we will be guided by the tenant farming forum on how we move forward.

Fishing for cockles on the Scottish side of the Solway Firth is currently prohibited under the Inshore Fishing (Prohibition of Fishing for Cockles) (Solway Firth) (Scotland) Order 2011. Enforcement powers under that legislation are conferred on the enforcement officers of Marine Scotland, who have primary responsibility for monitoring compliance. The role of the police is to assist Marine Scotland when required.

The member has written to me on the subject and I am giving serious consideration to the concerns that he and his constituents express. The powers exist, but there are challenges in enforcement. The member will be aware that there are real health and safety considerations for anyone venturing out on to the sands at low tide. However, Marine Scotland, the police, the Gangmasters Licensing Authority and others are able to investigate illegal cockling by other means. The collegiate approach that is being taken means that those who are engaged in illegal cockling are likely to be caught and punished. Nevertheless, I will give the member’s concerns serious consideration.

Thank you, Presiding Officer—I will speak very slowly. I welcome you back from your visit yesterday to Scotsheep; indeed, it is good to see you back in the chamber, chairing a debate on another very important agricultural sector. I begin with a formality. For the purposes of rule 9.11 of standing orders, I wish to advise Parliament that Her Majesty, having been informed of the purport of the Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill, has consented to place her prerogative and interests, so far as they are affected by the bill, at the disposal of the Parliament for the purposes of the bill. The bill represents another chapter in the development of legislation on farm tenancies in Scotland, which, of course, form a crucial part of Scottish agriculture. Modernisation of farming tenancies was central to the agrarian reforms in the agricultural revolution of the 18th century, and those changes led to the modern Scottish farming landscape that we all see and love today. However, as we know, this is a very complex—and sensitive—area with regard to legislation, regulation and management because of the balance that needs to be struck between the interests of tenants and landlords. Indeed, the tenant farming forum, comprising leaders from all sectors of the industry, was established some years ago to provide advice on how tenant farming arrangements can be improved for all concerned. The bill is the latest step in that process. Although it is not, as I will make clear later, the end of the story, it represents the culmination of one important phase of work. In 2009, the TFF made a set of recommendations on addressing certain obstacles to new entrants into agriculture. Although most were implemented, two recommendations could be introduced only through primary legislation. The bill implements both of those recommendations, plus a later recommendation on the technical treatment of VAT. The bill has six sections. Section 1 amends schedule 2 in part 3 of the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 1991, extending the definition of “near relative” to include grandchildren in cases where a deceased farmer’s tenancy is passed by succession. The purpose of that amendment, which was sought by the sector, is to preserve family farming traditions and, of course, to help younger entrants to get a start on the farming ladder. Section 2 amends section 9 of the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 2003. At present, it is possible to say in a limited duration tenancy that only the landlord can initiate a rent review or that the rent can only ever go up. Such clauses tip the balance too much in favour of the landlord and, understandably, many people in agriculture wanted the situation to be addressed. The TFF considered the matter and, as it recommended, the bill will stop such practices in the future, putting tenant farmers on a much more level footing with landlords. I am sure that such a move will be welcomed by the chamber. In response, again, to concerns that were expressed by the industry, section 3 amends section 13 of the 1991 act, which relates to VAT. As members know, the 1991 act says that a rent dispute can be referred to the Scottish Land Court for determination, but only once every three years, and the industry was worried that if, for example, the treatment of VAT in a lease were to be changed that could shut off the option of going to the Land Court for rent review for the subsequent three years. The bill clarifies that that is not the case. At stage 2, I lodged a Government amendment to section 4(1), which is on the timing of the changes. The amendment means that the new definition of “near relative” will also apply when a tenant farmer has died before the bill comes into force, provided that a notice has not already been served. Section 5 sets out the timing of the commencement of the act and section 6 states the short title. Nobody should underestimate how much effort has been made to get to where we are today. Without mutual respect and co-operation across the sectors, we would not have the level of stakeholder support that the bill, which addresses some sensitive and difficult issues, now carries. A great deal of work has been done within the TFF and between the TFF and the Government, and it is thanks to that hard work and constructive dialogue that areas of consensus have been developed. However, we cannot be complacent. Scotland needs a sustainable and vibrant tenant farming sector, not least because a tenancy is the first step on the ladder for new entrants to farming. I think that we all accept that we want to attract many more young people into farming, and indeed new entrants of all social backgrounds and ages. As I am sure many members are aware, the lack of new blood coming into agriculture is an issue throughout Europe. At an event in Brussels two or three weeks ago, I heard the commissioner say that only 17 per cent of farmers in Europe are under 35, and there are many similar statistics. The Government has introduced a number of initiatives to help tenant farmers and new entrants. We have supported industry-led initiatives such as the monitor farms programme and new entrant workshops. We were the first Administration to introduce a dedicated scheme for new entrants, which is delivered through the Scotland rural development programme, and the scheme now provides the maximum support that is allowed under European Union rules. To date, the scheme has given new entrants access to more than £1.1 million of funding. As the Parliament will recall, we offered to make up to £10 million available for that budget heading within the SRDP in the period of six or seven years for which the programme has been in place. The fact that, although some farmers have clearly benefited, the full £10 million has not been taken up perhaps illustrates that barriers to new entrants exist elsewhere in agriculture. Such initiatives are important, but they must be surrounded by the right support framework under the future common agricultural policy. The position of tenant farmers must be protected and new entrants must be properly catered for from day one. We have committed to setting up a new entrant panel to look at how the new CAP can encourage new entrants. Discussions in Europe are moving in the right direction, but it is fair to say that they have gone nowhere near far enough. We need to broaden the national reserve to cover all new entrants and not just those under 40. We need the ability to keep on using the national reserve throughout the life of the next CAP and not just at the beginning. We also need to ensure that the eligibility criteria for the new system meet the interests of tenant farmers as well as those of new entrants and active farmers who do not hold any current entitlements. I hope that members will join the Government’s efforts to influence the European Commission and the European Parliament in those areas. However well designed the policy framework is, tenant farming can thrive only if there is access to land, so we must have more landowners bringing forward land for rent. Some progress has been made on that front in recent months. The Forestry Commission Scotland, which is under the remit of the Scottish Government, has stepped up to the challenge and put land on the rental markets, as have the Crown Estate and some private landlords. I welcome those recent announcements, but we need many other people to follow suit in the coming months. In the same period, we need to continue to work on improvements to tenant farming arrangements, and a crucial aspect is the way in which rent reviews are carried out. Many members have expressed concern about that, as have many people in Scottish agriculture. Some members of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee were in Bute last week, where they heard at first hand about the difficulties that tenant farmers can face in undertaking rent reviews. I am sure that those members will refer to that visit when they speak in the debate. The issue is complex, especially given the range of situations in Scotland, so it needs expert consideration.

I accept that it is a long-term process, but the debate has been taking place in the Parliament and throughout Scotland for the past few years and, although I welcome the progress that has been made, many landowners and other people and organisations with a lot of influence in the debate could perhaps devote a little more effort to the issue. I welcome the fact that the issue has a higher profile than ever before, and that minds are being concentrated across the many sectors that are involved in the debate. I hope that we can get more effort in the very near future, although I recognise that there will not be an overnight solution. I am particularly delighted that the TFF has announced today the launch of its rent review working group, which is a panel of independent experts that will look at rent review arrangements and report its findings to the TFF and the Scottish Government later this year. The Government plans to offer financial support to the group, as we are very keen to see it succeed. The four members of the group have been chosen for their skills and knowledge, and not because of any particular organisational affiliation. The group will be chaired by Henry Graham, a farmer of 30 years, who has also been an agribusiness adviser for the Clydesdale Bank. The other members are Ian Duncan Millar MBE, John Ross CBE, and John Mitchell, a senior partner at Anderson Strathern LLP. I hope that the Parliament will agree that that is an upstanding and much-respected group of individuals with a huge amount of experience and knowledge of the issues, who are the right people for the job. The group will report in November 2012, which will enable the TFF to make recommendations to the Government by, I hope, May 2013. I urge members to support the group and allow its members the time to do their work and bring forward their conclusions. In parallel with the rent review working group, the TFF plans to address other areas of conflict between tenants and their landlords. Those workstreams will be on issues such as equipment repair and renewal, investment in hoardings, waygo compensation, diversification, and assignation and succession. As part of the assignation and succession workstream, the TFF will explore further with the parliamentary committee its suggestion that the definition of “near relative” in section 1 should be extended to include nieces and nephews. The TFF identified the need for a workstream to look at plugging gaps in the data on tenant farming. There was much discussion of that at stage 1 and stage 2. Accordingly, the Government will take the lead on a data workstream, with assistance and input from TFF members. Delivery of all the workstreams will be no mean feat, and no one here should underestimate the effort that will be required by the TFF to enable the completion of the work before the end of 2013. The outputs from those workstreams will feed into a review of agricultural holdings legislation. We committed, through our manifesto, to undertake a review within 18 months of the bill becoming an act. I will provide further information to the Parliament on the scope of that review once the outputs of the workstreams and the TFF’s recommendations are to hand. There is still much to do for the future. In the meantime, we have an important step to take today to implement the last pieces of the previous set of TFF recommendations through the bill and to welcome the plan of work for the future. I hope that we can all join together to support the bill, to help move forward our tenant farming sector in Scotland. It gives me pleasure to move, That the Parliament agrees that the Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

That is an important theme and the tenant farming forum has agreed to look at extending the definition of “near relative”. I remind the member that this bill is about extra protection for near relatives. In theory, anyone can inherit or be assigned a tenancy. The point here is that there will be extra protection should a notice be served by a landlord.

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer—you are very generous. It has been an honour to pilot bills through Parliament previously, but this is the first stage 3 debate in which I have had no amendments to deal with. In that regard, it has been an unusual day. However, I expect that one of the reasons why there have not been stage 3 amendments is—as has been acknowledged by many members—the complexity and sensitivity of some of the issues that we are discussing. I have certainly discovered that this particular aspect of my portfolio is a very difficult one to deal with. We are dealing with many different circumstances right across the tenancy sector in Scotland, and what may appear to be solutions to some of the genuine struggles, difficulties and challenges in some sectors of tenant farming can cause other problems for other parts of the same sector. I therefore welcome the fact that all parties have recognised the clear challenges. I think that we all have, ultimately, the same objective, which is to create a healthy tenanted sector that offers protection to tenants and security of tenure, while acknowledging that there are two contracting parties in every commercial agreement. However, because we are dealing with land there are extra challenges and sensitivities, and we have to be wary of where the power lies in that relationship, which is why so much regulation applies to tenant farming and agricultural holdings. We have to recognise that not all landowners in Scotland are as benign and cuddly as Alex Fergusson claims to be; we have a number of unscrupulous and immoral landlords. We are not saying that all landlords are unscrupulous and immoral, but we need legislation that copes with extreme circumstances if we are to prevent a very empowered but unbalanced relationship in tenancy arrangements in some parts of Scotland. We all know from harrowing cases that our constituents have brought to us—I say this as an MSP who has had to deal with a number of such cases, as, I am sure, many other members have—that there are extreme cases in Scotland. Unfortunately, some landowners do not see their role as being to ensure that their land is producing food or to ensure that there is environmental protection to safeguard biodiversity, and nor do they see that they have a role in relation to the people who live on their land. They do not go out of their way to attract new blood into agriculture. As Mr Pearson and many other members said, it is a national interest; we must attract people into agriculture in order to secure the nation’s future. There are people out there who are not doing that and who could do a lot more. It is important to recognise that. I am proud that the Government has taken the issue seriously. Since 2007, we have, of course, recognised that to attract new entrants into agriculture, there must be access to land. We were, for example, the first Administration to introduce a dedicated new entrant scheme to help people to deal with some of the challenges that new entrants face. Some 65 new entrants have benefited from support to the tune of over £1 million that has been available under the SRDP. The Administration tasked the tenant farming forum with identifying the barriers to entry, and asked it to propose solutions to help new blood to get into agriculture. In the previous session, we legislated on five of the TFF’s recommendations; today, of course, we are legislating on the remainder of them. That means that we have acted on all the recommendations for required legislation that the TFF brought forward two or three years ago. We have done more, of course: we have worked with the Forestry Commission Scotland to create new tenancies. That initiative has been very successful, and I am looking forward to handing over the keys, so to speak, to new tenants in a couple of weeks. A number of people from right across Scotland applied for the few tenancies that were available. Therefore, there is demand out there, and we have to investigate new opportunities. I am interested in how the RSPB and other large landowners in Scotland can create new tenancies, whether they are conservation tenancies, which Claudia Beamish mentioned, or other tenancies. I am happy to investigate what we can do to support the NGOs and other landowners in going down that road. We have also introduced new advisory services and higher rates of support for new entrants who apply to take part in some existing schemes elsewhere in the rural development programme, and we will, of course, do much more. We will establish a new entrants panel, host a new entrants summit and work with the TFF on its workstream, which will address dispute resolution, waygo compensation and other issues that many members have addressed. We gave a commitment in our manifesto to review all agricultural holdings legislation within 18 months of the bill’s being passed. We must recognise that the number of tenancies in Scotland is in decline, but that is a common problem throughout these islands and, indeed, throughout the whole of Europe. The problem is not Scotland specific, but we must find Scottish solutions to some of the challenges that we face. On the scale of the challenge, I think that I inadvertently said in my opening remarks that the European commissioner said that 17 per cent of farmers in Europe are under the age of 35. I should have said 7 per cent. That shows the scale of the problem that we face right across Europe in attracting a new generation of farmers to be active in our respective countries. The debate has demonstrated, as previous parliamentary consideration of the bill did, that the issue is only one part of a much bigger jigsaw. More work will need to be undertaken if we are to make progress on the journey for Scotland to have a vibrant tenant farming sector. Nevertheless, the bill’s successful passage through Parliament demonstrates that we are making progress. There is widespread recognition that it is in everybody’s interests that tenant farmers and their landlords succeed. I enjoyed working on the bill with the parliamentary committee at stages 1 and 2 and am grateful for its smooth transition through stage 3. I also thank my officials. The bill is short, but, given its complexities, the mental challenge that is involved with it is equivalent to that for a much larger bill. We all know that, on its own, the bill will not change the world, but it is part of a bigger picture that will enable the Scottish tenant farming sector to become more sustainable, progressive and fit for the future. The passage of the bill lays the foundations on which we can build a new future. We can then move on to tackle other issues that could stand in the way of our securing a vibrant tenant farming sector: many members have highlighted such issues. We all know what they are and they have been rehearsed in the chamber today and in recent months and years. Rent reviews are a crucial area, as are repair or replacement of equipment, investment holdings, waygo, diversification, assignation, and succession. There is no doubt that they are tricky issues, but I am confident that the planned workstreams will deliver on time and will feed into the future review of agricultural holdings legislation that we have committed to in our manifesto. I take this opportunity to thank the members of the TFF and the other stakeholders for the interest that they have shown in helping us to get the bill through the parliamentary stages. Everyone is in a better place as a result, and it allows us to draw a line in the sand and move on to deal with other issues. As I have said, the bill is part of a bigger picture of supporting the future of Scottish agriculture. Scotland has been shaped by agriculture for centuries. We owe the vibrancy of our rural communities, the unparalleled beauty of our landscapes, the food that is on our plates and the wildlife that is in our countryside to our farmers. For centuries, tenant farming has played an irreplaceable role in that rich farming tapestry. To be a farmer today, a person needs many things. They need access to capital. Unless someone is lucky enough to be a millionaire, that probably means access to a combination of loans and Government support. They need to have the right training and skills for their chosen enterprise, whether it be traditional shepherding in the hills or high-tech precision farming with the most modern equipment. They need to have a policy framework that puts them on a level playing field with all other farmers. That has been a hard thing to deliver recently. However, progress is finally being made with the CAP negotiations that are now in full swing in Brussels. I have said time and again that a big priority for Scotland is to stop basing support today for what people are doing on what they were doing 10 years ago when new entrants or active people might not get any support whatever. We must move on from that system to a better system that rewards active farmers and new entrants. A farmer needs to have the business acumen to succeed in an increasingly competitive commercial environment. They also need the determination and grit to make a go of it against the odds in one of the toughest jobs anywhere in the world. The most fundamental need for a farmer is access to land. Land is, quite simply, the key to the entire farming sector. It always has been and, no doubt, it always will be. That is why tenant farming legislation is not some obscure backwater legislation; it is crucial to the farming industry today and it will be in the future. It is the key to the door of an entire sector of our nation’s economy. Tenant farmers represent one third of the farming sector and tenant farming allows thousands of families to play their part in rural life. It is the glue that holds rural Scotland together, and I am glad to be able to say that Parliament can be proud of the role that it has played during the past few years to support such a vital sector and Scottish institution. We all appreciate that regulating arrangements between individuals or businesses is fraught with difficulty, as we have discussed today, but the stakeholders, meeting as the tenant farming forum, have found much consensus. The Government, working with the TFF, has found ways of implementing its recommendations, and Parliament has played its part by putting together a modern legislative framework for the 21st century. I therefore ask Parliament to join me in thanking the TFF for all that has been achieved so far and I urge the TFF to spare no effort in addressing, in the coming months, the issues I mentioned earlier. Scottish agriculture is at the heart of our nation and tenant farming is at the heart of agriculture. I ask all members to value our land, our countryside and our way of life, and to join me in helping tenant farming towards a brighter future. With the bill, we can pass an important milestone on that important journey. I commend the bill to Parliament.

We support the Scottish Agricultural Organisation Society to work across the public and private sector to support business models that enhance collaboration, gain economies of scale, reduce costs and promote Scotland’s outstanding produce at home and abroad. Among other things, since 2007, we have provided direct funding of more than £4 million to various farming co-operatives to develop and expand their businesses.

Yes—where that can happen, it makes sense. The Government remains committed to encouraging those who are involved in procurement, particularly public procurement, to buy more fresh, seasonal and high-quality produce, which often comes from local producers and suppliers. The Government has set in motion a range of actions to support that commitment, including publishing guidance that is aimed at small and medium-sized enterprises and public bodies. I am keen to hear more about the example that the member cites, because it is clearly causing concern. If there is any way in which we can help to change the culture locally, we would certainly support that.

Yes, I can give the member that assurance. The Government has given unprecedented support to farmers markets and has encouraged them to work together across Scotland. We recently gave the Scottish Association of Farmers Markets, I think, £200,000, which was the first grant that it had received as a body. I hope that that will help to make a difference. As I said in my previous answer, we have given £4 million to the Scottish Agricultural Organisation Society, to which the member referred. If the society wishes to bring to my attention any particular issues that will help to empower primary producers to deal directly with their customers and across the supply chain, I would be interested in hearing about that.

The Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Act 2006 makes it an offence to cause unnecessary suffering to animals kept by man and provides suitable powers for enforcement bodies. In the area of animal welfare, we are currently concentrating on developing new legislation on the welfare of animals at slaughter in order to implement European Union legislation early next year. Other issues under consideration include the use of wild animals in circuses, the regulation of equine establishments and the use of electronic shock collars for dog training.

I thank the member for raising the matter, although it is perhaps slightly more appropriate to the ministers in the justice portfolio who have just been answering questions. That said, I am happy to speak to the Cabinet Secretary for Justice on the issue and, if the SSPCA has any concerns, I urge it to write to me about them. The Parliament’s job is to legislate and ensure that the appropriate penalties are available to the courts, but ultimately it is up to the courts to decide on each case. Nevertheless, if the SSPCA wishes to write to me on the issue, I will look into it.

The Scottish Government works with a range of public and private sector partners to promote and invest in the food and drink sector, and our success is reflected in the latest figures, which show that, since 2007, there has been an increase in food exports of 62 per cent and a 50 per cent increase in whisky exports. Retail sales of Scottish brands in these islands have also increased by one third since 2007. Further good news is that the food and drink industry has reached £11.9 billion turnover, which is 95 per cent of the target of £12.5 billion that the industry set for 2017.

Of course, 2014 will be a very important year for Scotland, not least because the Commonwealth games will offer a fantastic platform for showcasing Scotland’s larder, so the member has raised a good issue. I assure him that the industry-led body, Scotland Food and Drink, which is supported by the Government, is closely involved with the organisers of the games, as are other Scottish Government agencies. There is a lot of activity on this issue. We do not want to miss the opportunity. Indeed, a few days ago, I saw some good press coverage of the organisers talking about their ambitious plans for promoting Scottish food and drink at the games. I am happy to drop the member a note to bring him up to date on that.

The member has raised another good issue. The purpose of Scotland’s first national food and drink policy that brought together all the different agendas was also to ensure that we took food poverty and community initiatives in Scotland into account. A number of community food initiatives in Scotland are supported through the climate challenge fund, which was the subject of a previous question, and by other means as well, and we are keen to increase our support to community initiatives that get into some of the more vulnerable parts of Scottish society. I am aware of such initiatives in my constituency as well as in the rest of the country, so I assure the member that we will continue to support them.

Late last year, the Scottish Government commissioned research to carry out a study of existing rural Parliaments in Europe and, earlier this year, we hosted a stakeholder discussion on the creation of a rural Parliament for Scotland. That work will culminate in a seminar on 29 May in which representatives from across rural Scotland will hear directly from European rural Parliaments, and then discuss and agree the potential next steps towards a rural Parliament for Scotland.

If we decide to proceed with a rural Parliament for Scotland and gain the benefits that other countries appear to have enjoyed from their rural Parliaments, that will help rural communities in the member’s constituency and elsewhere in Scotland to have more of a voice and influence over Government policy. That is not a criticism of the existing arrangements, but if there are additional added-value initiatives that other countries have taken forward and which we can take forward to give rural Scotland more influence, we should investigate whether that is appropriate for Scotland. I am excited about the potential of a rural Parliament, but we may want to do things in a different way in this country compared with how other countries have pursued matters. If we want to proceed with a rural Parliament, we must take the best of what is happening elsewhere and turn it into a Scottish version.

Many lessons came out of that meeting, but one that sticks in my mind is the need to ensure that, should we proceed with a rural Parliament, our rural communities and stakeholders feel a sense of ownership of it. That is an important message for Governments and politicians of all parties, and we will certainly take it on board. On the representation at that meeting and at future events, it is clearly always a challenge to ensure that all stakeholders have a voice around the table, and I will certainly take on board any concerns that our trade union movement has. We have to ensure, of course, that not only the usual suspects, but ordinary people from rural Scotland have a say in how we move forward. We have to strike a balance.

It is estimated that there will be little impact on farmers. A recent James Hutton Institute analysis of agriculture and slopes, for example, shows that only 2 per cent of cereal crops are grown on slopes of over 12 per cent. That percentage relates to all land; the figure for those slopes around watercourses will be much less than 2 per cent, of course. The report contains a detailed example of an area of north-east Scotland and is available for the member and others to see in the Scottish Parliament information centre.

As the member will no doubt be aware, the Scottish Government recently met the National Farmers Union of Scotland and put its mind at ease on the potential impact of the wording of the regulations. However, we are reflecting on the comments that we have received in the consultation, and we will ensure that they are taken on board. I trust that all members agree that we must protect Scotland’s watercourses from substances such as fertilisers for the sake of the environment, and I know that many farmers support that. We have to strike a balance, but we will ensure that the approach is proportionate.

As I said previously—I am sure that the member listened intently to what I said—we have clarified the proposals on spreading on slopes with the National Farmers Union of Scotland, and it is content that the final drafting will be consistent with existing cross-compliance legislation. As I said, consideration will also be given to all the consultation responses before any final proposals are taken forward.

I counted four different soundbites in the member’s supplementary question. No doubt they will appear in some worthy local newspapers in Scotland. We must keep the matter in perspective and be proportionate about it. We have said that we will consider closely the consultation responses that we receive. The purpose of the recent consultation was to bring one part of Scottish legislation into line with other parts of legislation that have come from Europe. It should not place any disproportionate burden on Scotland’s farmers.

We estimate that very few acres of farmland will be affected. Those who are in receipt of the single farm payment and rural development programme funding already have similar controls under cross-compliance legislation.

As I am sure the member is aware, the industry met Government officials just last week and left that meeting reassured that the proposed changes will not add any unnecessary red tape to industry. There was perhaps some misunderstanding about their potential impact. I am sure that the member agrees that it is important that we protect our water environment. Agriculture has a role to play in that, hence the European legislation that is in place at the moment, which we have to enforce in Scotland—often for very good reasons, and supported by many farmers in Scotland in the first place. Nevertheless, I am keen to get to the bottom of why there was such a misunderstanding in the first place. I am currently discussing that with officials and the industry. In the meantime, I can assure the member and the chamber that our objective is not to add any unnecessary red tape or bureaucracy and not to stand in the way of any farming businesses in Scotland that are acting responsibly.

Yes, I can give that guarantee to the member’s constituents, as I have done to many farmers throughout Scotland over the past few days. However, I cannot assure him that I will be able to stop the Tories and Lib Dems in this chamber from jumping on bandwagons and adding fuel to fires that do not exist.

The legislation should impact only on those farmers whose slopes go directly into watercourses and will ask them to take extra precautions to protect those watercourses. That is for good environmental reasons. Many farmers I speak to agree that we have to protect the water environment and that agriculture has a role to play in that. I am happy to send further background information to all members who have rural constituencies to ensure that they have the up-to-date information at their fingertips and that any comments that they are making to the media are based on accurate information.

We do not currently plan to do that, but I encourage all businesses to adopt environmentally sound practices, not only to help our environment, but because it can make good business sense. As the member might be aware, the Government laid the draft zero waste regulations before Parliament on 15 March, which will support businesses and householders in helping us to deliver a zero waste Scotland.

I am keen to learn more about the member’s concerns. We have a planning regime in place, which in turn must deliver the recycling and other facilities that are required on the road to a zero waste Scotland. If specific concerns have come to the member’s attention, I ask him to raise them with me. I am unaware of any plans to change the law in regard to the issue that he raises. The new zero waste regulations will place obligations on us all, including businesses, to recycle more, reduce food waste and take other measures to help to achieve a zero waste Scotland.

The Scottish Government welcomes all support for our long-held view that the Crown Estate’s rights and responsibilities should be devolved to Scotland. I have written to the Secretary of State for Scotland seeking a meeting to make the case for change for the benefit of Scotland’s communities.

I agree that that should be for the Scottish Parliament to decide. That view underpins the Scottish Government’s campaign for the devolution of the Crown estate. We want the Crown estate to become much more accountable and democratised. The administration of the Crown estate is currently reserved to the United Kingdom Government, so the timescale for change, in the short term at least, is in its hands. I hope that the secretary of state, Michael Moore, will abide by the campaign of his party in Scotland to secure the devolution of the Crown estate. Given that that is the message that his party has been giving to the people—particularly those of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland—this is his opportunity to fulfil his party’s promises.

I am answering from a piece of paper, Presiding Officer. As I indicated in my earlier response to Jim Eadie, the Scottish Government has for some time called for the Crown estate to be devolved to Scotland so that its revenues can benefit Scotland and our communities directly. We have proposed a two-phase approach to its devolution. The first phase would be to devolve responsibility to the Parliament; the second phase would be wide-ranging stakeholder consultation and discussion on the most appropriate way to manage the assets.

It would perhaps help if Tavish Scott’s colleague Michael Moore were to devolve the Crown estate to the Scottish Parliament in the first place and stick to the pledge that his party made when campaigning in the Highlands and Islands. Michael Moore now has an opportunity to fulfil his party’s pledge to the electorate. I said that the Government envisages a two-phase approach. First, the Scottish Parliament must have the Crown estate devolved to it. There would then be a second stage when, of course, local powers would be devolved to local communities.

As part of the discussions on devolution of the Crown estate in Scotland, we would review the arrangements under the coastal communities fund, to ensure that there were appropriate rules for community benefit. As I said in answer to a previous question, I have requested a meeting with Michael Moore to discuss how we can get the Crown estate devolved to Scotland, where it belongs, as soon as possible.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. This Government has two key policy objectives for tenant farming in Scotland: first, to ensure that tenant farmers have legislative protection; and, secondly, to have a vibrant tenant farming sector in Scottish agriculture so that the sector can continue to put food on our tables and help to care for Scotland’s environments. I think that all members recognise the important role played by all our diverse agriculture in Scotland, and I am sure that members agree that Scottish agriculture continues to punch above its weight in our economy. That is underlined by the incredible success of our food and drink sectors that was announced only yesterday, with overseas exports of Scottish food and drink increasing by a massive 19 per cent in 2011 alone. Those exports are now worth around £5.5 billion to the Scottish economy and are achieving our national targets about six years early—that is just an illustration of the booming success in recent years of our food and drink sectors. Our tenant farmers are of course an integral part of Scottish agriculture. Prior to 1883, the relationship between tenant farmers and their landlords was determined by freedom of contract. Since then, farming leasing arrangements between landlords and their tenant farmers, and their relationships, have been regulated by a series of acts of Parliament. Before the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 2003 was passed, the only formal leasing arrangements that legislation permitted were a seasonal let of less than one year—my notes refer in brackets to a lease of 364 days, not 365 days, in the legislation—or secure tenancies, such as those in the Agricultural Holdings (Scotland) Act 1991, with which we are all familiar. When a tenant farmer has a long-term protected lease that is heritable, it can now be broken only by non-payment of rent or a material breach of the lease. Many factors—not just legislation—influence the trends in agricultural tenancies. Economic factors, the availability of land and labour, our farming systems, the health of the marketplace and changing rural communities all influence the sector’s health. The purposes of agricultural holdings legislation are to protect the rights of the tenant and the landlord and to do what we can to enhance the productiveness of our land in Scotland. The legislation achieves that by encouraging tenant farmers to maintain proper husbandry of the land until the end of their lease while enabling them to receive value for the improvements that they have made to the land. The aim has been to ensure that neither party is disadvantaged by a tenancy agreement, and the bill has the same aim. For some, tenant farming provides the first foothold on the farming ladder. It is a family tradition for some and it provides for others the opportunity and flexibility to farm in a way that suits their needs. I am well aware that some tenant farmers face extreme hardship or economic difficulties, because they tell me that when I travel the length and breadth of Scotland. I know that there are difficult landlords and unscrupulous land agents, and we all wish that that was not the case. I know that tenant farmers provide some of our best produce and are dynamic businessmen. Many have contracts with leading retailers and provide some of the best beef and lamb that can be got anywhere. It is important to recognise that there are also excellent proactive landlords and fair-minded agents. It is not easy to achieve growth and dynamism in an industry that is based primarily on the relationship between two individuals, in a country in which available land is limited. Balancing the needs of both parties is often challenging. It would be easy to sidestep some of the difficult issues that need to be addressed. I expect that I speak for many members when I say that we in the Scottish Government do not wish to take the easy option. The Government and I are committed to tenant farmers and to a vibrant tenant farming sector. The bill is one of the many tools that we are using to achieve that. The bill marks the final stage in implementing the package of recommendations that were made to the Government by the Scottish tenant farming forum, with which we have worked closely in recent years to achieve our aims. I was disappointed when we could not include in the Public Services Reform (Agricultural Holdings) (Scotland) Order 2011 the two main amendments that are in the bill, but we could not abuse the power to make that order. I introduced the bill to enable the Government to complete its commitment to implement the final two parts of the package of measures that our key tenant farming stakeholders proposed and to implement a further recommendation from the industry on VAT. Section 1 of the bill amends part III of schedule 2 to the 1991 act to extend the definition of a “near relative” to include grandchildren. The current definition includes a surviving spouse or civil partner and a natural or adopted child of the deceased tenant farmer. The amendment will help to meet our objective of widening the class of people who are entitled to a degree of protection when succeeding to a secure 1991 act tenancy. It should also make it easier for grandchildren to inherit farm tenancies and should help new and younger entrants to get a start in tenant farming, which will be a key benefit to the agricultural sector. Section 2 will amend section 9 of the 2003 act to nullify lease terms in limited duration tenancies that provide for upward-only and landlord-only initiated rent reviews. In a limited duration tenancy under the 2003 act, the tenant and the landlord enjoy freedom to contract and are not restricted in any way when agreeing the contractual provisions on rent review that appear in the lease. It is therefore possible at present for parties to agree to upward-only rent reviews or to a provision whereby only the landlord and not the tenant farmer can instigate a rent review. Our amendment will help to prevent landlords from burdening their tenants with limited duration tenancies that have uneconomically high rents. Our proposals will ensure that, when such clauses appear in leases in the future, any such terms should be struck out. We do not propose to make the provision retrospective in order not to interfere with the contractual position of parties who have already entered into leases that contain such terms. Agreements between landlords and their tenant farmers that are already in place will continue to be unaffected by the provision until their expiry. Section 3 contains the third provision, which will amend section 13 of the 1991 act, which relates to VAT and rent reviews. Under section 13 of that act, rent reviews take place in a three-year cycle, and any variation in rent prevents the parties from having a rent review for a further three years. The amendment simply clarifies that, if the VAT rate changes or the landlord chooses to change the VAT treatment of the rents, that will not qualify as a variation of rent. The amendment therefore avoids the situation in which a landlord and a tenant are unable to go to the Scottish Land Court for a rent review. Again, that has been agreed by the tenant farming forum and it mirrors a recent amendment to English legislation that arose from a recent court case. An agreed and carefully negotiated set of proposals has been provided that commands the support of the tenant farming forum, which includes all the main stakeholders in tenant farming in Scotland. I know that the sector faces many other challenges and that many of those difficult issues have featured in the debate on the bill, but I also know from speaking to many tenant farmers and others that they wish their legislators to tread quite carefully, given the deep complexity that we are dealing with. Stakeholders have certainly said to me that they wish to avoid embarking on a further round of rushed changes to the legislation that may be well intentioned but which those with the necessary expertise to ensure that the changes will work have not been able to fully think through and analyse at this stage. I for one wish to heed their advice. That is why, following my consideration of all the background information and the stage 1 evidence and committee reports, I will lodge only one of the amendments that the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee proposed. There will be a stage 2 Government-led amendment to the transition provision that is contained in section 4 so that the changes to the definition of “near relative” will apply in cases in which a tenant has died before the bill comes into force but notification has not yet been given to the landlord under the relevant provisions. I have also considered the recent decision of the Court of Session in the Moonzie rent review case. As I indicated to the committee yesterday in writing, I will not lodge a stage 2 amendment to amend section 13 of the 1991 act. Some stakeholders may take the view that the Moonzie case highlights deficiencies in the formula for undertaking rent reviews in 1991 act tenancies, but all stakeholder groups agree that the rent review system is a complex topic and that any legislative change should be carefully considered to allow full consideration of potential impacts. We need detailed consultation on and discussion of that issue with the industry. Indeed, we have met the TFF to discuss the way forward on it, and I will hold a summit meeting with the TFF on 4 April in Inverness, at which we will discuss such issues. Let me be clear: I recognise that we need a system for determining rents that is fit for purpose. In that forthcoming meeting, we will consider whether an independent panel should be set up to assist in the process and to enable progress to be made in a much shorter timescale than might otherwise be the case. Members will be aware of the recent Court of Session decision in the Salvesen v Riddell case. That case is still before the courts, so I am quite limited in what I can say about it, but we are considering all our options, including the option of appeal. I am only too aware that there are other important tenant farming issues that need to be addressed and to be acted on within a realistic timescale. At the summit that we will hold in a few days’ time with the tenant farming forum, we will discuss many of those issues, which cover rent reviews, dispute resolutions, broader succession issues, waygo arrangements and issues to do with fixed equipment. I do not want to pre-empt the TFF work plan, but I want a strict timetable that we can stick to. Members will be aware that we have given a commitment that we will have a full review of all the legislation within 18 months of the bill becoming law. We will then take any action that requires to be taken in the Parliament, provided that the opportunity arises. Given the complexity of the issues that we are considering, ours is the right course of action. The Government believes that it is important that the bill, which has been developed in close partnership with the key stakeholders, deserves members’ support, which I urge all members to deliver. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill.

The debate has been good. Many issues have been discussed that have been discussed for decades. David Stewart even took us back to the 1880s—a period that he remembers well. That indicates that some of the difficult and complex debates that we have had have been going on for more than a hundred years.

I will give way as a one-off.

As the member knows, Lord Gill made a judgment on one element of the 2003 act. The member might have given the impression that the judgment related to the whole act, which I am sure he knows is not the case. We are considering our options. As I said in my opening speech, one option is seeking leave to appeal. We will keep Parliament updated on the course of action that we decide to take. I congratulate the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee on its stage 1 report. The committee handled a lot of difficult and complex issues. The report was useful, particularly as it raised many issues that are outwith the bill’s scope but which the committee feels that the Government and the Parliament should look at. In my opening speech, I gave the commitment that we will look in the near future at many of the issues that the committee raised. Like others, I commend the tenant farming forum. It involves many people and organisations that have different perspectives and backgrounds. It has been good that they have been willing to get round the table in the past few years to discuss many difficult issues that involve many vested interests. That helped the Government to conclude that it should introduce the measures that it brought forward in 2010 and those that are in the bill. I remind members that we introduced a number of measures in 2010 that should help by giving more flexibility. They should help landlords to reach the conclusion that they should make more tenancies available and give tenants more security of tenure, given some of the issues that they face with their tenancy agreements. We replaced the two-man rule with a requirement for a viable unit, which the tenant farmers required; annulled post-lease agreements; reduced the minimum length of limited duration tenancies from 15 years to 10; allowed conversions of short limited duration tenancies to limited duration tenancies; and, of course, amended some of the fixed equipment provisions. On top of what we are debating, I hope that those measures give more comfort to tenants and landlords and will help to create more tenancies in the future and make both sides feel more comfortable with the current legislation. It is key that we do everything that we can to increase the availability of land, as many members have mentioned, and to increase the number of tenancies that are available to help new entrants to get on the first rung of the ladder. At the moment, if a person’s family is not already involved in farming or if they are not from a very rich family, it will be difficult for them to get hold of land other than by means of a tenancy to enter farming. That is a challenge, as we all recognise that we want to attract new blood into agriculture in Scotland. Various issues impact on people’s ability to get involved in agriculture, but the availability of tenancies and therefore land is a key issue. I appeal to everyone who has influence on the matter, particularly landowners, to look at what they can do to make more land available. I have met landowners who are 100 per cent behind the aim of ensuring that more tenancies are made available on their land—that represents proactive and forward thinking—but, unfortunately, I have also met landowners in Scotland who are 100 per cent behind the opposite direction. They want less land to be made available for tenants on their own holdings, and they want to clear their land of tenants. That is not healthy, and it is clear that we want to discourage that.

I agree that a degree of trust is needed. Of course, we recognise that we are often talking about commercial relationships, in which there are two contracting parties, both of which must feel that there is a benefit from it. However, land ownership clearly brings extra responsibilities, and I think that most members recognise that it brings a social responsibility, if not also a moral responsibility, to help to make that land available and ensure that it is used productively for the benefit of the nation. That is an important principle to which many members would adhere, and that is why the issue that we are debating is important. I am pleased that the Scottish Government is meeting its commitment to make more land available. As many members are aware, Forestry Commission Scotland is seeking applications for new entrants to farm small units of land on the national forest estate and—to give credit where credit is due—the Crown Estate has put four farms on the open market for let under a mixture of different types of tenancy. I hope that that will be a positive development for the rural communities concerned in Dumfries and Moray. Indeed, some estates in the private sector have also stepped up their efforts—I alluded to that before. We welcome the decision by Buccleuch Estates to let out 17 lots of farming land on its Queensberry estate in Dumfriesshire, and we hope that others will follow its example and that it will lead to positive developments. We want such arrangements to provide greater security for tenant farmers and to encourage long-term investment. As many members have said, the availability of land is not the only obstacle for new entrants to agriculture. There is also the common agricultural policy, which is currently being renegotiated. CAP support is based on historical levels of payments, of course, so if farmers did not farm prior to 2002-03, they do not receive any support. They will have no access to land and tenancies or to support through the CAP. The Scottish Tenant Farmers Association proposes to strengthen the double gate link to 2011 under the new CAP proposals. That suggests a possible way of dealing with the new entrant situation. I should explain to members that the double gate ruling means that, to qualify for new support under the new CAP, a person must have claimed at least one single farm payment entitlement in 2011, and they must put in a claim under the new system in 2014. That is known as double gate provision. As things stand, there will be little provision in the new proposals for anyone who enters farming after 2014. We want a policy that provides support to everyone who is farming, irrespective of when they entered farming. We are taking many more steps to help new entrants. We have given support to the Scottish Agricultural College to provide a broader package of advisory support to new entrants, which will help to attract new blood into the industry. In addition, the Scottish Government is working with the industry to create a register of new entrants. Rob Gibson mentioned the need for that. A matchmaking service is perhaps required so that landowners who feel that they can make tenancies available will know who is looking for a tenancy. If we can help to support that, that will be a good thing as well. In my opening speech, I touched on many of the issues that members raised. There are many other outstanding issues that are not addressed in the bill, but I have given a commitment that they will be addressed in the current five-year session of Parliament. We are at the beginning of a journey through the five-year session. Today, we have debated some measures that will help with the situation, but there is a lot more work to do. I accept that, and I know that the Parliament accepts it, too. However, at the heart of everything that we do in connection with improving tenancies and the tenancy sector in Scotland must be justice and fairness, as some members mentioned.

We should recognise that many landlord and tenant relationships are ticking along just nicely, but many are not, and those are the ones that we have to address. I thank members for their comments and their constructive support, and I commend the motion to the Parliament.

I am continuing to work closely with the fishing industry to mitigate any damage that is caused by the possible suspension of the MSC certificate. The suspension, which would affect all European mackerel fisheries, demonstrates the irresponsibility of the actions that Iceland and the Faroes have taken in the on-going mackerel dispute. They are not only threatening the sustainability of a vital stock but putting at risk the business interests of fishermen throughout Europe.

It is worth mentioning that the suspension might come into place at the end of this month, but existing stocks can continue to be sold as having MSC status. Only fish that are caught after the suspension comes into place will not have the accreditation. However, Scottish-caught mackerel will continue to be caught sustainably, albeit not as part of the international agreement that is required for MSC status. Of course, as I am sure many retailers are aware, that mackerel is some of the best product anywhere. The best way in which to secure its position in the market is to get the international agreement in place as soon as possible. We need Iceland and the Faroes to see sense sooner rather than later.

I am well aware of the importance of the pelagic sector to Shetland, not only for the vessels, but for the onshore processors, which employ many people. I have just returned from the fisheries council in Brussels this week where, at the request of Scotland, the United Kingdom, with support from Ireland, put the item on the agenda for discussion. The point was made that we need sanctions to be put in place as soon as possible. I am keen to work with anyone in Europe who sees the issue as a serious one. Many member states are trying to work with the European Commission to get sanctions in place as soon as possible. Of course, the UK Government has a role, so I am making clear to it that it must accelerate its efforts to ensure that the Commission has our support for trade instruments to be put in place, which we hope will be effective in persuading Iceland and the Faroes to see sense. It is an important issue.

The member raises an important dimension to the debate. However, potentially, the trade instruments and sanctions are not solely about mackerel. We await the Commission’s view on which of the range of trade instruments that are available should be used, but they do not necessarily have to be only about mackerel.

We have made significant progress, particularly through the laying of the draft Waste (Scotland) Regulations last week to drive the separate collection of food waste and recyclable materials from households and businesses. We expect to see food waste recycling available to at least 650,000 households by early 2015. The next key step will be to reduce the amount of waste that is generated in the first place. We will shortly consult on safeguarding Scotland’s resources, an ambitious programme to unlock the economic and environmental benefits of using materials more efficiently.

Yes, after careful consideration, I can tell the chamber that that is a good example. I very much welcome the reuse hotline, which I was privileged to launch outside Parliament just a few weeks ago. I commend all the social enterprises in many of our communities across Scotland that are helping communities to reuse what might otherwise make its way to landfill. The hotline is a good initiative and I hope that members across Scotland will support it in local communities.

Such enterprises have quite a number of routes for support. As I do not have much time, I will not go through them all at the moment, but I am happy to write to the member with details. Zero waste Scotland is involved in a number of initiatives, and other funds are available for social enterprises generally.

The Scottish Government recognises the benefits of microchipping in helping to reunite dogs with owners when dogs have been lost or stolen, which is why it is recommended as best practice in the “Code of Practice for the Welfare of Dogs”, which was published in 2010. In addition, we have ensured that the owners of dangerous or out-of-control dogs can be required to microchip their dogs by the issue of a dog control notice under the relevant legislation. However, there are currently no plans to introduce compulsory microchipping more widely.

Yes. I am always happy to have dialogue with the Kennel Club and, indeed, with Dennis Robertson. If he wishes to put a case to me, I will certainly sit down with him and discuss the relevant issues. If he wished to contact me to set up a meeting with the Kennel Club and himself, I would be happy to take that forward. There are a number of issues that we should be conscious of. Enforcing a widespread requirement for compulsory microchipping could be costly for local authorities, and a scheme could of course be costly for owners, since any registration system and database would have to be self-sustaining financially. We are concerned about a number of issues, but I would be happy to sit down with Dennis Robertson and the Kennel Club, if that is what he desires.

We supported the Control of Dogs (Scotland) Bill, which Christine Grahame introduced. Indeed, I believe that all parties in the Parliament supported it. The new powers for local authorities under the 2010 act have been in force since February 2011 and, since then, local authorities have undertaken more than 1,000 investigations and issued 92 dog control notices to irresponsible dog owners. That means, of course, that 92 dogs have been microchipped and that local authorities are monitoring under the 2010 act those dogs’ behaviour and that of their owners. I hope that the legislation is making a good difference. We will of course continue to monitor it to ensure that that is the case.

I have had no direct conversations on the issue with UK counterparts. I indicated in my previous answer that we will pay close attention to developments in Northern Ireland and in England and Wales, should they, too, decide to proceed with compulsory microchipping. On consultation, clearly Northern Ireland has taken its own decision and England and Wales will take their own decision, so here in Scotland we will take our own decision. However, I assure the member that we will pay close attention to what happens elsewhere in these islands.

The Scottish Government works closely with the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and zero waste Scotland on the specific issue of waste tyres. Recent joint SEPA and local authority initiatives targeting illegal operators have resulted in significant reductions in the instances of illegal tyre dumping. For example, in 2010 in the North Lanarkshire and Glasgow areas, operation aspen resulted in a 71 per cent reduction in incidents. There are other examples.

The member makes a good point. I am happy to investigate the details further. We all accept that the illegal dumping of tyres in the countryside is a blight on our landscape that we should tackle. A lot of good work, involving many local authorities and agencies, is taking place to curb illegal fly-tipping, of which dumping of tyres is a major component. If further measures need to be taken, I will investigate them. If the member wants to write to me with some ideas, that would be helpful.

The member has my support. There are other examples of good initiatives that have good results. For instance, in 2011, operation indigo led to instances of tyre dumping in East Ayrshire falling from up to 200 tyres a month to only a few sporadic incidents. Such initiatives work, and we should all support them in our local areas. I will certainly check what the situation is elsewhere in Scotland.

If there are ways in which the regulations can be simplified, I would be happy to consider them. I urge the member to write to me with examples of how the regulations are the barrier to the proper disposal of tyres. There is a market for used tyres and it is only right that those who wish to dispose of them pay for doing so because, in this country, we believe in the polluter-pays principle. Therefore, we must have regulations in place but, if they can be simplified, I will consider that.

The key source is “The Scottish Environmental Attitudes and Behaviours Survey”, which was published in 2009 and included questions about the environment and climate change. There are no current plans to repeat the survey, but good-quality attitudinal data is available from other sources, such as the Scottish recreation survey and the understanding society survey.

The purpose of the new campaign is to urge the people of Scotland to appraise their lifestyles and contributions to making Scotland greener. Many campaigns are behaviour specific, whether they focus on recycling or other action that people can take; the point of the greener together campaign is to ask people to take a general approach, to see what they can do in their daily lives to contribute to making Scotland greener.

I assure the member that no Government ministers will be appearing in adverts on the issue in newspapers or on television. There is still a long way to go for Scotland’s population to reduce its emissions, but recent statistics show that we are making good progress. We are already around two thirds of the way to the 2020 target of reducing emissions by 42 per cent. Some good actions are being taken by the people of Scotland, but we have a long way to go; that is why the Government has a number of budget lines to help to ensure that we are greening right across Government expenditure. As Gordon MacDonald’s question illustrated, we are also funding greener Scotland campaigns to ask the people of Scotland to look at how they live their lives and see what actions they can take to reduce their carbon footprints, promote recycling and help to green Scotland.

The Scottish Government provides £43 million of support to Scottish dairy farmers each year under the single farm payment scheme. Additionally, the cumulative total amount of support that the Scottish Government has provided under all elements of the Scotland rural development programme since 2007 now stands at £40 million.

That is certainly one area in which it would be helpful for Scotland to have its own voice at the top table in Europe. There are many others, of course, that would also help our dairy farmers. For example, they have taken a close interest for a long time in labelling issues, which are reserved to the UK Government in some contexts and to Europe in others. If we had a voice, we would be able to influence those issues more than we do at present. There are many other issues, not least the fact that we want to safeguard the single farm payment for the dairy businesses in Scotland that benefit from it. The UK Government would rather that the common agricultural policy budget was slashed, and I note that the Labour Party supported that position in the House of Commons in the past few weeks, which is disappointing. If the single farm payment was not making its way to many dairy businesses in Scotland, they would face severe financial difficulties. We need a voice for Scottish farming in order to protect our exports.

The Scottish Government is always keen and willing to support co-operatives in the agriculture and food sectors. Indeed, we have been doing so; a number of funding streams have made their way to the Scottish Agricultural Organisation Society, which deals with that matter on behalf of the agricultural sector. There is no doubt whatever that many farmers and primary producers have a lot to gain by working more closely together instead of always competing against one another. We will continue to support such efforts, including the promotion of organic produce, in times ahead.

Through the Scottish budget that was passed yesterday, we will invest almost £80 million over the next three years in efforts to reduce waste and recycle more. Of course, that funding is in addition to the money that each council already allocates from its local government finance settlement for waste management services and infrastructure.

I certainly agree with the member’s first point. It is good that councils are saving £20 million a year by promoting recycling. Of course, such promotion is an investment; it helps councils to avoid having to pay landfill tax and, at the same time, it is good for the environment. As for the member’s second point, I really regret that because of the cuts that have been imposed by Westminster we cannot invest even more in recycling facilities. Those cuts also impact on local government and I suggest that the member’s energies would be best directed at urging the Tory-Liberal Democrat coalition in London to stop the cuts and reinstate funding to help Scotland’s environments.

In the current financial climate, we have looked carefully at the demand for agri-environment funding in Scotland and consider that our proposed budget will meet this demand.

I will happily work with the committee to monitor the situation over the coming years. Against a very difficult budget backdrop, we believe that we have enough money in the pot to meet expected demand. The expected outturn for the current year is about £39 million, and we had budgeted £40 million. Despite there being a lower figure in the first year of the spending review period compared with the previous year, given the number of legacy schemes that have come to an end and the number of new schemes that are expected to come on stream, we believe that the budget will be there for the next three years, but we will continue to monitor this very closely.

Rob Gibson correctly highlights the fact that crofters and farmers play a crucial role in protecting biodiversity and Scotland’s precious environment. It is important that we learn the lessons from the current rural development programme, which is due to come to an end in 2014, to ensure that we get the next programme, which will last from 2014 to 2020, correct. We must very much take into account the factors that he raises.

The budget has been cut not just because of a lack of demand but because the Lib Dem-Conservative coalition Government in Westminster cut Scotland’s budget in the first place, so perhaps the member could direct some of his fire towards his United Kingdom colleagues in London. Individual schemes or measures under the budget headings change from year to year in line with demand, and we continue to keep a close eye on where that demand comes from.

I plan to review the Scottish Agricultural Wages Board again in 2013.

Clearly, I cannot pre-empt the 2013 review, but I recognise that John Wilson has a good track record on speaking up for the role of the Scottish Agricultural Wages Board, which provides safeguards relating to the particular circumstances of agricultural workers in Scotland. The board also provides a useful forum for negotiations in an industry that is particularly fragmented. I have no doubt that John Wilson will make his views known at the time of the review.

Nothing, apart from our manifesto commitment to review the future of the board in 2013, which I will stick to. We will listen to views from all parties in the chamber when we come to the next review of the board in 2013.

I am delighted to speak on the future of the common agricultural policy. I thank the committee for bringing this important debate to Parliament. This is a crucial time for Scotland. Every week, I meet farmers up and down the country, as I am sure many other members do. I know how important the policy is to Scottish agriculture. Only last week, I was across in Renfrewshire to talk with 30 or so farmers and to hear about their day-to-day challenges and their views on the future. This morning, I addressed Quality Meat Scotland’s biennial marketing conference, where I heard about the growing demand for food across the world and the opportunities that that presents for our producers. It is vital that we get the new regulations right so that Scottish agriculture continues to underpin our world-class food and drink sector, as well as delivering other benefits. Scotland’s food and drink sector has a bright future. In 2009, food and drink turnover in Scotland increased to £11.9 billion. That is already almost at the stretching £12.5 billion target that Scotland Food & Drink set for 2017. We will all have to reconsider our predictions, as we are breaking all records for growth. That has a lot of implications for our primary producers. Exports provide us with a fantastic opportunity, too. Food and drink exports stood at £2.4 billion in the first six months of 2011, which is 21 per cent higher than the figure in the same period in the previous year. Those spectacular successes rely on strong and healthy agriculture with robust protection of our environment—that is very important for our global reputation. There are good indications that some business conditions for our farmers and crofters might be easing. There is some optimism in the industry but, given the wider economic environment and, in many cases, rising input costs, we must not become complacent. However, after two years of decline, total income from farming increased by 25 per cent in 2010. Strong export demand produced excellent market conditions that drove up prices for cattle and lambs in 2011, and prospects continue to look good for this year. There are welcome signs that the Scottish beef herd is at least stabilising. The Scottish Agricultural College’s recent report “Response from the hills” suggests that the industry might be at a turning point. Scottish cereal production is also estimated to have increased by 5 per cent in 2011, producing the fourth-biggest Scottish cereal harvest in more than 20 years. All that is despite having in the past 12 months some of the most extreme weather that our farmers and crofters have experienced. Those weather conditions highlight the resilience of our food producers but also show why the CAP plays such an important role in Scotland. It helps farmers to produce crops and livestock, whatever the conditions; it is a buffer against volatile conditions, be it the weather or the market; it encourages businesses to innovate and to produce the novel goods that consumers now demand; and it looks after our many natural assets—after all, farmers are the keepers of Scotland’s natural resources. The CAP has always been important for Scottish agriculture, and it will continue to be so. No one in Scotland will be immune from the effects of CAP reform, whether they live in our rural communities or in the heart of our cities. The CAP is a key European common policy that is suitable for agriculture across Europe. It needs to support farms of all types—large and small, lowland and upland. We have all those types in one country, so the shape of the future CAP is of paramount importance to us all.

I thank the member for the notice that he gave me just before I sat down. He raises an important issue. On co-financing and pillar 2 of rural development funding, there will be an appetite for greater co-financing from Europe, especially given the pressure on some EU states’ domestic budgets. The new proposals are to replace modulation with flexibility for member states to transfer funding between pillars 1 and 2. That will be the successor to modulation. I turn to the Scottish debate. Brian Pack’s inquiry was absolutely crucial in putting Scotland in the middle of the action. Many aspects of the European Commission’s proposals resonate with ideas that were proposed by Brian Pack’s team. For instance, the Commission proposes smaller area payments with various top-up payments, which is similar to what Brian Pack’s inquiry proposed. The Commission also recognised that there is a continuing need for coupled payments, and it proposes to increase the level above the 3.5 per cent that is currently permitted. There is synergy between many of the principles that Brian Pack reached after consulting the people of Scotland and the Commission’s proposals. Scotland’s principles are based on Scotland’s distinctive needs, our diverse industry and our aspirations for the future.

Tavish Scott raises a very good point. The only bit of good news that I have on that point is that all member states across Europe share his concern. I hope that that strong message is conveyed to the commissioner and that he listens to it. The Commission has published seven draft regulations—four main ones and three minor ones—that cover the whole CAP. The negotiations have now started and will be long and complex. We have to plough our way through almost 800 pages of legal text. As a country, we will have to think about all the options that are open to us. The final options will have to be agreed by the European Council and the European Parliament, so there is a long way to go before we get to the finish line. I hope that in Scotland we can all agree on what we want success to look like. Success will be a fair deal for Scottish farmers with a policy that has food production at its heart while protecting our environment and biodiversity. The future CAP must be flexible enough to accommodate the diverse range of farming activities that are found in Scotland.

I apologise to Mr Scott for not giving way, but I am running out of time. Future CAP processes must be simpler for farmers and Government alike, with regulatory burdens that are proportionate to the risks involved. We need the industry’s help to achieve those objectives. Scotland has a strong track record of people working together and we will pursue that approach in the coming years. However, we must stay on our toes during the discussions, because every aspect of the CAP will be revised. These are important decisions for Scotland and we need to be certain of what the Commission is proposing and what it might mean for Scotland. Therefore, we will not make any snap decisions. At this stage, most of the thinking is about the principles of what we want for the future and the balance of one thing against another. For example, when money is tight, we might want public money to generate greater public goods. Many of us support in principle the idea of greening the CAP, but the proposed focus on greening pillar 1 direct payments seems problematic for several types of traditional Scottish farming. No quick and easy decision can be made in that area. We also need to think carefully about what the provisions might deliver and all the unintended consequences. Some are obvious. Given that Scotland currently has the lowest rate of rural development funding and the fourth-lowest rate for single farm payments in Europe, it is clear that our priority should be to argue for a fairer share of both those budgets, which benefit not only farming, but wider rural Scotland. It goes without saying that we must continue with direct support in Scotland. We know that the UK Government would rather phase that out as soon as possible and that, if it does not get that outcome, it will be looking to transfer funds from pillar 1 to pillar 2. However, Scottish farming would be simply unviable without that support and unable to compete with non-EU countries that do not have to meet the same standards that we demand of our industry. Therefore, we will continue to urge UK ministers to base their negotiations on the need for food security, not cost-cutting demands from the UK Treasury. Many of the EU’s proposals are welcome, and I hope that we can cover them in the debate. In my winding-up speech, I will do my best to address many of the issues that I have not had enough time to mention in my opening speech. I am sure that, by working together, we can all achieve success for Scotland and our farmers, crofters and wider rural communities.

I have very much enjoyed the debate and once again congratulate the committee on its novel approach of having the debate prior to publishing its report. Other novel approaches have been taken. We heard Graeme Dey of the SNP praising Alex Fergusson of the Conservative Party, and then we heard Mary Scanlon of the Conservative Party praising Graeme Dey of the SNP. Perhaps that will raise suspicions about Graeme Dey among SNP members. However, I am implicated as well, as Mary Scanlon made some very nice comments about my role, for which I thank her. Some wild claims have been made. Mike MacKenzie claimed that his cabinet secretary understands the common agricultural policy. Without disabusing him of his belief in that, I have to say that, having met the authors of the common agricultural policy, I do not believe that anyone understands it. That is another case for simplicity as the debate moves forward. However, I look forward to working with the committee, MSPs from all parties and, of course, the UK Government in the years ahead—at least the next two years or so. It is important that UK ministers not only talk the talk but walk the walk. I welcome the fact that the Scottish Government has access to some of the negotiations, but it remains to be seen whether we will have access to them all, particularly the crunch negotiations when the dotted line will be signed. It is very important that Scotland is in the room when those vital negotiations take place in the next year or two. Before I turn to some of the common themes in the debate, I reiterate the situation in the Council of Ministers so far, because a couple of themes that have emerged have attracted consensus among all member states. First, on the proposals for greening, which many members have highlighted, it is certainly my perception that all member states are concerned about the proposals. They are concerned not so much about the principles but about the way in which they are presented. There is concern about the proposal for 7 per cent of land to be put aside and not involved directly in food production. There is also concern about the fact that it would be expected that monoculture is avoided and that it would be necessary to ensure that there is the rotation of three crops on any ground. That would not be suitable in many Scottish circumstances. If barley growers want to supply our booming whisky industry, they should be allowed to do that. Of course, in certain parts of our remote upland areas there are not options to grow three different crops. We must ensure that Scotland’s concerns are taken into account. The other theme on which there is consensus among member states is complexity. All member states, all of us in the Parliament and, especially, our industry are concerned by the increasing complexity of some of the proposals. In Scotland we will do what we can to tackle complexity and bureaucracy, which is why I have asked Brian Pack to head up a new review to look at red tape and bureaucracy in what we have control over in this country and to make recommendations to other authorities. The issue is a big concern with regard to the new common agricultural policy, so we have to tackle it. I turn to some of the themes in the debate concerning Scotland’s distinctive needs. Many members have mentioned the need to have a better budget. Paul Wheelhouse used the word “scandal”. It is a scandal that we get the lowest pillar 2—or rural development—budget in the whole of Europe and the lowest in the UK, so we are at the bottom of the bottom of the league. That is unacceptable. If anyone asks what the UK has perhaps not done for Scotland in negotiations in past decades, please point to not only the pillar 2 budget but the pillar 1 budget—those budgets are an indictment of the fact that no importance was attached to rural communities in past decades by UK Governments. We can perhaps change that.

Claire Baker and now Jim Hume raise the concerns that have been expressed by environmental stakeholders about the agri-environment budget. Up to September 2011, which was the last round of applications under the existing budgets, 82 per cent of applications were met. That is one of the highest ratios. We are therefore confident that the budget available will meet demand in the future but we will, of course, keep a close eye on that.

I will move on, as I have covered that issue. We all accept that one big challenge is the transition from the historic basis of payments to area payments in the future. Graeme Dey and others mentioned the potential impact on the production of raw materials for our food sector if we do not get that right. Let us not deny that that will be a difficult debate. We have the same size of cake and we have to redistribute it, so there will be winners and losers. It is important that we have the ability to have top-ups to the area payments, so that we can link them to productivity and give extra payments where necessary for certain types of activity. I hope that that will be a means to support production in Scotland, in particular in the LFAs where, if there was only a straight area payment, that would clearly not be good for livestock production, because there would be no incentive or support for it. As Aileen McLeod and others have said, we can bring in limited headage payments. That is very important. Under the current proposals, we are allowed up to 5 per cent for headage payments. Brian Pack proposed that up to 15 per cent should be the threshold, so we should certainly negotiate that 5 per cent upwards. Again, the UK Government seems to take a different view from Scotland on the issue, but negotiations are on-going between Scotland and the UK, just as they are between the UK and Scotland and the EU, so we have to continue to make that point. I have said before that the pace of transition from historic payments to area payments should be dictated by the extent to which we can give support to new entrants. Many members have expressed support for ensuring that new entrants get support from day one of the new common agricultural policy. We should move from historic payments to area payments so that we include new entrants, but they should get support from day one. As others have said, if there is a delay in the new CAP coming into play, there should be some bridging mechanism. That is not so much a case for Scotland, but the EU would certainly have to ensure that it is possible so that new entrants receive support from day one and other schemes can continue. We have all agreed that there is a need for direct support in Scotland through pillar 1. I welcome the cross-party support for that as it highlights Scotland’s distinctive needs, but there will be difficult decisions. There is a tension between our desire to have a new common agricultural policy that adheres to simplicity and the fact that in this chamber and the industry we are all asking for Scotland’s diverse agricultural sectors to have tailored policies. There is a tension between the two positions of wanting simplicity and wanting total flexibility to allow everyone’s diverse circumstances to be taken into account, which entails more bureaucracy and complexity. That is a difficult debate, which we will have to have. In conclusion, I think that we all recognise that we have to protect our massive food and drink sector in Scotland and the primary producers who produce the raw materials for that sector, as well as the other environmental and economic benefits. The committee certainly recognises it, and I am sure that, working together, we can achieve that.

Scottish households are steadily increasing the amount of material that they recycle. Significantly, the new set of figures shows that for the first time they are recycling more than 40 per cent of their waste. In some local authorities that figure is approaching 60 per cent—a clear reflection of the efforts being made by local authorities and, of course, households across Scotland. I am confident that our zero waste regulations will see Scotland’s performance improve substantially in the years ahead.

Gil Paterson raises a very important point about ensuring that best practice is spread throughout local authorities, given that some are doing much better than others—albeit that there are mitigating circumstances, including geography and other issues. I spoke to the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities a couple of weeks ago about the issue and assured it that we will continue to work with all local authorities and to co-ordinate best practice. Zero waste Scotland, the body that is responsible for recycling, is also actively speaking to all local authorities in Scotland. Ultimately, what often makes the difference is local leadership in the council chambers. That is the most valuable ingredient for success.

Sarah Boyack will be aware of the very difficult financial constraints facing the Scottish Government due to cuts from the Westminster Government in London. Despite that, I am sure that she will welcome the fact that we rolled over the zero waste budget in the recent spending review, which will be debated in Parliament this afternoon. That shows our commitment to ensuring that appropriate funding is available to local authorities. The most important point to make is that local authorities cannot afford to ignore recycling, because of the costs of not dealing with it—the cost of landfill tax and so on, as well as the cost to Scotland’s environment.

As I said in a previous answer, the Scottish Government recognises that there are different circumstances in different parts of Scotland, particularly in terms of the island communities. It so happens that when I spoke to COSLA a couple of weeks ago, the islands representatives called in to the meeting via conference call, which was a good idea, and I gave them a commitment to look at some of the specific challenges facing our island communities. We will do more work on that with our island authorities.

The Scottish Environment Protection Agency expects to receive from the Ministry of Defence a draft remediation plan by January 2012 and a final version by the end of February 2012. If the MOD fails to provide the plan, SEPA has stated its intention to designate the land, under legislation, as radioactive contaminated land, by the end of March 2012. I believe that the MOD still has an opportunity to take the lead and bring this issue to a close without the need to designate the land, but to do that it must start to fulfil its obligations to the people of Dalgety Bay and deliver credible plans to remediate the contamination.

Bill Walker highlights a number of good points and the best outcome for the people of Dalgety Bay and the other adjacent communities will be for the MOD to step up to the plate on this very important issue. Indeed, it is important that it does so. The member asks me whether I am confident that that will happen. Obviously, I would much rather give the MOD the benefit of the doubt, but my confidence—and, more important, the confidence of the local community—is being sapped. I hope that the MOD recognises the seriousness with which the local community treats the issue. The best outcome will be to avoid the land being designated as contaminated by radioactivity—we do not want to go there unless we really have to—but that decision ultimately lies not with me but with SEPA. However, I hope that the MOD takes the necessary steps.

The total funding awarded under the rural priorities scheme since 2008 is £480 million. More funding will be committed throughout 2012 for a range of projects. The 2011 spending review allocated £97.9 million in 2012-13 and £89.7 million in 2013-14 towards our rural priorities budget.

I will be happy to send Claudia Beamish more details about the specific issues in her region. I think that she refers to concerns about agri-environment funding, which she and other members have written to me about in recent weeks. I am confident that the demand for agri-environment funding will be met as we move forward. That is evidenced by the high approval rate in the September funding round, in which 82 per cent of applicants were successful. That is above the acceptance rate in some previous years, which I hope shows that demand is being met. Of course, I have already announced a full agri-environment round, which will take place in 2012.

I expect that all local authorities will have met the 70 per cent recycling target by 2025, and that many will have exceeded it. Scotland has already met the 2013 European Union landfill diversion target, with 12 local authorities now recycling over 50 per cent of the household waste they collect, and two thirds recycling over 40 per cent.

The Scottish Environment Protection Agency has responsibility for monitoring the progress of local authorities, hence its publication of the targets for levels of recycling for households and so on, and progress towards those targets. As for specific issues that each local authority has to deal with, there is bilateral discussion through zero waste Scotland and there are negotiations between that body and each local authority to help and advise them. Of course, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities also plays a key role. The Scottish Government has many discussions—I referred to discussions that I had two weeks ago with COSLA on the progress that our local authorities are making. I am always open to suggestions, if James Kelly has ideas about local action plans that COSLA, the Scottish Government and zero waste Scotland could sign up to that are not being done at the moment.

I very much welcome the fact that Dumfries and Galloway Council is committed to taking a lot of action in the coming years to help us to meet our national targets. I was told at a meeting with the leadership of the council two or three weeks ago that the council is very committed to that. On interpretation of the statistics on household recycling rates, I am sure that members agree that, in order to ensure that they are accurate, we have to be very transparent about what the public sees about the rates in terms of what is published and in the public domain. We have also to abide by European legislation, which has helped to define effectively the recycling statistics, and to ensure that we are consistent not just within Scotland, but with what is happening elsewhere, so that there can be real and transparent interpretation of the actual situation for household recycling. I assure Alex Fergusson that we are working very closely with his local council, and in his constituency, to make progress.

Electronic identification of sheep was introduced to enhance traceability and enable efficient and effective disease control. Since its introduction in January 2010, we have worked very closely with all stakeholder groups to keep Scottish sheep farmers and crofters informed of their regulatory requirements.

This is an issue which I accept continues to cause a lot of anxiety for sheep farmers. The concession that the member suggests, which would be good for Scotland is, of course, something that we have attempted unsuccessfully to win over the past few years, although we have won other concessions that have made things easier. We met the industry on 7 December to agree a common agenda on some of the outstanding issues with the sheep EID regulations, so that we can go back to Europe and try to win more concessions.

Two weeks ago I informed the chamber of our intentions for the negotiations at the European Union fisheries council, which took place on Thursday and Friday last week, finishing shortly before 4am on Saturday morning. Before the negotiations, I outlined how crucial the talks would be for Scotland, and I think that it is useful to update Parliament on the outcome. We went into the negotiations with a very dark cloud hanging over us. The legal quagmire of the cod recovery plan threatened to snatch from our fishermen their rightful opportunities to catch their quotas. Let me be clear about what was at stake. We faced penalties for an alleged misinterpretation of a regulation that would have kept large parts of our prawn and white-fish fleets idle in port for the vast majority of the year. The impact would have been catastrophic for our fishing communities. More than 200 vessels could have gone out of business. We were staring over an abyss of economic meltdown for two of our key fleets. Recently, I explained to the chamber that that was all down to a decision by officials in Brussels to interpret one of the articles in the cod recovery plan—the notorious article 13—in a way that would have driven a coach and horses through our whole approach to sustainable fisheries management. In short, they wanted to scupper the win-win scenario that has been pioneered in Scotland, which has given the fleet the lifeline of more days at sea in return for delivering real gains in conservation. I told the chamber that I would take every step to ensure that our fleets had the time to catch our available quotas, which would mean overturning the Commission’s decision. We made that goal our top priority as we went into the negotiations, to avoid our fleets plunging over the abyss of draconian penalties. With enormous relief, I can now report that we managed to deliver that key priority. With the support of our United Kingdom, Northern Irish and Welsh counterparts, we played a leading role in winning widespread support for our incentive-based approach to achieving cod recovery. WWF and RSPB Scotland gave us a clear endorsement. During the negotiations, we managed to build the case for common sense, and the Commission was eventually obliged to accept our sensible and positive approach. Our fishing communities can now look forward to 2012 with much greater optimism than would otherwise have been the case. Our vessels will still be able to secure additional days at sea in return for continuing to take conservation measures. The outcome that we achieved has allowed our fishermen to draw back from the brink and, finally, to make their plans for accessing their fishing opportunities next year. To move forward, we must stick to our commitment to develop further cod avoidance measures, particularly in the important prawn fleet, where we all agree that the high discard rates need to be tackled. As always, that will be extremely challenging, but we have a strong and proud track record of working with our industry to put in place cutting-edge conservation measures. Indeed, we have a head start. A month before the council, we were already actively discussing with the industry a range of selectivity measures, and we had a programme for further reducing discards clearly in our sights. It is important to make the point that many of those measures are being developed by the industry itself. However, as we move forward, it is necessary for all vessels in all fisheries to support effective fisheries conservation. The package that was agreed last week adds extra urgency to the discussions and, through meetings with the industry in the early new year, we will set to work on putting in place the next stage of our conservation plan for 2012. The fact that our fleets can now go to sea next year is without doubt the big prize that we had to win, but I—along with, I am sure, the rest of the Parliament—remain hugely frustrated that we were not also able to secure a pause in the automatic yearly cuts in days at sea that the crazy cod recovery plan imposes on our fishers. That was the other threat to days at sea that was being negotiated. We pushed hard for such a pause alongside France, Germany and Spain and, up until the last moment, we genuinely believed that we had secured a vital breathing space for our fleets. However, as is so often the way, given the ludicrous nature of the rollercoaster negotiations, as we neared the finishing line, the Commission suddenly declared that common sense was no match for the legal straitjacket of the plan. In short, it insisted that it did not have the legal powers to deliver the pause that it appeared to be sympathetic to. That left us incredulous that the lawyers were once again running the show to the detriment of our fishing industry and our stocks. We believe that the further cut in days at sea is grossly unfair and that it defies reason, but it is important to recognise that, thankfully, our success on the interpretation of article 13—the other issue affecting days at sea—will allow our fishers to reinstate the days that have been cut as a reward for taking conservation measures. Therefore, we must urgently investigate what new selective gears and other measures can be made to work in our mixed fishery to reduce cod mortality to the extent that complete exemption from the cuts will be allowed for the days-at-sea regime. That is one possible option. Crucially, we left the negotiations with a clear commitment from the Commission that it would accelerate a complete overhaul of the cod recovery plan. Regardless of how belated that might be, we welcome it. We will focus our efforts next year on holding the Commission to that commitment. Turning to our other priorities at the council—priorities that would normally dominate the debate at the council and here—I am pleased to be able to report an extremely positive picture. We have been battling with the Commission for three years to remove west of Scotland haddock from catch-composition rules, which next year would have become a recipe for discards, given the increased quota for the stock. That key priority was finally secured at the council, thereby freeing our fishers to operate a targeted and profitable haddock fishery without massive and wasteful dumping of good-quality fish. As part of the package, we secured the second-largest ever—I repeat, the second-largest ever—quota increase for a white-fish stock, with a 200 per cent increase for west coast haddock. That is still well within sustainable limits. At last our west coast haddock fishery has been placed on a sustainable and secure footing for the future. More generally, we succeeded in overturning the Commission’s attempt to impose arbitrary cuts in quota for so-called data-poor stocks. That allowed us to pursue the far more sensible approach of considering each stock on the basis of all the available evidence and left us with a vastly improved set of outcomes, which are worth an additional £4 million to Scottish fishermen for those stocks alone. We managed to hold steady quotas for a number of other stocks that were threatened with arbitrary cuts, such as ling and tusk, while successfully arguing, on the basis of the evidence, for a rollover for our valuable megrim stocks and smaller reductions for a number of others, such as North Sea nephrops, or prawns, for which the reduction was only 6.5 per cent, and monkfish, for which the reduction was just 5 per cent on the west coast and in the North Sea. We followed our scientific long-term management plans, where plans were available. That means that in 2012 we can look forward to healthy increases across many of our key stocks, including a 94 per cent boost to North Sea herring, an 18 per cent gain in North Sea whiting, a 14 per cent increase in North Sea haddock and a huge uplift in blue whiting. On top of that, we succeeded in achieving a commonsense approach to reaching maximum sustainable yield across all our key stocks, with agreement that we should follow the scientific advice to seek to reach that point by 2015, rather than bring the date forward to 2013—an unrealistic date, which had been plucked out of thin air. These were the toughest of negotiations. I take the opportunity to pay tribute to the Scottish Government officials who worked over two days without sleep to fight Scotland’s corner and deliver many gains for our industry. We achieved all but one of our key priorities, in extremely challenging circumstances. Crucially, we resolved in our favour a dispute with the Commission that would have decimated our fleets and made a mockery of our approach to rewarding fishers for conservation actions that will improve the cod stock and reduce discarding, which are aims that the Commission and member states are supposed to share. We achieved that by working closely and effectively with our UK partners and other member states. We also saw healthy quota increases in key stocks such as haddock, whiting and herring. Those are big gains, which will be worth millions of pounds to the Scottish fleet. We at last achieved our long-standing priority to remove haddock from the west coast catch-composition rules. Our one disappointment was that we were prevented from stopping the on-going annual cuts in days at sea, due to the frustrating legal barriers that I mentioned. However, that will provide a driver for accelerating the overhaul of the current plan and ensuring that its successor is much more sensible and delivers effective conservation of cod stock alongside viable fishing opportunities for the Scottish fleet. I am determined that in 2012 we will finally strike the balance between fisheries conservation and fleet viability, and I am determined to secure, in time for the new common fisheries policy in 2013, the necessary changes to that damaging policy, to allow Scotland more control over the destiny of our fishing industry and our seas.

I thank Claire Baker for her questions and extend a warm welcome to her in her new role. I am sure that she will enjoy engaging with the rural affairs and environment portfolio and, in particular, with our fishing communities. I am also sure that I speak for most members of the Parliament when I say that very few will envy her having been given only a few hours to respond to a ministerial statement on fisheries. We will be working very closely with our fishing industry throughout 2012. One clear message that I want to get across is that our industry is taking its obligations in relation to fisheries conservation very seriously indeed. Many of the measures that we now have to bring forward early in 2012—with a view to allowing the fleet to buy back days at sea in return for adopting new conservation measures—were already in the pipeline, and many of the discussions had already started over the past few months. Many fishermen have been trialling new measures and new gear, and I hope that those trials are productive. I know that many will be deployed for the first time in 2012. The close working relationship with the industry, which I certainly support, will continue. Claire Baker mentioned the impact on the onshore sector. That was a very important theme throughout the negotiations. Our fish processors need continuity of supply, otherwise they will lose their markets. On the one hand we are getting increased quotas, which is a very positive piece of news for our onshore sector. However, on the other hand, we had the debate about whether the fleet should go to sea to catch those quotas, and we have to make sure that that happens. We will maintain dialogue with the European Commission. There are many issues that we want to pursue after last week’s negotiations, but we also want to hold the Commission to its word that there will be an early, thorough overhaul of the cod recovery plan. We are not against the principle of a cod recovery plan, but it must work in Scottish circumstances. That is our aim.

Jamie McGrigor asked first for my response to the results that we achieved at the negotiations last week. I will make two clear points. First, we achieved all our priorities, bar one. It is not often that any minister in Scotland or the UK can come back from the negotiations and say that. Secondly, it is regrettable that, as I outlined in my statement, we did not achieve that priority. We resisted with the utmost vigour, but for legal reasons—which is not a good enough excuse from the Commission—we were unable to achieve the pause that we wanted to achieve. We now have to work with our industry because, as I hope Jamie McGrigor and others accept and as I said in response to Claire Baker, we still have some way to go in fisheries conservation. I agree that the negotiations were about fishing opportunities for Scotland’s fleet. As I said, where the science can back them, we have a variety of quota increases. However, the negotiations were also about fisheries conservation, because we must ensure that the stocks are there for future generations. The industry in Scotland recognises that we still have some way to go, as I am sure do Jamie McGrigor and the Conservatives. However, we must ensure that the legislation that comes out of Brussels is appropriate for Scottish waters. We have a mixed fishery, which is why the combination of quotas and constant effort reduction is not the right solution for our waters.

We will produce the economic analysis of the negotiations in due course. Our initial findings are that they will be largely neutral in terms of revenue for the fleet. If anything, there will be an increase in the value of the quotas that can be landed in Scotland. However, we are continuing to work out that information. With regard to the future, I can only reiterate what I said in response to other members, which is that we will work closely with the industry on many of the measures that we want to put in place so that we can finally reach a position whereby we are fishing sustainably in all fisheries with all vessels, which will be a win-win situation in which we will land better-quality fish from sustainable fisheries and have higher incomes for our fishermen, while at the same time having a long-term conservation plan in place.

I assure Claudia Beamish that it has its good moments as well. I thank her for her questions and I welcome her to her new role in the Labour shadow team with responsibility for the environment and climate change. I expect that she will have more exchanges with my colleague Stewart Stevenson than with me, but I am sure that we will have exchanges from time to time. We paid attention to the science throughout the negotiations. The irony was that, quite often, the European Commission, which likes to preach how important the science is, did not stick to the science. If I had had a couple of extra hours for my ministerial statement, I could have explained to members what we had to go through just to secure a 200 per cent increase in the west of Scotland haddock catch, when the scientists were recommending a 410 per cent increase. Perhaps that gives members an indication of the inconsistency in Europe’s approach to such matters. However, we are confident that we stuck to the science throughout. I am determined that adequate support will be available for fisheries science in Scotland in the future. Our challenge is always that we have more than 30 species that we fish for in our waters alone, so other countries are not always able to contribute to the scientific effort. It is quite a challenge to fund that, because we must prioritise. However, we will pay close attention to that.

I agree that the experience of this fisheries council and the previous one only serves to highlight how important radical reform of the common fisheries policy is. If we had decentralisation of the kind of decisions that were discussed on Thursday, Friday and Saturday back to member state level, working where appropriate on a regional basis, we would reach the right decisions without the anomalies and inconsistencies that we experience in Brussels in every annual negotiation. In response to Rob Gibson’s first point, I can only reiterate that we should remember that, just a couple of weeks ago, a law—not a proposal but a law—was published by the European Commission that would have decimated the fishing fleet in Scotland had it stayed in place. We resolved that in Scotland’s favour at the negotiations, which is a big prize that we must not forget.

The key is to take advantage of the fact that the dispute over article 13 is now resolved, which means that we are allowed to give back to the fleet the amount that was cut, as a reward for adopting conservation measures. That has to be our tactic. Although we disagree with the European Commission that it is possible to have year-on-year cuts—because, clearly, the more the basic allocation for the fleet is cut, the more difficult it becomes to restore the days, because we have a mixed fishery in Scotland and avoiding cod is difficult in many circumstances—there is a lot more that we can do. There are certain fisheries in Scotland in which discard levels are too high. I know that the Liberal Democrats and the other parties support this Parliament taking action in partnership with our industry to reduce those discards. We should focus on that and do what is right for fisheries conservation, as well as the fleet’s long-term future.

We will deeply miss Elaine Murray in this portfolio, but I am sure that she will still be around, given her rural interests as a constituency MSP. I confirm that the article 13 dispute has been resolved. A declaration was passed at the council, which we are satisfied gave us what we wanted at the end of that important dispute. As I indicated in my statement, the commissioner has given a commitment to the council that, early in 2012, she will propose an alternative to the existing cod recovery plan. We will hold her to that timetable and will demand that ways be found to ensure that it is fixed as soon as possible because, of course, we face the prospect of co-decision with the European Parliament, which could take up to 18 months, and we want some early changes in place.

That is a very good question. I am sure that time will tell. Thankfully, many countries in Europe realise that two thirds of the UK fisheries are based in Scotland. I assure the chamber that Scotland has many friends in Europe at the current time. We will use that good will to ensure that Scotland’s voice is heard in the renegotiation of the common fisheries policy.

I assure Tavish Scott that I and, I am sure, my UK colleagues, will be fighting tooth and nail to ensure that we can pin down the commissioner on a strict timetable for—and, indeed, a legal interpretation of—a new cod recovery plan, with the amendments that we want put in place. We are not opposed to the principle of a cod recovery plan—indeed, Scotland is leading the way in many regards in helping cod stocks to recover in our waters—but we have to have those changes in place as soon as possible. We will continue on those lines.

Mark McDonald raises a good point. The future of our fishing industry in Scotland is not just about tax and quotas that are negotiated in Brussels or anywhere else, but about how the processing and onshore sector interacts with the fleet at sea. That is one of the biggest failings of our fishing industry in Scotland, because it has not been happening adequately in recent years. If there is anything that I can do—and I have been trying to encourage this for a long time—to fix a better relationship and greater co-ordination between landings and what the market requires for the processors and onshore sector, I will do it. That will be another win-win situation: the fleet will get higher prices and the processors will get continuity of supply. The sea fisheries partnership that the Scottish Government is setting up will address the very point that Mark McDonald raised, because we have to pay attention to the markets.

As I said before, it was not a European Commission proposal but an act of law that was published—it was then withdrawn, thankfully, but at one point it was the law of the land that we would suffer penalties that would mean that our fleet could not go to sea. Thankfully, we have resolved that dispute, and that was the right thing to do. I once again experienced the European Commission’s tactics—well over 48 hours without any sleep—and I can tell members that they are not the best. Thankfully, they do not often win, but the way in which they are implemented is abhorrent. That is a symptom of the common fisheries policy being far too centralised and the Commission trying to reach a deal among 27 member states, many of which do not even have fisheries, over a matter of hours. That is not the way to do business and it is not the way to treat Scotland’s fishing communities.

To give Margaret McDougall comfort, the industry has been working closely with the scientists and the Scottish Government. There are a number of new nets being developed, as well as other measures. Others are still to be developed in the future, but we hope that those measures will be deployed in 2012, which will help to cut the discard rate and improve cod avoidance. That will in turn allow more days to be given to the fleet at sea, which will be a win-win situation all round.

Once again, we reach an important point in the annual European fisheries negotiations, in which Scotland rightly plays an important role, given our prominent role in the north Atlantic fisheries and our place at the forefront of fisheries conservation. Indeed, given the common fisheries policy’s constraints, Scotland’s progress in recent years in developing responsible fisheries management is something that our industry should be justly proud of and our approach is now being reflected in the increasing abundance of many of the stocks in our waters. Our industry, which accounts for three fifths of all United Kingdom landings, is worth £435 million. This is a busy fortnight for negotiations. This week, we have negotiations with coastal states and Ireland over the future of many stocks—including the massive mackerel stock that, as we know, has been the subject of dispute between many countries and the Faroe Islands and Iceland—and last Friday, the European Union and Norway fisheries discussions concluded with positive outcomes for Scotland. North Sea herring quota has doubled and haddock, whiting and plaice are up by 15 per cent. Even North Sea cod has just about held steady, with a very marginal cut of only 1 per cent, and we have secured the continuation into next year of our pioneering catch quota trials for tackling cod discards, winning an extra 12 per cent on top of the agreed cod quota. We now move towards next week’s December fisheries council, at which we will finalise negotiations on the stocks that we share with other EU countries. Here, too, scientists are advising a clear improvement in the health of the key west coast haddock stock, suggesting that we could safely increase the quota by no less than 410 per cent. We will also ensure that we secure revision of the west coast catch composition rules, which, with such an uplift, would simply become a recipe for discards. Otherwise, the European Commission is proposing automatic blanket cuts in quota for what it calls “data poor” stocks. However, its approach is fatally flawed on two counts. First, for reasons that continue to baffle us, the Commission has not taken into account available information on those stocks. Secondly, the arbitrary cuts that it proposes ride roughshod over the principle that the setting of all quotas should be based on scientific evidence and we will be demanding that each stock is decided on a case-by-case basis. We will also argue that we should remain committed to reaching, where possible, maximum sustainable yield for our stocks by 2015, in accordance with the Johannesburg commitment on sustainable fishing, rather than the Commission’s proposed target of 2013. Overall, I am cautiously optimistic that we will be able to deliver on our core objectives for this year’s final round of negotiations with a range of increased quotas. Alas, a very dark cloud in the form of the cod recovery plan and limitations on the days at sea allowed to vessels catching cod is hanging over all of our fishermen’s hard-won opportunities. We have always stood by two core principles in our approach to cod recovery: first, that our fishermen must have sufficient days at sea to catch their rightful fishing opportunities and, secondly, that we do our utmost with the industry to incentivise conservation and recovery of cod. That approach is beginning to bear fruit. Since 2007, North Sea cod discards by Scottish vessels have fallen by more than half from 62 to 29 per cent, which is an impressive achievement in anyone’s book. Indeed, it is the biggest drop in the whole of Europe. Moreover, although still low, North Sea cod stocks have been steadily increasing since 2006. However, as we witness the current CFP’s death throes, it seems that the Commission has saved the worst for last with the prospect that it will seek a massive cut in time at sea for our vessels. For three years, our fleet has endured automatic year-on-year cuts in days at sea and, for 2012, it faces being left with only 45 per cent of the days at sea it enjoyed back in 2006. If the cuts had been applied in full, they would have snatched the time needed to catch the rightful quotas, and our fleet would be much smaller than it is today. That is why, when the cod recovery plan was drawn up, we insisted that there should be incentives for vessels, allowing them to avoid the cuts if they adopted cod avoidance measures. We delivered a win-win scenario that gave the fleet the lifeline of more days at sea in return for delivering real gains in conservation. Lest anyone think that that was simply a wheeze to buy our vessels extra fishing time, let me make two things clear. First, do not forget that the Scottish fleet went through a massive downsizing over the past decade, when 66 per cent of our white-fish fleet—165 vessels—was decommissioned. Secondly, there is no doubting that, through the approach that we have adopted, Scotland has led the European Union in developing new approaches to fisheries conservation. For example, our conservation credits scheme has won praise across Europe. WWF Scotland states: “The Scottish Scheme is a leading example of how all those concerned with conserving fish stocks can work together and come up with solutions to address the problems of over-fishing and wasteful discards.” That innovation will be stopped in its tracks if the Commission gets its way. Officials in Brussels decided, through their interpretation of a legal technicality, that we had reinstated too many days to our vessels, not only this year but also in 2010, when we gave more days at sea to our vessels to expand cod avoidance measures and programmes. The Commission published a regulation imposing penalties on the UK, which would have reduced by half the time allowed to UK vessels in 2011. It withdrew the regulation a few days ago, because the figures made no sense to anyone, but it has stuck to its legal interpretation. We have made it clear that we do not share the Commission’s interpretation, not least because it would take us on a nonsensical downward spiral, which would eventually mean that no days at sea would be left for any of our vessels. The incentives for vessels to engage in conservation would be pretty much killed off in one fell swoop and years of careful co-operative work with our industry to avoid intensive cod fishing would be put at risk. As for our vessels’ ability to fish their other quotas, the Commission’s proposals could mean that large parts of our fleet could not go to sea for large parts of the year. That would clearly be devastating for our fishing industry; it would destroy jobs in the fleet and in the onshore sector. Let us be clear about what this means. Our fishers fish in a mixed fishery in Scottish waters, where cod swim with other fish, such as haddock and whiting. Cod accounts for only 5.5 per cent of the total value of the Scottish catch but, if the Commission’s draconian proposals were to be accepted, our vessels would be prevented from fishing their rightful quotas of all those other stocks—the other 95 per cent of fishing opportunities. Let us also be clear about how the cod recovery plan is failing. It is already supposed to be under review and it certainly needs revising. Indeed, we were promised that this year but we are now told that it may be 2014 before any changes are implemented. The Commission’s scientists have concluded that the plan was not delivering reduced mortality for cod and did not have stakeholder support in many areas. The Commission’s advisers concluded that the provision of additional days as an incentive for conservation measures should “be seen as the cornerstone of the plan.” However, that is the very part of the plan that the Commission’s latest action threatens to destroy. If it was not true, we could not have made it up. What are we doing to respond to all that? Let me assure the Parliament and, importantly, our industry, that we will take steps to ensure that our fleets have the time at sea that they need to catch their available quotas. Any other scenario would be a breach of our fishermen’s fundamental rights. I can confirm that we are at one on this issue with the United Kingdom Government. I welcome the support and co-operation of UK Government colleagues, and the First Minister has written to the Prime Minister to outline the importance of the issue. Meanwhile, we have been working intensively with colleagues in Westminster and Belfast to find a resolution to the issue with the Commission. I am in close and regular contact with industry representatives, whom I met again just yesterday, to hear their views. As members will understand, their view is that enough is enough. RSPB Scotland and WWF Scotland have contacted the Commission to endorse our position. On Monday, I met the commissioner in Brussels, along with the UK’s Richard Benyon and colleagues from Northern Ireland. Obviously, I left the commissioner in no doubt about why we believe that her proposed actions are wholly unjustifiable and, indeed, counterproductive. The Commission has agreed not to proceed until after the new year, which gives us an opportunity to explore further a resolution to the issue. I am therefore clear that the issue must be placed at the top of our priorities for next week’s December council. I will ask for a pause on cuts in days at sea and a stop to the continual ratcheting downward year on year. We are in intense discussions with our UK colleagues to agree other options for next week’s council. The irony is that this threat has emerged just as catching opportunities look brighter and conservation efforts are gaining plaudits. We cannot allow the cod recovery plan to become an industry destruction plan. We must be released from the regulatory quicksand that is threatening to drown our industry. At a time of economic turmoil across Europe, more than ever we must maintain a strong voice to protect our key sectors in Scotland. I assure the Parliament that we will do just that in the coming weeks.

Elaine Murray asked four questions, which I will try to address quickly. The way in which the Commission issued a decision on its website without warning member states other than at a meeting of EU officials the previous afternoon was unfortunate. The matter does not merit a constitutional debate, but it highlights the flaws in the Commission’s decision-making processes on an important issue, given the devastating consequences that the regulation would have had if it had been implemented. I am thankful that because, at a meeting in London with the UK Administration, the Commission itself could not explain the figures, the regulation has been withdrawn. One of the ironies of the situation is that the Commission’s own adviser body—the scientific, technical and economic committee for fisheries—has highlighted that there is no evidence of a direct correlation between cod mortality and effort cuts in relation to days at sea. The Commission takes the view that it is a case of one for one—we cut effort by a certain amount and cod mortality will reduce by a certain amount—but there very much appears to be a lack of evidence to back that up. That is one of the serious flaws in the cod recovery plan. Elaine Murray was right to say that other countries are affected. We are in contact with some of the affected countries, and there is a lot more of that to be done during the next few days. I think that France shares the view of Scotland and the rest of the UK. On regionalisation, what has happened surely demonstrates why we cannot have on-going micromanagement from Brussels. So many mistakes are made in Brussels, often at 3 o’clock in the morning during heated and chaotic fishing negotiations. That has to end.

I lost track of the number of questions that Jamie McGrigor asked, but I will answer as many as I can. I am sure that I addressed some of them in my statement. When it comes to spelling out the devastating impact that the Commission’s interpretation of article 13 of the cod recovery plan would have in Scotland, I can assure the Parliament that we did that in the strongest terms in the meeting the night before last in Brussels with the commissioner and her officials. We will continue to do that in the coming days. To address Jamie McGrigor’s subsequent questions, we have a situation in which, on the one hand, because of the good work that is happening in Scotland and elsewhere, stocks of a number of very important species to Scotland are increasing and we will, I hope, benefit from increased quotas. That is good news for the fleet and a reward for its good, hard work over the past number of years. On the other hand, the Commission appears to think that it is possible for the fleet not to be allowed to leave port but to catch those quotas at the same time. As I said in my statement, that is a breach of our natural rights and we should not allow it to happen. We have a mixed fishery: that is the point that we have to get across to the European Union and the Commission. We have a mixed fishery: the fish swim together. We have different quotas for different species. We cannot have the fleet being kept in port in case a cod is caught at sea. We must continue with what we are doing in Scotland, which is to allow our fleet to go to sea to catch its other quotas, but at the same time do its utmost, under very difficult, complex circumstances, to avoid cod. Scotland has received plaudits, as Jamie McGrigor said, over the past few years, because we have developed innovative ways of doing that. There are two ways in which we can save the stock. We can either allow our fleet never to fish again, or we can allow the fleet to go to sea to catch its other quotas but avoid cod. I am sure that the Parliament is united in pursuing the latter.

We must give the Commission credit where credit is due: the regulation has been withdrawn and there is an agreement to negotiate with the Scottish and UK authorities over the next few weeks. Of course, we will be taking full advantage of that. The first opportunity for the Commission to show that it understands the issue is for it to agree a pause in the already programmed cut in effort, which is due to be put in place in next week’s December fisheries council. We must use the negotiations over the coming weeks to get the right result for Scotland. I cannot give a guarantee that we will be able to make the Commission understand the devastating consequences; I can say that the UK and Scottish authorities must work together to ensure that our fleet has the opportunity in 2012 to go to sea and catch its quotas.

An important point to make is that our position all along has been that there needs to be a cod recovery plan, but we need the current plan to be changed because it does not work. The Commission’s advisers recognise that the plan is not working: I already mentioned the STECF; there is also the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea, the scientists who advise the Commission. We therefore need some urgency from the Commission to address the issues and fix the plan so that our fleet can go to sea and catch its other quotas—the other 95 per cent of fishing opportunities—but at the same time continue its good work, which is paying dividends, in avoiding cod. That is how we will take the issue forward in the next few weeks.

It certainly appears that we are taking a disproportionate share of the pain, in the North Sea and elsewhere, in terms of the cod recovery plan. At the same time, we must accept that we have a big responsibility, because we have the biggest share of the North Sea cod stock. Indeed, the west of Scotland is important in that regard, too. We must recognise that responsibility, but I believe that we are doing that. I pay a huge tribute to the Scottish fishing industry for the sacrifices that it has made over recent years and the innovative measures that it has proposed to Government, which have meant that we have been able to work in partnership to try to allow the cod stock to recover. As I said, those measures are being praised throughout Europe. Aileen McLeod is right. The fact that we have the biggest responsibility and appear to be taking a disproportionate share of the pain at the moment illustrates why we need decentralisation of fishing policy from Brussels back to member state level. As well as having a bigger share of the stock, I believe—I am sure that we all agree—that we have the biggest share of expertise and are therefore much better placed to put in place the measures that are required for Scotland’s mixed fishery. There seems to be a gross misunderstanding by Brussels of the complications and challenges of managing the mixed fishery that we have in Scottish waters.

I hope that Jim Hume will forgive me for not contemplating losing the argument with the European Commission at this point and preparing for defeat on the interpretation of article 13. There is a genuine dispute between, on the one hand, the UK authorities, some other countries and Scotland and, on the other hand, the Commission about the legal interpretation of a technicality within article 13 of the cod recovery plan. I make it clear that, had we gone with the Commission’s interpretation, our fleet today would be much smaller than it is. Our interpretation was therefore the only interpretation that could make that article work—that is, give an incentive to the fleet to have days at sea in return for avoiding cod, which is the crux of the debate. I am convinced that we can reach a commonsense solution with the Commission, if it is willing to be reasonable with us. The question about the clarity of the science is a good one; that debate is on-going. There is always a lag between the science and the decisions in Brussels. Again, as part of the CFP negotiations, we must somehow find a way of addressing that.

The best reward that we can give the fleet for its conservation measures is not to have a massive reduction in time at sea as proposed by the European Commission. Paul Wheelhouse is perfectly correct, in that we are at an important crossroads. The Scottish industry has come on in leaps and bounds in recent years and has taken our conservation policy to new levels. We must not lose that good will and co-operation. If anything remotely like the regulation that was published a few days ago were to be implemented in Scotland, the cause of fisheries conservation would be set back by decades. No one wants to see that. That is why the scientists, the non-governmental organisations, the industry and, indeed, the Parliament, other UK authorities and the Scottish Government are all united in wanting to continue with the good way in which we approach fisheries conservation at the moment. That is what we have to fight to safeguard.

As I indicated in a previous answer, the position of the Scottish Government and the Scottish industry is that, with regard to, for instance, the challenges facing the cod stock, we need a cod recovery plan. There is no dispute over that key principle. We need a cod recovery plan that is workable and which is suited to the mixed fishery that we have in Scottish waters, where various fishermen with the same gear and the same vessels are catching a variety of stocks at the same time. There are ways of avoiding cod in such a fishery, and those are what we have been developing in recent years. Unfortunately, the cod recovery plan—and certainly the Commission’s interpretation of one part of the cod recovery plan—does not reflect some of those innovative approaches. We have a lot more opportunities to continue to improve the cod stock. A number of new gears are being trialled by the fleet. We must give that a chance to succeed.

Annabelle Ewing raises an important point, which is the fundamental purpose of this particular part of the cod recovery plan, which is about incentives. There should always be a relationship between the measures that are taken by the fleet to avoid cod and the days that are awarded to the fleet as a reward for doing that. The greater the amount of cod that is avoided by the fleet, the more days at sea it should be awarded. The Commission official to whom Annabelle Ewing spoke perhaps does not understand that fundamental point. Being given more days in which to go to sea is a sign of having done the right thing. The commissioner always has an open invitation to visit Scotland; I issue that to her every time that I speak to her. She has been here before, and she should certainly come back here if she insists on continuing with the regulation that she tabled a few weeks ago, as that would enable her to understand, from first-hand experience, the implications that it would have for Scotland. I hope that the discussions that we will have in the next few weeks will be productive and give us the right result for Scotland.

I can assure the commissioner, as I always have done, that conservation policy and the future of our maritime environment are at the heart of what we do. That is why we have a united front in Scotland, with the WWF, the RSPB, our scientists, all political parties—I hope—and others all speaking with one voice and sending the message that we must continue with our conservation measures, which are paying dividends in Scottish waters, and not have them being completely undermined by a flawed legal interpretation of one part of the cod recovery plan.

I was disappointed that the catch quota scheme was not expanded, due to resistance from the Norwegian authorities at last week’s negotiations between the European Union and Norway. However, that scheme alone shows that we are ahead of the game. We want to expand such programmes to build up the stocks that require to be built up, particularly the cod stock. I caution Alison Johnstone not to say that Scottish fish stocks are in crisis. Many Scottish fish stocks, particularly some of our key commercial stocks, are being fished to sustainable levels. That is why the science recommends—as I outlined in my statement—a significant increase for a number of important stocks in Scotland. We need to do a lot more work to help some stocks—particularly cod—to recover, but we should not tar all stocks with the same brush. More than 50 per cent by volume of Scottish species are now Marine Stewardship Council accredited, which is a big feather in the cap for Scotland. We should recognise that, and I ask Alison Johnstone to use every opportunity to acknowledge it when she talks about the subject.

I assure Alex Fergusson that at the meeting with the European commissioner on Monday evening, we raised the point that the onshore sector in Scotland and elsewhere in the UK would be severely affected if the continuity of supply was disrupted because the fleet was not allowed to go to sea to catch its quotas. The onshore sector is completely perplexed at present. People read in their newspapers and see on the television that there are increased quotas for Scotland, yet they hear from the European Commission that we may not allow the fleet to go to sea to catch those very same quotas. It is important that we give an assurance to the onshore sector—fish processors, customers and everyone else in the retail sector—that we will give our fleet time to go to sea in 2012 to catch the legitimate quotas.

The Scottish Government—and, I believe, the rest of the members of this Parliament—are proud of the ambitious climate change targets that we have collectively set. Meeting those targets will be challenging, but we remain absolutely committed to doing so, and we are on track to do so. The spending review sets out this Government’s plans to invest more than £690 million in a wide range of measures that will help to drive the low-carbon transition. That significant investment supports the Government’s strategic priority to secure Scotland’s transition to a low-carbon economy. As well as cutting emissions, that will help to give Scotland a competitive edge in global green industries and will be central to maximising our sustainable economic growth. We plan to meet all our annual emissions targets through domestic action rather than by offsetting emissions through the use of carbon units. However, in an uncertain world it is only sensible that we accept the advice of the independent Committee on Climate Change that we should allow ourselves the flexibility to use carbon units for the period 2013 to 2017 up to the 20 per cent limit that is prescribed in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. That means, for example, that with annual targets to reduce emissions by 3 per cent between years, ministers could use carbon units equating only to 20 per cent of that 3 per cent, which is only 0.6 per cent of the total amount of emissions allowed in a target year. I hope that members will agree that, far from enabling ministers to buy their way out of trouble whenever targets become tight, the draft order that we are debating simply avoids ruling out the use of carbon units if the circumstances should ever present themselves, which I hope they do not. It is a very small contingency measure. [Interruption.] I reassure members that we recognise and acknowledge the concerns regarding the quality and provenance of carbon credits that have been raised in some quarters. The further legislation that we plan to bring forward next year will set out which internationally recognised carbon units may potentially be purchased, and will ensure that those units represent genuine emissions savings. On checking the record, I noted that Robin Harper of the Green party supported a 20 per cent limit when the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill was before the Parliament. Principles are good things, and I urge the Green party to stick to theirs.

Through our national food and drink policy, we are committed to ensuring that allotments and grow-your-own projects are developed and supported. For example, we continue to support the work of the grow-your-own working group, whose action plan explores many diverse ways of encouraging the development of allotments and community growing spaces.

The member has laid out many of the benefits of grow-your-own spaces. She also raises the interesting issue of how we can make such spaces the norm as Scotland moves forward. I am willing to bring the issue to the attention of the grow-your-own working group.

Scotland is a proud maritime nation that has 60 per cent of United Kingdom waters and about 60 per cent of the coastline of these islands, amounting to 18,000km. We have been very lucky to have so many men and women who are employed or who volunteer to keep our seas safe around the clock, to protect life and to keep our waters free from pollution. Of course, they deserve our full support and recognition for the valuable contribution that they make. As, we now know to our cost, however, penny-pinching number crunchers in London offices have been busy slashing maritime safety under the guise of modernisation. Now our coastguard, our oil and gas sector, environmental organisations and many others, including members of this Parliament, are up in arms following the UK Government’s decision to put at risk our mariners and precious marine environment for the sake of saving less than £4 million a year, which is equivalent to about three hours of the revenues that are generated in Scotland’s waters from oil and gas. Safety cover is being reduced and jobs lost across our maritime emergency services. For anyone who is concerned about keeping our seas safe, it is surely a worry that the UK Government’s approach has not been properly co-ordinated or strategically thought through, but has instead been based on saving money, not lives. Confirmed cuts to coastguard co-ordination centres and the withdrawal of funding for emergency towing vessels come, of course, on top of other cuts that are already compromising maritime safety, including taking Nimrods out of service, and there is on-going uncertainty about search and rescue helicopters and fire-fighting capabilities at sea. All five areas of maritime rescue services are currently either facing cuts or severe uncertainty. UK ministers should have delivered a fully co-ordinated strategy for maritime safety instead of dealing with each issue separately and randomly. In addition, Scottish interests have not been adequately taken into account. The prime example with which we are extremely concerned and disappointed is the UK shipping minister’s announcement this week confirming decisions to close the Clyde and Forth coastguard maritime rescue co-ordination centres. The Clyde station dealt with most call-outs in Scotland last year. UK ministers have also confirmed plans to downgrade the Aberdeen centre, which plays a vital role in relation to the offshore oil and gas sectors in the North Sea and west of Shetland. Today’s air accidents investigation branch report on the tragic accident involving the Super Puma helicopter in the North Sea, with the loss of 16 men, serves to remind us all that our seas and associated industries can be dangerous environments. I am, indeed, pleased that Labour’s amendment raises that issue. We do not have to look far for current examples of the work of the coastguard stations, along with their Royal National Lifeboat Institution and volunteer coastguard partners. On Tuesday this week—on the day that the UK Government announced that the network was to be cut—the Stornoway station dealt with the capsizing of a fishing boat off Barra. Thankfully, all those on board were rescued. The need to ensure that we have the services available to deal with such incidents has led this Parliament to express concern over the UK Government’s policies. The closures have previously been raised at members’ business debates in the Scottish Parliament on 27 January and 23 June, and I welcome the universal support up to now for the coastguard service that emerged from those debates. As Scottish ministers, we have made our feelings crystal clear in responding to successive UK Government consultations, and we will write in the strongest terms to the UK Government expressing our views on its latest announcements. We take some comfort from the fact that our previous representations, along with the co-ordinated campaigns by Western Isles Council and Shetland Islands Council among others, resulted in the retention of both the centres covering the remote areas around our islands. Confirmation of that sensible decision is, of course, welcomed. However, we obviously remain extremely concerned and bitterly disappointed about closures of other Scottish stations. Throughout the process, we have strongly highlighted the case for all Scottish stations to remain open. The First Minister has met, along with Stuart McMillan MSP and Duncan McNeil MSP, staff from the Clyde centre to hear their concerns, and I have visited the Aberdeen centre. We urged the UK ministers also to consider visiting the affected stations prior to making a final decision. However, Scotland’s pleas largely fell on deaf ears, and we have still reached the position where the UK Government sees it fit to close two Scottish centres. Despite its claim to have recognised the importance of local knowledge, we now face huge areas of the west coast being covered by a combination of Stornoway, Belfast and Holyhead stations. Under current arrangements the Clyde centre, which has responsibility for one of the longest and most complex areas of coastline in the UK, is set to go. It covers a variety of mainland coast, estuaries and islands, not to mention complex tidal conditions, within which a wide range of maritime activities occur. As I said, last year Clyde dealt with the highest number of incidents in Scotland—more than 1,300. It is difficult to see how the other centres could possibly build up and sustain the levels of local knowledge and expertise that currently exist. The removal of that local knowledge and the increased workload for other centres could well place lives at risk. The Forth centre has also continued to show high levels of expertise and local knowledge in a busy waterway. The need for that will only increase as work on the Forth replacement crossing begins and with the deployment of offshore renewable energy infrastructure in the times ahead. We also remain extremely disappointed about the plans for the Aberdeen centre, which reflects concerns that were raised directly with me by staff when I visited in September. The downgrading of the Aberdeen centre has significant implications for staff numbers and for the crucial relationship with the oil and gas industry in Scotland. The station will experience an overall reduction in its watch-keeping staff while it sees an expansion of the coastline it covers. It is also planned that any major incident involving a North Sea oil platform would be managed by the maritime operations centre based in the south of England. It is absurd and potentially dangerous to downgrade the Aberdeen station, which sits cheek by jowl with Europe’s biggest offshore centre, and to transfer responsibility for dealing with major North Sea incidents to a location hundreds of miles away at the other end of the country. That will be an unjustified and mistaken departure from existing procedures, which have been tried and tested in Aberdeen. Those procedures, which ensure a co-ordinated local response to major incidents, must be retained, so we appeal to the UK Government to think again. If we look at the reasoning behind the decision, it is clear that the UK Government is not taking Scottish interests into account.

I hope that the UK Government keeps an open mind on those very important issues. I recognise that Scotland is being used as a guinea pig, because my understanding is that the Scottish centres are to close before those in the rest of the UK. The focus is, from the UK Government’s point of view, very much about links between the UK Government and agencies down south, in terms of the centres that it wants to keep open. Surely the focus should be on what can be done locally for an incident that takes place in Scottish waters. Scotland, with some 60 per cent of the UK seas, and some of the busiest in terms of offshore oil and gas development and planned renewable energy development, would be left with only a third of UK coastguard stations. The UK Government has decided that there will be no maritime operations centre in the maritime nation of Scotland—the only one will be located in the south of England. If ever evidence was needed that the coastguard should be devolved to Scotland, this is it. Decisions on an issue that is as important as the safety of our seas should be made in Scotland, with Scottish interests to the fore.

Devolution of the coastguard would give the best of both worlds—it would give the best protection for our seas in Scotland, and we would have the ability to work with the rest of the UK. For instance, devolution would take account of the need for an appropriate level of cover for cross-border areas such as the Solway Firth. It would ensure that Scottish centres co-ordinated with their counterparts in the rest of the UK and that the RNLI and volunteer coastguard teams were fully supported within that structure. Although we welcome any moves to strengthen the support for the front-line service, our view is that it should not come at the expense of the established co-ordination structure. That is especially true when other parts of the structure that help to provide our maritime safety are under attack. That takes me on to the threat to emergency towing vessels in Scottish waters. It is difficult to find anyone who supports the UK Government’s view that funding for them can simply be withdrawn. Last winter, we had some high profile call-outs for the Scottish ETVs—including, of course, the call-out by the Ministry of Defence to rescue the grounded submarine HMS Astute off Skye. The loss of the ETVs would take us back to the situation that existed prior to the sinking of the MV Braer. Lord Donaldson’s subsequent inquiry recommended the need for ETVs in areas where adequate towage cannot be provided in any other way. If other aspects of safety and navigation have subsequently improved enough to negate the need for ETVs, the UK Government needs to clarify that, but it certainly has not done that so far. I am not reassured that the need has been negated.

Tavish Scott makes a good point. I have said all along that renegotiating the current contract is a good option to pursue. However, that is not where we are. The UK Government has cut the contract without consultation of the Parliament and without having a long-term alternative to put in place. It might seem that the Braer incident was a long time ago, but Lord Donaldson’s recommendations should still be treated seriously. There is a strong concern that the measures relating to that aspect of maritime safety have, again, been led simply by a wish to cut costs and not by a wish to improve the safety of Scottish waters for those who use them, or to protect our environment. I say to Tavish Scott that I am encouraged by the three-month reprieve for the two Scottish ETVs, which is a departure from the original proposal to cease funding when the original contract ended on 30 September. I welcome the Scotland Office’s constructive approach in reconvening the ETV working group after the UK Department for Transport washed its hands of the issue. The working group, of which Marine Scotland is a member, aims to bring about a long-term solution, and we will continue to work constructively with it. I very much appreciate the Scotland Office’s efforts to keep the Scottish ministers up to date on progress on the issue. However, as the UK shipping minister, Mike Penning, has stated in correspondence with the Scottish Government, the issue is reserved. That is the main reason that was given for the lack of discussion on the issue with the Scottish Government prior to the announcement to end the contract. Therefore, it is the UK Government’s responsibility to identify and resource alternative provision. The three-month reprieve appears to be an overambitious timescale. We press the UK Government to introduce a further extension to the contract to allow the work of the ETV group to be carried out in a more realistic timescale. I am sure that the Parliament will agree that there should not be a further break in provision and that we certainly should not be left without cover in the winter months when the current contract comes to an end in January. It would be remiss of me not to mention two other areas of concern that relate to a downgrading of maritime rescue services and, in particular, of search and rescue capabilities in Scotland. Those are the withdrawal of the Nimrod aircraft and the on-going uncertainty over the future provision of search and rescue helicopters. Although the Nimrod service was primarily for military incidents, Nimrod aircraft attended many civilian emergencies and provided a valuable addition to maritime safety resources. The removal of the aircraft from service without any certainty about how the capability will be delivered in the future again demonstrates the UK Government’s lack of a strategic approach. That lack of strategic thinking is further demonstrated by the removal of funding from the maritime incident response group. The issue is best summed up by the Westminster Transport Committee’s report on the matter, which notes the significant intervention of the response group and recommends that the UK Government continue to fund the resource in a more cost-effective manner. The Scottish Government is considering responses to our consultation on the future delivery of fire and rescue services in Scotland. The Scottish Government is committed to the future of Scotland’s seas and coastlines and to protecting them from any further dismantling of services by the UK Government and Westminster cuts. I hope that we will continue to have support from members from across the Parliament in making the case for the Scottish coastguard stations and ETVs to carry on doing the valuable work that they do in protecting Scottish waters. I hope that the Parliament agrees that the UK Government’s financially driven and piecemeal approach is totally unacceptable and cannot deliver a proper strategy for marine safety in Scotland. I call on the Parliament to unite behind the cause, to condemn the UK Government’s action and to support the motion. I move, That the Parliament notes with concern the potential impact of a number of UK Government cuts affecting maritime safety in Scotland’s seas, including the review of Coastguard Maritime Rescue Coordination Centres and the withdrawal of funding from the Scottish Emergency Towing Vessels, alongside other reductions in maritime safety provision, and agrees that this piecemeal approach driven by a cost-cutting agenda cannot deliver a proper strategy for maritime safety in Scotland.

Will Alex Fergusson at least accept that it makes no sense whatever for major oil and gas incidents to be handled and co-ordinated hundreds of miles away in the south of England, when we have the expertise and knowledge at the Aberdeen centre, which is where such incidents should always be handled?

The member refers to staff terms and conditions. Why are the unions up in arms at the announcements that were made by the UK minister this week?

Will the member give way?

Is it the case that the Liberal Democrat member is not content with defending the cuts to the Scottish budget that were made by his Government in London, but is now suggesting that the depleted Scottish budget should start paying for reserved issues as well as devolved issues?

The Scottish Government will consult on new legislation on the welfare of animals at slaughter that will implement European Union legislation early next year. Other issues under consideration include the use of wild animals in circuses, the regulation of equine establishments, the use of electronic shock collars for dog training and the tail docking of dogs.

I know that John Pentland was not an MSP in the previous session, but I well remember discussing those issues with members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee and other members time and again, and I gave a commitment to consult on a number of those issues, of course. Legislation has not yet been introduced on electric shock collars, as the results of that consultation exercise were inconclusive and we are awaiting further research findings. There has been no ban on wild animals in travelling circuses, as there is insufficient evidence to demonstrate that their welfare is any worse than that of animals in other forms of captivity. We are concurrently considering other mechanisms for dealing with that issue and we retain an open mind. There have been a number of consultations and there are a number of other issues in the pipeline. As the member correctly said, we have, of course, already taken action on a number of important animal welfare issues.

If it is not the disallowance of agricultural funds in the European Union or sheep ID, Jim Hume and his colleague-in-arms George Lyon MEP mislead farmers throughout Scotland on a range of other issues. They scaremonger and put inaccurate information into the public domain to try to get publicity, which is a real pity, as I would much rather have a mature debate. In particular, I would like to debate the fact that sheep EID, which is a big challenge for the sheep sector in Scotland, was introduced and agreed to by the Labour-Lib Dem Administration a few years ago. I will continue to remind the industry in Scotland of that fact. I know that many sheep farmers in Scotland welcome the concessions that have been achieved by the Scottish National Party Administration to try to ease the pain of the introduction of sheep EID. We will continue to work closely with the sector in Scotland, and we are taking a proportionate approach to compliance. As long as sheep farmers maintain their paperwork as required by the regulations, we will do our best to maintain that proportionality in applying the compliance regulations.

The need for landfill capacity in Scotland will dramatically fall as landfill tax increases, bans on landfilling certain materials take effect and recycling rates increase. Last year, we published information on the landfill capacity that Scotland will need for the next 10 years. If we are to meet our zero waste targets, we will landfill around 80 per cent less than we currently do. That might mean that certain landfill sites might need to operate for longer to reach full capacity or create the desired landscape profile stipulated by the local authority prior to restoration.

I am sure that the member will acknowledge that the Government has made tremendous progress in taking Scotland down the road towards a zero waste society. Of course, many of the concerns that he has highlighted about landfill sites should be raised by the local authorities in his region—Aberdeenshire Council and Aberdeen City Council. Unfortunately, as Scotland goes through the transformation phase from its current waste profile to zero waste, tens of millions of tonnes of waste will still be required to go to landfill, but at least we are travelling at a reasonable pace in the right direction. Indeed, there might be a positive aspect to such a move. The success of and progress with recycling might require licences for existing landfill sites to be extended because they will take longer to fill.

Again, many local authorities are making good progress in collecting material for recycling—and, of course, it is up to those authorities to decide the roll-out of recycling, kerbside collections and so on. We are taking steps to expand this approach, given that our zero waste regulations will make it mandatory for local authorities to collect dry recyclables and food waste from households, wherever economically or environmentally practicable, from 2013. The Government is putting in place ambitious measures to support the progress that a number of Scottish councils have already made.

I met the president and other representatives of NFU Scotland yesterday at AgriScot—and I am meeting the president and his team again today to discuss the proposals for reform of the common agricultural policy. I assure the member that that is just coincidence.

My response is to welcome very much the seriousness with which Nigel Miller and NFU Scotland have taken the issue, and I note that the organisation is doing a lot of good work on preventing animal disease in Scotland and promoting animal health. I listened to Mr Miller’s speech yesterday at AgriScot—after all, I was sitting next to him—and discovered that tackling cattle scab was the new priority. Cases of the disease have been identified in Wales and the south of England and, following Nigel Miller’s remarks, the chief veterinary officer in Scotland has signalled that he is prepared to look at the issue again. There were discussions last year between the industry and the chief vet at the time, but we have to address a number of complex issues with regard to treatment processes and disease identification and we cannot commit too hastily to legislation or otherwise as we might not be able to back it up with enforcement or other measures. Nevertheless, we are taking the issue seriously.

I know that the member has a long-standing interest in this and I hope that, like me, he welcomes John Kinnaird’s report on the future delivery of the veterinary surveillance service in Scotland. It will ensure that we have services appropriate for the 21st century. I am aware that John Kinnaird interviewed around 750 farmers and others across Scotland as part of that exercise. I have already indicated that we will set up the strategic management boards in the very near future. As Liam McArthur rightly points out, there were other proposals and recommendations in the report about the number of labs that we should have in the future, so a great deal of work must be done in order to identify the way forward following those recommendations. There are, however, a number of good recommendations that we can proceed with in the meantime and I give a commitment to Liam McArthur and to the chamber that we will consult members and the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee as we take this very important debate forward.

We fund Keep Scotland Beautiful, through zero waste Scotland, to support local authorities and others in tackling litter and raising public awareness of the problem. This includes the annual national spring clean, which has grown from 11,500 to 97,000 volunteers in just four years. Importantly, those are mainly young people. Carrier bags are another highly visible litter problem and we have given a commitment to consult shortly on proposals to introduce charging for carrier bags to cut the numbers used and discarded every year.

Derek Mackay is right; litter continues to be a problem in Scotland. I know that when he was convener of his local authority, Derek Mackay led from the front, ensuring that there was a big campaign in that part of Scotland to tackle litter and I hope that that leadership is followed by other local authorities in Scotland. Anyone who drops litter is irresponsible and shows a complete lack of respect for the local environment and their own community. I urge all local authorities to use existing enforcement measures, such as fines—which some councils use and others do not—as a means of deterring littering in Scotland. I agree that we must raise the profile of the issue and do a lot more.

Yes. I will chew over the member’s contribution, which was very good and which raises a very important issue. Chewing gum is a big social nuisance for many communities in Scotland. We should remember that local authorities spend up to £100 million per year cleaning our streets and that one of the biggest menaces is chewing gum, which is a particular problem in our cities and larger towns. I join the member in welcoming Highland Council’s work and I hope that we can see progress in the coming years.

The Scottish Government has regular interaction with the UK Government on the common agricultural policy. Most recently, I met the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, Caroline Spelman, and the Minister of State for Agriculture and Food, Jim Paice, ahead of the agriculture and fisheries council meeting in Brussels on Monday of this week.

Scotland is making progress on achieving some of our key principles in the new common agricultural policy. We all accept that there is a long way to go and much more to achieve. The member rightly highlights the need to ensure that Scotland’s voice is heard, because whereas 85 per cent of Scottish land is of less favoured area status, it is exactly the opposite south of the border, where it is around 15 per cent. Therefore, we have distinct needs that have to be recognised in the new common agricultural policy. One of those, of course, is the fact that, because Scotland has been stuck with a historic payments regime, anyone who entered farming over the past few years—indeed, most of the past decade—has been excluded from current supports. This Government is arguing, and I know that we have the support of the chamber, that those who are actively, genuinely farming but are currently excluded from support should receive support from day one of the new common agricultural policy regime.

The member raises a good point and highlights Scotland’s diverse agricultural profile. That is one reason why there is sometimes a contradiction in arguing for a simple common agricultural policy while asking for a policy that is tailored to Scotland’s regional needs. There can sometimes be a tension in that. The proposals on the table allow for basic area payments and lots of other payments for different types of activity. Such a system would be complex, and there are lots of negotiations ahead on what it would finally look like, but it gives us the opportunity to ensure that those who are generally active in agriculture, whether in the dairy or another sector, can in some shape or form continue to receive a reasonable level of support, as they deserve.

Tenant farmers who quit their holdings can already make statutory claims against their landlords, including for certain investments. Depending on the tenancy, that can include improvements that qualify under the terms of the lease or net assets that the landlord gains from, for example, future tree cropping. The Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) (Scotland) Bill, which the Government introduced on 31 October, will not amend the statutory provisions on waygoing and other compensation claims.

I am sure that Elaine Murray will be aware that I am not familiar with the detail of 1944 leases. However, if she wishes to write to me in more detail about the 1944 lease I will do my utmost to investigate the circumstances. A tenant with proper records of what he or she has invested over the years should have little difficulty in justifying compensation.

Following the recommendations of the Scotland rural development programme first-stage review by Peter Cook in 2009, we have taken a number of actions to improve the application processes. Those include an option to bypass the first stage of the two-stage rural priorities application process; the transfer of support for community services and facilities applications from central control to the more locally based LEADER—links between activities developing the rural economy—scheme; and the introduction of an on-going approval process for woodland creation and for agri-environment grants on designated sites.

As Mike MacKenzie can imagine, I have been carefully examining the implications of the recent spending review and I will announce a future agri-environment round. We are also consulting our stakeholders before announcing arrangements for other RPAC rounds. As the end of the programme gets closer, there is less funding available and the spending review has had an impact on the amount of resource available to the Scottish Government, especially in capital grants, but I assure members that there will be further rounds.

Alex Fergusson raises valid concerns and issues that many applicants throughout Scotland have raised. I feel confident that we have addressed a number of those concerns in the past couple of years, and the system is much simpler than it was before, but I accept that it is perhaps still not simple enough. There are many administrative European Union regulatory checks—including a 5 per cent inspection requirement—that must be carried out before any claims can be paid. As members can imagine, that often slows up the process. There are lessons to learn about how we administer the scheme in Scotland, but we must also ensure that Scotland’s voice is heard in Brussels so that the next rural development programme is simpler, as the member calls for and as I would certainly support.

I thought that I was going to get off lightly. The 2011 harvest has been difficult for farmers because of unfavourable weather conditions. The Scottish Government has stayed in regular touch with the industry throughout these challenging weeks. It is fortunate that crop maturity has been relatively late this year, so crops were not ready to harvest until later than usual. Conditions in the past few days have allowed farmers at least to make progress. The Government is collating data on crop yields, which we will publish next month.

Rob Gibson describes some reasons why the bad weather in recent months has adversely affected harvesting. He is right to highlight the example of damage to straw and straw bales. The higher costs of drying crops that farmers will have to pay will also be a difficulty. I am interested in considering the issue that Rob Gibson raises—the help that can be made available to farmers around Scotland to put in place the equipment to mitigate such situations in the future. That is on our agenda, and I will write to him with an update.

Jim Hume will have noticed that the agricultural sector’s comment last week in response to the spending review was positive in comparison with what it might otherwise have been. We have done our best to protect most of the agricultural budgets, which has been warmly welcomed. I am sure that the member warmly welcomes that, too. On the budget cut to which Jim Hume refers, we are trying to subsume many such budget cuts within our portfolios through internal administration costs. The Parliament would agree, I think, that that is a better route than cutting front-line services. That approach will be our focus. The budget is difficult and times are difficult, but I am confident that the effect on Mr Hume’s constituents will not be too adverse.

I was deeply disappointed at the European Commission’s recent decision to withdraw from the market asulam, the main herbicide for controlling bracken, despite the fact that Scottish and United Kingdom Government ministers had provided scientific evidence of its safety. Farmers and crofters will cease to be able to use asulam from the end of 2012. The Scottish Government is now keen to work with the agricultural sector on the options available to it to continue to control bracken, which could include emergency authorisations of asulam.

I point out to members that in 2010 there were 134 applications in the UK for aerial spraying of asulam, 74 of which were from Scotland. Clearly a number of producers were taking advantage of the pesticide. Although I take on board the member’s comments and assure him that we will work closely with the industry on the issue, I have to tell him that we fought very hard against the delisting of asulam and that we had the UK Government’s support for our efforts. We will continue to make representations to the UK Government and the European Commission to ensure that we can get emergency authorisations when required.

There are many instances in which using such by-products for biofriendly renewable energy should be welcomed, but we are aware of the concerns that farmers have expressed that there are not enough of the by-products to meet farmers’ and the renewable energy sector’s needs. We are currently considering our response to a letter that has been received from the industry that asks the Scottish Government to ensure that supplies to local farmers are maintained.

Those are exactly the issues that I am keen to look at, which is why I said that we are considering how to respond to the concerns that the agricultural sector has expressed. At the moment, there is a surplus of those by-products in Scotland, but I accept that a number of bioenergy plants have been built. We must commend the Scotch whisky industry, as the issue is for distillers who are trying to lower the carbon footprint. I am sure that all members support that. However, we must consider the wider impact, which is why I am keen to investigate the issue on behalf of the agricultural sector. I will keep members updated in due course.

I thank you for being so generous, Presiding Officer. I do not need much encouragement to take interventions. We may be a small nation in the north-west corner of Europe, but we are central to European fisheries. Our nation’s identity, culture and heritage and, of course, our economy are shaped by the seas that surround us. We are responsible for Europe’s sixth largest fishing grounds, which range across some of the European Union’s richest waters. The fish in our waters have given many generations sustenance, and they now underpin a modern and innovative industry that is worth hundreds of millions of pounds to Scotland’s economy. Our high-quality seafood products are renowned worldwide and are in high demand in shops and restaurants all over the globe. The men who go to sea put their lives on the line to bring food to our tables, and we all know that many have paid the ultimate sacrifice in doing so. They battle not only the seas, the wind and the cold to bring us that bounty, but a bewildering and often contradictory tangle of European regulation. Despite that challenge, our fishermen land more than 70 per cent of the United Kingdom quota and almost a tenth of the total EU marine fish catch. Thanks to its resilience, our fishing industry is performing well. In fact, the value of catches landed by Scottish vessels has consistently held up. The second-highest value achieved this decade was achieved last year. Mackerel and langoustine remain our two most valuable species; together, their value approaches £200 million. Newer fisheries are also doing well. We have seen, for instance, an 86 per cent increase in the value of squid landed by Scottish vessels as a result of both greater volumes and higher prices. Alongside our sea fisheries, Scotland has, of course, a well-deserved reputation for producing healthy and high-quality farmed fish and shellfish. Scottish aquaculture is thriving and it continues to grow. Atlantic salmon production is now worth more than £400 million. We are the largest producer in the EU and the third largest globally, and salmon now accounts for more than a third of Scottish food exports. It is not just about salmon. The value of farmed blue mussels has gone up by more than 50 per cent, to £6.7 million. That is yet another new growth sector. I am sure that many members who represent fishing communities are aware that our fleet, onshore processors, aquaculture and auxiliary sectors are hugely valuable to Scotland and our communities. That is why we need to safeguard our stocks and our vital fishing industry for future generations. Ever since the Tories deemed our fishing industry expendable, took us into the common fisheries policy, and gave away our fishing rights into the bargain, Scotland’s fishing communities and our fish stocks have paid a heavy price.

I know that Alex Johnstone and some of his Conservative colleagues are trying to disassociate themselves from the Conservative Party’s history, but every Scot and everyone who lives in a coastal community is well aware that it was the Tory party that sold Scotland out back in the 1970s and 1980s. We must use the opportunity of the current review to right some of the wrongs. Negotiations on a new fisheries policy will take place across Europe between now and 2013 and the outcome will determine the future viability of our fishing communities. Today, I hope and expect that we can all agree that the CFP has been an unmitigated disaster. It has been a horror story since the day it was written. Fish stocks have been slashed, vital jobs have vanished and communities have been cut up. The very people who have to cope with its consequences are disenfranchised from the decision-making process. Our fishermen, who struggle day in, day out with the byzantine regulations will certainly agree with that, as do I and the 27 other ministers who have to sit in Brussels into the early hours every December attempting to decide mesh sizes for individual fisheries from the Baltic to the Bay of Biscay. We all know that the CFP is too centralised and rigid, too focused on enforcing compliance, too slow to react to developing situations—which is extremely bad news for the complex situation of Scotland’s mixed fishery—and far too complex for most people to understand, not least those who are expected to implement and abide by it.

That is an important point, and I will deal with it when I address some of the key issues in the CFP reform debate. I will say, at this point, that we are still waiting to hear some of the proposals from the European Commission, which will give us some indication of what it thinks is legally possible—and, perhaps, legally less possible. We will take a strong view once we have that information. Crucially, the CFP has failed to protect our stocks. The Commission has identified 75 per cent of European stocks as being overfished. We could not get a better recognition of the failure of the CFP to achieve its core objective. In recent years, and against that challenging background, Scotland has shown leadership and a determination to solve problems as far as we can within the constraints that are set by Brussels. We have brought together everyone who is involved in our fisheries—the Government, scientists, the industry, the non-governmental organisations and the fishing crews—in order to work together for the good of Scotland. We have put stakeholders at the heart of policy making; we have provided incentives for stock conservation measures; and we have challenged conventional thinking with innovation and imagination. Europe can learn from our experience. It is important that we have introduced measures to tackle the abhorrent practice of fish discards under the policy of catch less, land more. The discarding of high-quality and high-value fish is an absolute disgrace. The way in which the CFP currently operates fish quotas is a recipe for discards. In 2010, perfectly good, high-quality white fish worth more than £30 million to the Scottish fleet were thrown back into the sea, dead. I know that we all agree that that is an appalling waste of a valuable food resource.

Yes.

Liam McArthur makes a good point and illustrates how we have to be careful as we take this debate forward. Of course, the statistic that I just gave the chamber concerned fish that are thrown back into the sea dead. That distinction, which involves different fisheries in Scotland, has been made. The fact that the situation that we are discussing is a by-product of a policy that is designed to conserve stocks is perhaps the biggest disgrace of all. There is now international agreement that tackling discards is a priority, and people are talking about imposing a ban on the practice. Of course we will make the case that, if we genuinely want to deal with the issue, we cannot have a ban without having a plan. In Scotland we have worked with the industry and the NGOs to take action. For example, under our innovative real-time closure schemes, areas that have concentrations of cod, for instance, are closed to fishing until the fish have dispersed, which lowers mortality. We have not stopped there. We have developed more selective gear measures in many different fisheries and the catch quota scheme, which focuses on what is caught and not what is landed, is operating. The scheme reduced discards of North Sea cod by 30 per cent in 2009-10. On the west coast, the science is recommending a 410 per cent increase in quota. I think that all members know that the west coast has had its fair share of pain in recent years, so I hope that the science gives grounds for optimism for the future. It is imperative that the Commission follows the science, because to do otherwise would lead to more massive discarding of viable fish on the west coast of Scotland.

Tavish Scott makes a point that is important to his constituency, given the high-value stocks that would be caught by the discriminatory rule whereby if the scientific evidence was not regarded as being up to the Commission’s standards there would be an automatic 25 per cent cut in the quota. Such an approach is not justified. We have expressed concern about and are resisting the proposal. I assure Tavish Scott that the issue is high on our agenda for the forthcoming negotiations. Innovation is the hallmark of fisheries management in Scotland, which shows what can be achieved when we can take decisions closer to home. The one-size-fits-all micromanagement by Brussels of every aspect of fisheries needs to stop. For as long as we are part of the common fisheries policy, the CFP’s role must be limited to the setting of targets and a framework in which decision making by Brussels is kept to a minimum. Member states must be left to work together, where it makes sense to do so, to manage fisheries in partnership with our fishermen and other stakeholders. Through our good work in Scotland, I have seen that when everyone who is involved feels that they own the problem they also feel that they own the solution. That unlocks creativity, honesty and fresh thinking about problem solving. The first step to solving the problems of the CFP can be taken only if the Commission trusts member states and returns more power to them to run their fisheries at local and regional level. The EU’s centralising tendency is demonstrated in some of the proposals around aquaculture. The Commission has made clear that aquaculture will be a key pillar of the reformed CFP. Scotland has a diverse and thriving aquaculture industry, which produces some of our most prized products. The industry is doing great things, with support through the European fisheries fund but without overdetailed regulation and micromanagement from Brussels. As part of the debate about the future of the CFP and the fisheries fund, we must ensure that a framework is in place to enable the continued growth of an economically viable, competitive and sustainable Scottish aquaculture industry. What we do not want or need is an extension of the centralised approach that has worked so poorly for the sea fisheries sector during the past few decades. The Commission’s alarming proposal on transferable fishing quotas illustrates many of the existing problems. The Commission has identified as a problem the number of fishing vessels and has proposed a measure to reduce them. Our view is that an approach that allows the people who have the deepest pockets to swallow up the industry is not what Scotland’s diverse fishing communities need. The Commission views transferable fishing quotas as a way of cutting capacity, but in Scotland we have already reduced our fleet and the EU should recognise and reward that. Indeed, thanks to the industry’s sacrifices, three quarters of our stocks in our waters are being fished sustainably. I want to be very clear. The introduction of transferable fishing quotas for Scotland could, in time, spell doom for our fishing communities. This Government will not allow a situation to arise that could mean that future generations will not be able to fish the stocks in their own waters. I note that the proposed regulation allows Governments to recall and redistribute individual transferable quotas after a 15-year notice period. I think that we can all agree that 15 years is a long time. What capacity would be left in Scotland to begin fishing again after the quotas were back in place—if we could find the cash to buy them back from foreign-based multinationals? The UK Government appears to be sympathetic to quota trading, but Scotland has far more to lose than the rest of the UK, where much of the industry is already foreign owned. That is why Scotland needs a strong voice in the negotiations, so that our case can be heard loud and clear on that and other issues. That means that we must have appropriate representation in Brussels. Even under devolution, Scotland’s voice could be louder. The UK Government keeps telling us that it is relaxed about Scottish ministers speaking at council meetings on the UK’s behalf, until we ask to do so—then the UK Government says no. Under this Administration, Scotland has spoken only once for the UK in fisheries negotiations, and even that was only after the First Minister had to ask the Prime Minister to intervene to overturn the initial refusal by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. I assure the Parliament that I intend to ask the UK Government for a greater role in the CFP negotiations, to safeguard our interests. That is not about picking a fight with London; it is about making Scotland’s voice heard and focusing on the issues that matter to Scotland’s fishing communities and on the industry’s future. Scotland is part of the UK—for the time being—so it is obvious that it is important that we work constructively with the UK Government to ensure that it promotes Scotland’s interests. We will of course continue to do that. The UK and the Commission tell us that they want radical change. They must not take the easy route of sticking with the status quo—that happened in the past and must not happen again. We have heard many fine words from them, but now it is time to deliver. Scotland will remain active in Europe to pursue reform. I have met and discussed the issues with the European commissioner, among others, and I will work with all parties that have an interest in putting the failed CFP behind us—the Commission, the European Parliament, Westminster and other member states included. If Europe blows the golden opportunity to sail our fishing communities into calmer waters, the consequences will be dire for fisheries conservation, our fishing communities and our industry in Scotland. I know that everyone in the Parliament wants the best outcome from the negotiations for our fishing communities and our marine environment. Our priorities will be the return of decision making to Scotland to protect our fish stocks, to really tackle discards and to protect our fishing rights for future generations. The Government will strain every sinew and use every means in its power to consign the current CFP to the dustbin of history and replace it with a policy that provides a better future for Scotland’s fishermen. I commend the motion to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament supports the Scottish Government in its efforts to achieve the best possible outcome for Scotland during negotiations on the future of the failed Common Fisheries Policy in order to protect Scotland’s historic fishing rights, protect fish stocks, tackle discards, support Scotland’s aquaculture industry without burdening it with unnecessary regulation, promote Scottish seafood and give greater power to fishing nations to manage their fisheries and protect the marine environment.

As someone who in recent years has attended more Council of Ministers meetings than I care to remember, I assure the member that I have witnessed many small nations sitting round the table getting better deals than some of the bigger nations on issues that are key to those small nations’ futures. Does that not illustrate why Scotland would get a much better deal with our own seat at the top table in Europe?

I will do my best to address some of the points that have been made very eloquently by many members of all parties in the chamber. I agree with Sarah Boyack and Alex Johnstone that we have had a very good debate with good speeches. At the outset, I should say that as well as being Scottish Government minister for fisheries, I represent—as do many members in the chamber—a constituency in which many of the communities are defined by their fishing heritage. Today, the level of fishing activity is much less than it was in many previous decades, and fewer livelihoods are dependent on fisheries compared with past years. That is perhaps the real cost to us all of the common fisheries policy. Many members spoke about the importance of our fishing industry to defining not just our communities but Scotland as a nation. Many also made the point that the future of our fishing communities is a national priority. It is not just an issue for members who represent fishing communities, which is why I was delighted that John Pentland, our representative from Motherwell and Wishaw, spoke in the debate and used the opportunity to remind us of that point. We are also speaking about food. Dave Thompson raised the fact that we are talking about a top-quality food product, which, as Jean Urquhart said, is also a healthy product. We are therefore talking about a good healthy food, to which many communities add value to the benefit of both our coastal economies and Scotland as a nation. I welcome the news, which Dave Thompson referred to, that the west coast of Scotland, which has not had its problems to seek in the fishing industry in recent years, has an added-value project that means that consumers the length and breadth of these islands will be able to buy top-quality langoustines from the pristine waters of the west coast. That is good news for the local industry. Fishing has changed over the decades, and there are several factors behind that. First, the biological and ecological conditions in our seas have changed. That has had an influence on the size and location of our stocks, and we should not lose sight of that. We have also seen technological creep. Our vessels have become bigger and more efficient and can catch fish a lot more quickly and easily than in previous decades. That influences the number of vessels that we can have and the impact that they have on our fragile fish stocks. Those are important factors, but I think that we can all agree today that the biggest factor that has influenced the fortunes of Scotland’s fishing communities down the years has been the disastrous European common fisheries policy, which is what today’s debate is really about. I want to address a number of issues that were raised by members. I will start by ensuring that the arguments that we put forward for the future of our fishing communities and fish stocks are based on science. It is important that we present the evidence that makes Scotland’s case. Tavish Scott asked about the science budgets; I can assure him that as part of yesterday’s announcement we have protected the fish science budgets in my portfolio. We recognise the importance of the science in negotiations, not just this year but in subsequent years, including in relation to some of the stocks in Tavish Scott’s constituency. We need more science. We tend to be one of the few member states to have an interest in the stocks, so we have to ensure that we fund the science because no one else will do it. It has been challenging, but we have protected the budgets. My officials have helpfully passed me a note to remind me that I am appearing before the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee to discuss our budget in a couple of weeks. I am looking forward to that. Many members raised the issue of international tradeable quotas and the prospect that we could have a regime imposed on us that would mean that our current generation of fishing businesses could sell their quotas to foreign-based companies, thereby denying future generations of Scots in fishing communities their birthright and, as Sarah Boyack said, inflicting huge economic damage on our onshore sectors, as well the fleet. We all want to avoid that. We have asked for clarification from the Commission on the legalities of what it proposes and the safeguards it is offering. Clearly, we live in a single market, so if a Scots fisherman can sell to another Scots fishermen, how can he be prevented from selling to Dutch or Spanish fishermen? As I said in my opening remarks, unless we have absolute guarantees, the proposal will spell doom for many of Scotland’s fishing communities. Discards are a huge public issue. I can exclusively reveal to the chamber that I have had two lengthy conversations with Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall in recent months. He did not give me any tips for the kitchen, but we did discuss the importance of discards and ensuring that we take the right approach. I used the opportunity to make it clear that we need not only a ban on discards at some point in the future but a plan to get there in the first place. The situation is not quite as simple as some people are making out, particularly in the case of Scotland’s mixed fishery, where the net goes over the side of the boat and various species are caught at the one time. It is not the same in the clean fisheries in the Mediterranean and elsewhere in European waters. We must be very careful, but we all agree that we have to make discards history as soon as possible. Another proposal from the European Commission is that we ensure that our stocks achieve maximum sustainable yield by 2015. We can all agree with that principle, but we have concerns about how we will get there. As I said before, the biological and ecological conditions in our seas can influence the location and size of stocks; therefore, it is not the way forward to set a crude target for 2015 and, if we do not make progress quickly enough in the eyes of the European Commission, to be suddenly denied fishing opportunities for our fleet. We will keep a close watching brief on that. Many members raised the issue of aquaculture and the need to ensure that the mistakes that we have made over sea fisheries are not made in relation to Scotland’s important aquaculture sector. Some good things are being proposed by the Commission. For instance, the movement toward long-term multi-annual plans for our fish stocks is a good idea that we all support. We must move away from the constant crisis management that our fishing industry has had to put up with year in, year out. Those plans would be a way of doing that and would give the industry stability to plan its business into the future. The retention of relative stability is also welcomed by us all, because it protects Scotland’s historical fishing rights. The protection of the Hague preferences, which is a mechanism that ensures that fisheries-dependent communities get a minimum threshold of fish stocks and quotas, is also very important for Scotland and Ireland. In addition, the retention of the 6 and 12-mile limits has been confirmed, which we all welcome. Tavish Scott raised the issue of the Shetland box. We have noticed that it is absent from the European Commission’s proposals and we are discussing with fishing representatives in Shetland and nationally how we can take the debate forward on the future of the Shetland box. I assure Tavish Scott that the matter is on our radar screen. Sarah Boyack suggested that we must maximise our influence in the negotiations. I agree that we must make every effort to maximise our influence in determining the future of the common fisheries policy and the future of our fishing communities. That is why we are asking for a greater role for Scotland in those negotiations. Surely, we all agree that the current position is unsustainable. Last year, the Labour Government chose to send from the House of Lords a junior minister with responsibility for bee health to an important fisheries meeting, despite the Scottish Government’s request to attend; the UK Government turned down the Scottish Government’s request to have the Scottish fisheries minister present. Surely, any reasonable person recognises that that is wholly unacceptable. The new Tory-Lib Dem Government in London says that it is relaxed about Scotland attending and speaking at meetings when a predominantly Scottish interest is being discussed or there is another good reason for us to do so. Yet, every time that we have asked to do that, it has said no. The UK Government cannot on the one hand be relaxed about the Scottish Government having the opportunity to put the case for Scotland’s fishing communities, but on the other, when a logical case is put as to why Scotland should take the lead or be able to speak at a meeting, say no every time. The only time that has been allowed to happen was when the First Minister intervened and persuaded the Prime Minister to overturn DEFRA’s decision. That situation must change if Scotland is to maximise its influence as we move forward. The make-or-break issue in the CFP negotiations will be the extent to which decision making can be decentralised and returned to Scotland and the other member states, to work on a more local and regional level. I am pleased that the Parliament is united in recognising that that is the make-or-break issue and that we can send a clear, loud and united message from Scotland that it must be delivered. At the moment, we are awaiting further information from the Commission—which it has promised to publish soon—on how a regional model might work in a way that is acceptable in terms of the treaties and legal conditions. Our argument is that it is important to knock down the legal obstacles to ensure that such a model is delivered. If we agree that the CFP, under the current arrangements, has failed miserably, we cannot allow that to continue; so, let us knock down any of the obstacles that prevent decision making from being returned to member states and Scotland, in order to give our fish stocks and fishing communities a future. Members have referred to the importance of our fishing industry in Shetland, Orkney, the west coast, Mallaig, north-east Fife, north-east Scotland, Eyemouth, the Western Isles, Scrabster, Lochinver, Pittenweem, Buckie and elsewhere. Our fishing industry remains crucial to the future of Scotland, which is why I am confident that we can take a team Scotland approach to the negotiations and speak with one voice as we work with our MEPs and other member states. I have had meetings with the Spanish and Irish ministers, and we will continue to do what Sarah Boyack asked for and put our case to other member states and capitals in Europe as well as working with the UK Government. The UK Government will have to work with Scotland and will, I hope, take into account our predominant interest in the UK’s case. Seventy per cent of the UK’s fishing industry is based in Scotland; therefore, it is vital that the UK Government listens to what Scotland has to say. In closing, Rod Campbell said that he visited the Scottish fisheries museum in Anstruther. I have fond memories of my visit in the past year or so. I recommend making a visit to all members, who will see that the history of fishing is woven into Scotland’s story. We must get the review of the common fisheries policy right so that we can write a new chapter for Scotland’s fishing communities and save Scotland’s fishing industry.

I welcome the opportunity to debate this important topic and thank Michael McMahon and his colleagues for giving Parliament this opportunity. I listened carefully to Michael McMahon’s opening speech and I agree with many of his comments. However, I cannot agree with his assertion that we should scrap Scotland’s planning system and scrap the appeals process unless we reject every appeal that comes before us.

The debate addresses some of the challenges that our society faces on the road to zero waste Scotland—a destination that we all, I am pleased to say, appear to support. I hope that we can all agree on at least one important point: it is no longer acceptable for Scotland to landfill 4.7 million tonnes of the 17 million tonnes of waste that we produce as a nation. We must reduce the amount of waste that we produce in the first place, and we must reuse and recycle as much waste as possible. Michael McMahon pointed to the challenges that are outlined in the Audit Scotland report. I am grateful to him for highlighting the report, because I can now highlight that many of the points that it made have been overtaken. For example, Scotland has now achieved its landfill diversion targets, which were due to be met in 2013. That is good news for Scotland. It is also excellent news that many councils in Scotland are now approaching 50 per cent of waste being recycled in their areas. However, we must extract maximum value and environmental benefit from the residual waste that we will be left with and which cannot be recycled. Scotland therefore requires to have the infrastructure in place in the coming years to treat the nation’s residual waste. There are different technologies for treating residual waste, of which energy from waste through incineration is but one option. This Government does not specify which technology should be used, as long as it meets appropriate standards and fulfils our policy aims.

I have an element of sympathy with the member’s comments. That is why more infrastructure needs to be built in Scotland. I am acutely aware of the strong emotions and opinions that surround energy-from-waste facilities. They are not restricted to energy-from-waste plants; the location of recycling centres, waste-processing facilities and, of course, landfill sites all stir strong feelings in our communities.

The member raises an interesting point. Of course, the Electricity Act 1989 is reserved to the United Kingdom Government, although elements of it are devolved to the Scottish Government. I will certainly bring his concerns to the attention of the UK Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change, who I am sure will be willing to write to the member with his views. Our approach to tackling Scotland’s waste is set out in our zero waste plan. Simply put, we wish waste to be treated as a valued resource, rather than as something that is simply to be discarded. Achieving our zero waste agenda will require changes and improvements to the infrastructure for managing Scotland’s waste, not to mention the development of a reprocessing sector. We need to stop exporting materials that can be recycled and start recycling them here. I think that we can all agree on that. I want to be clear that the majority of infrastructure that we need will support improvements in recycling and collection. However, that does not mean that energy-from-waste plants or other types of residual-waste treatment facilities will not be needed. We are heading towards a level of 70 per cent recycling with no more than 5 per cent of waste going to landfill in the longer term. Not all waste is suitable for thermal treatment. Therefore, the reality is that less than 10 per cent of Scotland’s total waste is ever likely to be processed in that way. The importance of avoiding overcapacity in infrastructure to treat residual or black-bag waste is clear. We do not need to look too far afield to see the consequences of infrastructure overcapacity. Other European countries have established large networks of energy-from-waste facilities. Scotland incinerates around 2.7 per cent of municipal waste, while Denmark, the Netherlands and France—which have good environmental credentials—incinerate 53.8 per cent, 32.9 per cent and 33.7 per cent, respectively. Those plants rely on a constant supply of waste, which can restrict the levels of recycling that can be achieved.

I apologise, but I have taken three interventions already. I have no desire to see such levels of incineration in Scotland. That is why we have set some of the most ambitious recycling targets in Europe, including a target of recycling 70 per cent of all waste by 2025. It is why all new facilities must be highly efficient in producing heat and energy and why there is a presumption against large-scale facilities, and why this Administration is progressing legislation that will ensure that only materials that cannot be recycled are incinerated. Of course, none of that will remove the need for difficult planning decisions—around not only waste infrastructure, but a variety of large-scale infrastructure—which is why local accountability and decision making are key to successful planning decisions, and why ministers get involved only when planning decisions are appealed or when there are matters of national significance. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and our local authorities are not knocking on our door and asking for planning decisions to be taken on a national basis—they want local accountability. That is what this Government supports and will continue to support.

I am sorry, I have taken three interventions already. I will take the member’s intervention in my closing speech. At each stage of the planning process, whether it involves a decision by a council, reporters or ministers, those who are responsible must give material consideration of public representations in national policies and guidelines. In the case of waste infrastructure, that means that all elected members must recognise the need to take responsibility for waste and must show support for the development of appropriate infrastructure to manage our waste. However, when it comes to public concerns over the siting of incineration plants, we attach the highest importance to protecting and improving the health and wellbeing of our communities. For example, experts who have been engaged in a wide range of independent scientific and medical studies have examined the evidence around the impact on health of modern incinerators, and have concluded that the relative health impact that is associated with their operation is very low. We need to put all of that in context. I have been told by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency that a modern incinerator would have to run for 120 years to produce the amount of pollution that was produced by the millennium firework display in London. SEPA and our other authorities have responsibility for regulating all the applications that are being received. They will continue to do so, taking into account local representations and the very fit-for-purpose national framework that is in place at the moment. I am clear that energy-from-waste technologies and other technologies are safe and sustainable and represent a valuable option for dealing with Scotland’s big problem of residual waste. I move amendment S4M-00853.1, to leave out from the first “notes” to end and insert: “and notes the importance of an effective national framework to guide waste management, represented by Scotland’s Zero Waste Plan.”

We can all agree that the debate has been interesting and valuable. The issue of waste and how best to manage it is one that never fails to stimulate discussion in the chamber and throughout Scotland. I was slightly confused at some points about whether the debate was about the future of Scotland’s environment or about the distress that the Labour Party is experiencing at losing some key constituencies in Lanarkshire. Of course, those issues are linked, because the election of SNP MSPs is good for Scotland’s environment. I was struck by Jackson Carlaw’s opening comment that he agrees with the Labour Party on the issue. If I were in the Labour Party, I would be slightly concerned that the Conservative Party was agreeing with Labour’s environmental policy. I also note that he and some of his colleagues have criticised the attempts to roll out waste food collections across Scotland, which shows that, in relation to some of these issues, they are still stuck in the 1980s. I have no doubt that companies will continue to pursue planning consents for a range of waste infrastructure across Scotland. I am also confident that our zero waste plan and the measures that will be introduced through the zero waste regulations will significantly reduce the volume and type of materials that can be disposed of through incineration. The feedstock will simply not be available to feed large-scale plants or an extensive network of incinerators across Scotland. Our zero waste plan is the right national strategy to deliver real and lasting change to how Scotland’s waste is managed. I am going to be generous to Elaine Smith and address two of the points that she raised during the debate. First, she and other members mentioned private sector involvement. We cannot say that it is really important to deal with Scotland’s residual waste but then attack the role of the private sector in helping us to solve that problem. The resources and expertise must come from somewhere. Jim Hume said that he wants anaerobic digestion to be rolled out across Scotland, but he did not remark on the fact that Scotland’s budget has been cut by his own party at Westminster. That really takes the biscuit. We must start to realise that the private sector’s resources will be required if we are to deal with Scotland’s waste challenges and that that sector has a valuable role to play. Elaine Smith and Jackson Carlaw raised the issue of the health implications of incinerators that may be built in Scotland. SEPA is responsible for regulating the waste industry, and before it considered issuing a permit for an incinerator, the operator would have to undertake health risk assessments and demonstrate that human health and the environment would be protected. Waste incinerators must also comply with stringent emissions standards and controls, which require plants to meet minimum burn temperatures and strict emissions limits. Clearly, we all take very seriously potential increases in health risks. I can reassure Parliament that we are not resting on our laurels in that regard. The Government recognises that there is public concern on the issue, and we are reflecting more on what can be done to alleviate some of those concerns. For instance, I am examining whether more can be done to give the public easier access to real-time, continuous information on emissions from facilities through SEPA’s website. We are also considering other ways of communicating the issues to the public. However, we all have a responsibility in our own constituencies to keep things in perspective and ensure that information that we get from others is checked out properly and that the information that we give to constituents is accurate.

In certain situations there are, of course, exceptional circumstances of national significance that mean that ministers cannot intervene. However, a very important part of the debate is what should be decided locally and what should be decided nationally. If ministers took into their remit decisions as part of a national decision-making process, Labour members would be the first to complain if ministers then said that one of Scotland’s incinerators was going to be based in a Labour member’s constituency. They would suddenly start to complain that there was not enough local input or local accountability. We must therefore stick with what local authorities, COSLA and—I believe—most if not all parties in the chamber support, which is that some decisions must be decided locally and within the planning framework because that is what is delivering at the moment.

The member will be aware that the Presiding Officer made it clear to Parliament that some applications that are causing contention around Scotland are subject to judicial review at present and cannot be referred to by ministers or others in the chamber. The member has just made a ridiculous accusation. Surely he is not suggesting that members of the Scottish Parliament should not stand up locally for their constituents and work with them on local issues. It is our democratic right to do that, and we should all stick to doing that. Perhaps if Labour Party members had done that a bit more, they would not have lost so many seats at the last election. We all have a responsibility to deal with Scotland’s waste. I hope that the debate has been about that. I think that there is a lot of agreement across the chamber that we must deal with residual waste. We cannot just put it in a big hole in the ground, which is a waste of money and bad for the environment—and, of course, bad for our climate change targets. Let us all move forward together on the issue. Let us stick to our national framework, put the waste strategies in place and ensure that local decision-making continues to be seen as important.

Will the member take an intervention?

Yes, the Scottish Government considers those targets to be achievable. Statistics published last week show that revenues from food and drink reached an all-time high of £11.9 billion in 2009, an increase of more than £700 million on the previous year. We are making phenomenal progress, and we will continue to work with the sector to ensure that it goes from strength to strength.

Scottish ministers have instructed Scottish Enterprise to actively engage across the food and drink sector, including the dairy sector, to attract inward investment here in Scotland.

Yes, I have held meetings with NFU Scotland’s leadership in recent months and I will meet them again in a few days’ time. The Scottish Government is funding an NFU trip to Europe to an international dairy conference that takes place next month at which the NFU has agreed to investigate whether there are any inward investment opportunities out there for the dairy sector in Scotland. I agree that we have to add value to milk in Scotland and to the dairy sector if we are to give it a prosperous future and encourage it to be much more profitable. Clearly, that has got to be our focus for the next few years as we learn some of the hard lessons of the past few decades that have led to some decline in the dairy sector not just in Scotland but across the United Kingdom and, indeed, Europe.

I think that the member will find that the Scottish Government’s track record on procurement for our catering contracts has improved dramatically to help primary producers in Scotland over the past few years and certainly since the member’s party was in Administration. I will continue to explore all opportunities to ensure that the Scottish Government can support a fair deal for Scotland’s primary producers, including our dairy sector.

I, too, congratulate Aileen McLeod on securing the debate. As we all recognise, she has picked a fantastic topic for her first members’ business debate and I welcome the other positive speeches that members across the chamber have made. I should also say to Aileen McLeod—and, in his absence, to Alex Fergusson—that my taste buds have fond memories of my visit back in April to the microbrewery that they mentioned. I also congratulate Dumfries and Galloway Council on its comprehensive programme of 92 events in its flavour fortnight. I regret that I will not have the opportunity to visit any of those events this year, but should any of the local MSPs wish to invite me to next year’s event I will be more than delighted to come—and, yes, that was a very big hint. I have certainly been impressed by the breadth of the areas that the flavour fortnight is covering. As we have heard, it ranges from events showcasing traditional local Scottish fare to innovative ideas such as the wild food forage around an art gallery in the area. Given that all those events will encourage people to discover, buy and enjoy the food and drink that is produced on our very own doorsteps, it is good to see that LEADER funding has helped with the event’s overall management and promotion. This is a clear example of the public, private and third sectors all working together to contribute to and promote rural development and sustainable economic growth on the back of our food and drink businesses. Events similar to the Dumfries and Galloway flavour fortnight are taking place across the country and are encouraging everyone, regardless of age, taste or budget, to become more informed about what they buy and why they buy it and to try something new. The fortnight not only supports the people who make the food and drink we enjoy but challenges our restaurants, caterers and suppliers to source and champion quality Scottish produce. It is great that, since it was first started in 2003 by the Scottish Countryside Alliance Education Trust, the event has grown. As we have heard, this year’s food and drink fortnight—the initiative is now in its ninth year—is even bigger than before, with more than 200 events, or a more than 50 per cent increase on the number of events last year. That sends a clear message that more and more people are joining in and celebrating the variety of Scotland’s natural larder. I am pleased to say that we have been able to support Scotland Food and Drink again this year to enable small food businesses to attend the events taking place during the fortnight. Of course, the success of Scottish food and drink fortnight is part of a much wider trend. As Chic Brodie pointed out, a revolution is happening in Scotland’s food and drink industry and it is local food and drink initiatives such as that in Dumfries and Galloway and other communities throughout the country that are giving grass-roots momentum to that revolution. There are many different dimensions to all this. For example, I was pleased to hear Aileen McLeod, in particular, suggest that it can help tourism, highlighting what is happening in Ireland with the food trails. I would like to find out more about that, because it sounds like a good initiative, but I point out that we have a commitment in Scotland to supporting food networks throughout the country and we envisage that they will play a food tourism role. I certainly agree with members that that is a huge and untapped opportunity. Some of the food initiatives that have been discussed certainly support that approach and are kicking off these opportunities, but I agree that much more can be done. What is certain, though, is that demand for local produce is continuing to grow with nearly a third of Scotland’s shoppers saying that they have specifically bought locally produced food. That is good news, particularly given that when people think there is a recession they tend to move away from local food. That that has not been the case is a good vindication and endorsement of Scotland’s reputation of good food and produce. Scotland is renowned across the world for its unspoilt landscapes and high-quality produce, all of which underpin its success in this area. As members have pointed out, even in this tough economic climate there has been an increase in retail sales of Scottish brands; indeed, in the past few years alone, sales have gone up by a third. Scottish food and drink exports are also at an all-time high, with international sales reaching £4.5 billion. Those figures are testament to a real consumer demand for the high-quality food and drink products that this country has to offer. Since May 2007, the Government has supported many businesses with around £30 million of assistance through our food grant schemes. I mention that because the issue of local abattoirs was raised during the debate. The fact is that assistance is available to anyone who wishes to make a business case for a local abattoir. I think that we are all in favour of the philosophy behind such abattoirs but they have to be commercially viable—and that, in many cases, has been the challenge in Scotland. However, Scotland has local abattoirs and many projects are being investigated to try to open new local abattoirs. There are challenges—for example, Elaine Murray mentioned the role of the Food Standards Agency. Of course, the Scottish Government listens to the industry and that is why we are having a review of the FSA’s role in Scotland. An important part of that review is the role of the meat hygiene service and all the charges that are associated with it, which of course help to determine whether rural abattoirs are viable in the first place. I will update Parliament in due course on how that review is going. We should celebrate the fact that it is all good news on the food and drink front in Scotland. Promoting local food is very important and the Scottish farmers market partnership is one way of doing that. This Government has delivered the first ever support to that organisation to help our primary producers at a local level interact with consumers on their own doorstep. There are now 53 farmers markets across Scotland, which is good news. Dumfries and Galloway’s flavour fortnight, which is part of the wider Scottish food and drink fortnight, is our opportunity to celebrate the continued growth and success of Scotland’s famous food and drink industry. People now associate Scotland’s image with good-quality, healthy and often seasonal food and drink produce, which has perhaps not always been the case. That is why the revolution that is under way deserves the support of this Parliament and of all parties. I know that it has that support. We have the opportunity to get behind it and allow the initiatives in Dumfries and Galloway and elsewhere in the country to go from strength to strength and deliver a huge number of benefits for Scotland. Meeting closed at 17:36.

Last week, the Scottish Government published proposals to amend the Scotland Bill to devolve responsibility for the Crown estate in Scotland. That will ensure that Scotland’s assets are managed in Scotland for the benefit of all Scotland’s people. Once management of the Crown estate is devolved, the Scottish Government will consult stakeholders and the wider public on proposals to involve local authorities and communities in decisions about our marine resources, including Scotland’s iconic salmon fishing rights that are held as part of the Crown estate.

The member highlights some very good points that go right to the heart of the debate about why the Crown estate should be managed in Scotland and not by Westminster. Of course, the Liberal Democrats, who supported the report that was published by Highland Council, can now stick to their word and fulfil their promise to support the devolution of the Crown estate to Scotland. Of course our angling clubs and others should have a role in the consultation that we promised to hold in this Parliament once the Crown estate is devolved. We all agree that we have to democratise the management of our salmon fishing rights and the other assets managed by the Crown Estate in Scotland.

That is another good point. Yes, we have plans to review this whole area over the course of this session of Parliament, as outlined in our manifesto. We can all agree that there have been some improvements to the composition and role of the fishery boards in recent years, but it remains the case—I think that many of them would accept this—that their structures are outmoded. We need structures that are fit for purpose in the 21st century.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I take it that you want this to be a 2G debate in which we all speak slowly as opposed to a 4G debate in which we go very fast and deliver next-generation speeches. Thank you for the allocation of ample time. If I do not take it up, Stewart Stevenson certainly will in his winding-up speech. Last week, the Parliament had the opportunity to debate the future of rural Scotland. A major theme was rural connectivity in the context of next-generation or high-speed broadband. In that debate, I said that if we can “connect our communities to the rest of the world, we can offer rural Scotland and the whole nation a brighter future.”—[Official Report, 22 June 2011; c 888.] The purpose of today’s debate is to provide members with the chance to focus on the increasing importance of digital connectivity in rural Scotland. There is cross-party support for the view that a lack of ambition on the part of the United Kingdom Government should not be allowed to create a situation in which rural Scotland misses out on the digital revolution. The absence of connectivity can hold back our rural communities and businesses, as I was reminded only last week when, like many other members, I was at the fantastic Royal Highland Show. I met the owners of a small, farm-based rural business in the Borders, who had received a modest amount of Scotland rural development programme funding to establish their butchery business, which sells premium produce that they have reared. They told me that the biggest obstacle to their future was the lack of broadband connection in their area. They want to offer an online ordering service, because they know that that is where the future of their business lies, but they cannot compete on a level playing field because—in the 21st century—the infrastructure has not found its way to rural Scotland. As many members will recognise, that is a consistent message from communities and businesses the length and breadth of rural Scotland. Members will recall the speak up for rural Scotland consultation that the Scottish Government conducted just last year. The fact that respondents consistently identified connection to high-speed broadband as their highest priority has been acknowledged in the Government’s response to that consultation, which was outlined in our policy paper, “Our Rural Future”. High-speed broadband is essential to keeping rural businesses viable and competitive in the future, but there are wider community benefits from greater connectivity in rural Scotland. If rural communities are left behind, that could lead to greater isolation, so the digital revolution can deliver social as well as economic benefits. We have all seen the phenomenal rise of social media. I speak as a recent convert to tweeting and Facebook—I can give members who want to follow me my details later on. Of course, the issue is important not just to politicians and ministers. It is particularly important to today’s young people, including those who live in rural Scotland, because young people seem to organise their social lives through their PCs and their smartphones in a way that none of us would have predicted just a few years ago. How far we have come from the days when, in a former life, my colleague Stewart Stevenson programmed computers that filled a room but had only 1kB of memory—I wanted to use that analogy before Mr Stevenson reminded us of his experiences in his wind-up speech. How far we have come in a short space of time can also be illustrated by looking back to the early days of this Parliament, in 1999, when the first mobile phones that could send e-mails had just come on to the scene. Twelve years later, we all know how important BlackBerrys, iPhones and so on are to the business community, to politicians and to people in many other walks of life, who think that they simply could not do without them. Digital communications, mobile phones and broadband internet access are game-changing innovations. That is why connectivity will be the cornerstone of our activity on rural development throughout the session. A connected Scotland will be the ideal location for investment. Our digital strategy sets out to ensure that all of Scotland, regardless of how rural or remote it might be, will have access to next-generation broadband by 2020, and that significant progress will be made by 2015. We believe that a world-class broadband infrastructure will underpin the digital economy in Scotland, and we want to equip all our rural communities with what they need for future economic development in the 21st century. Our focus must be on ensuring that rural areas are not left behind as next-generation broadband is rolled out across the nation. Early projects are already under way in the Highlands and Islands and in the south of Scotland. Highlands and Islands Enterprise is leading the first of those projects, which is receiving UK Government broadband funding, following a successful bid from the Scottish Government. It will deliver next-generation broadband to around 50 towns and communities spread over the region, which include key population centres, areas of low employment and towns with fragile areas. The procurement phase started earlier this month, and it will run for a year. We will begin to see improvements being delivered in the region within the six months after that. At the other end of the country, a co-operative association between Dumfries and Galloway, the Scottish Borders and Scottish Enterprise is developing a strategic broadband plan for the south of Scotland. The project is being championed by the chief executives of two councils in particular; they are fully behind the project team. The next-generation broadband pilot in Annan is exploring how the existing network that is available to public sector buildings can be opened up to the wider rural community. That has been made possible by a grant of almost £0.25 million from the Scottish Government. Close working between the Scottish Government and both project teams is ensuring that they receive the support that they need from us. We want to replicate that right across the rest of Scotland and we are working with many local authorities and the enterprise agencies to take forward a more strategic national broadband plan. That will, in turn, be informed by the findings from John McClelland’s recent “Review of ICT Infrastructure in the Public Sector in Scotland”, which confirmed that we need to collaborate across the public sector to get maximum value from our resources. He also tells us that we need to ensure that our public sector investment has wider benefits for the citizens, which is exactly the kind of project that is being explored in Annan. Progress is being made, but there is a lot more to be done. Thankfully, the Scottish Government already has an impressive track record of getting Scotland connected. As a direct result of our intervention, basic broadband availability is now at 99 per cent in Scotland. Our digital strategy and national broadband plan seek to address directly many of the concerns that were raised in the speak up for rural Scotland consultation that I mentioned earlier. Earlier this year, I chaired a rural broadband summit to highlight our objective and promote solutions to ensure that rural Scotland joins the global connected economy. That was followed just last week by a rural broadband workshop, and we will continue to work in partnerships with all Scotland’s local authorities, enterprise agencies and other stakeholders to develop regional broadband strategies that will, in turn, contribute to the national broadband plan that I mentioned earlier. We need to ensure that rural Scotland accesses as much of the available United Kingdom funding as possible to enable all that to happen. As members will be aware from last week’s debate, the UK Government has allocated £530 million to the roll-out of next-generation broadband for rural areas. We all agree that it is important to work very hard to obtain the best possible share of that fund for Scotland. At the same time, we must be realistic and accept that, during the coming years, that will be only a fraction of the overall cost of getting next-generation broadband to all of Scotland’s rural communities. That is why it is important to look at how we can leverage in additional funding, including, of course, from the private sector. That will be critical if we are to maximise the return from our investments. Connecting rural Scotland to a 21st century communications network will connect rural Scotland to the world. That is true of not just broadband, but mobile phone coverage, which is something that we should push higher up the agenda over the coming years. Scotland’s 3G coverage is only at around 66 per cent of the population and 41 per cent geographically. The roll-out obligation for the current 3G network required only coverage of an area in which at least 80 per cent of the population of the UK live. The figures show that a large proportion of the missing 20 per cent, who are not covered, happen to live in Scotland. Last year, the UK Government directed the Office of Communications to increase its obligation to 90 per cent. Although that is a welcome move, it will still leave many people across large parts of Scotland with inadequate coverage. We have to demand a specific coverage obligation for Scotland. We want 90 per cent of Scotland to be covered to match the UK’s 90 per cent, but we should at least have a specific target for coverage in Scotland. That would allow the Parliament to have an informed debate about the future, and to hold operators to account at the same time. The Scottish Government is working with the industry and Ofcom to identify further barriers to increased mobile phone coverage in rural Scotland, and to make improvements as we implement our own strategy during 2011 and beyond. Ofcom’s own recently published research quoted families who are living in rural Scotland talking about the challenges that they face. For example, one lady who lives on a Highland estate in the north of Scotland said, “we get post three times a week ... I would expect telecommunications to be of a greater standard.” She went on to say, “it would be a great benefit to get better coverage.” The situation even affects public safety. Gamekeepers cannot always be contacted when they are out in the glens. As part of the Ofcom research, someone said when interviewed, “I have had to call the helicopter out twice when people haven’t returned, when a direct call to their mobile would have done it.” Those are some of the challenges that people living in rural communities face day in, day out, due to a lack of connectivity, whether mobile phone coverage or broadband. The current arrangements allow for incremental improvements, such as mast sharing and roaming agreements, which are helping to improve coverage in areas that are poorly served by the networks. However, I am absolutely clear that although we are doing all we can on this very important matter, we are restricted in what we can do. Telecoms policy, including mobile coverage, is reserved to the United Kingdom Government. That includes matters relating to the licensing of mobile telecoms operators and mobile coverage obligations. As a consequence, the Scottish Government has limited power to require mobile operators to extend their coverage beyond the current levels. The UK position on mobile coverage does not meet the needs of rural Scotland. It is vital that the UK Government works with us to develop the specification for the next generation of mobile services—the 4G mobile network. Indeed, 4G has huge potential to overcome many of the current problems experienced by rural communities, whether families or businesses. We see that as crucial in getting next-generation broadband coverage to Scotland’s rural areas. We must not repeat the mistakes that we made with 3G roll-outs. In the absence of any interventions, I shall touch on a couple more themes. The potential benefits to Scotland from the next round of digital innovation can be very substantial indeed. Digital advances are vital to the development of our world-leading creative industries, our life sciences, remote health care and distance learning. In my constituency of Moray we are piloting digital health care. If that is to work, it is vital that we have up-to-date infrastructure for broadband and mobile services. That is one example of how people’s health can benefit if we take advantage of 4G in the years ahead for rural Scotland.

I agree that those opportunities should be taken. That is one area where progress has been made. Many public sector buildings are now giving local communities access to their information and communication technology infrastructure. I agree that there is probably a lot more to do. The John McLelland review, which I mentioned earlier, referred specifically to the issue of how we use public sector resources to help citizens, not just the public sector. Improving digital infrastructure, skills and participation will help us to build on all the successes and provide opportunities throughout Scotland for every community, whether remote, rural or whatever, to flourish. That has to be the aim of everyone in this Parliament. A Scotland that is well connected digitally is a Scotland that is well connected economically and intellectually. It is also about attracting inward investment, allowing our businesses, particularly in rural areas, to become much more competitive by raising their productivity, and driving innovation and international trade. A rural Scotland punching above its weight in contributing to our success brings better jobs and more vibrant communities that attract and retain young people and families. This debate goes right to the core of the issue of how we attract and retain young people and young families in jobs in rural Scotland. If we get the ICT infrastructure that we need in the coming years, that will be a huge step forward for Scotland and for the quality of life of people living here. I commend the motion to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Government’s wish to see a rural Scotland that is outward looking and dynamic with a diverse economy and active communities and notes that key to that is the Scottish Government’s Digital Strategy, which wishes to see all businesses and people throughout Scotland, particularly in all rural areas, fully connected to the global economy through next generation broadband access and mobile phone coverage.

Rhoda Grant seems to connect the Scottish Government’s digital strategy to the fact that other small countries in Europe are able to legislate on targets. Does she accept that we cannot, in our digital strategy for Scotland, commit to legislate, as unfortunately that power lies with Westminster and not yet with this Parliament?

Next week, we will publish our renewables route map, which will set out how our targets will be met through the deployment of all forms of renewable technologies, onshore and offshore, to deliver a transmission network that is capable of bringing vast amounts of clean, green energy to our markets in the United Kingdom and Europe. Through the route map, the Scottish Government will commit to developing new strategies for microgeneration and for agri-renewables to reflect the growing significance of small-scale generation and opportunities for local and rural ownership of energy.

The member asks a very good question. Our water resources have a big role to play in helping us to meet our clean, green energy needs, and we have already announced assistance for such community projects. In April 2011, the Scottish Government launched the community and renewable energy scheme loan fund, through which loans of up to £150,000 are available for the pre-planning consent stages of developing proposals, as well as free advice and support from a nationwide network of local development officers. That scheme has a budget of £5.3 million for supporting community-owned projects and £2.4 million for supporting projects that are owned by land managers. All of the loans have a built-in condition that community benefits must be part of the project. There is now quite a lot on the table to help communities to move forward with their local energy schemes.

I support the sentiments behind the issue that the member raises. Our farmers and crofters are sitting on massive natural resources that could be used for renewable energy and other things, to provide extra income and more self-sufficiency for them. That is a good thing, and we all support it. In my answer to Stuart McMillan, I mentioned that we are supporting the development of an agri-renewables strategy. I would be happy to think about how the needs of crofters—if crofters have distinctive needs—can be built into that.

I could not agree with the member more. The lack of grid connections and the proper infrastructure in Scotland is a huge running sore, which is why the Government has, on numerous occasions, made strong representations to both the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets and United Kingdom Government ministers. We must sort out this matter if we want to make the most of Scotland’s fantastic renewable resources.

We have allocated an extra £4 million to zero waste Scotland this year to support the development of food waste infrastructure, which includes support to local authorities to develop food waste collections. I make it absolutely clear that achieving high levels of recycling, including recycling of food waste, is the most effective approach for local authorities to adopt.

The easy answer to John Pentland’s fair point is that many local authorities are just getting on with it. Given that landfill tax is set to rise to £80 per tonne by 2014-15, it is in the financial interests of Scotland’s local authorities to divert their waste from landfill. Food waste collections should be part of that—about 10 councils already run such collections. Many councils are getting on with it, including Fife Council, which has just come up with innovations. As part of this week’s national recycle week, I saw new ways of collecting waste that have been adopted in one part of Fife, which mean that the recycling rate will increase from just under 40 per cent—if I remember the figure correctly—to well over 60 per cent in that area, and close to 70 per cent in some streets. Many councils are using innovative ways to improve recycling rates and save our environment.

I have made numerous representations to UK ministers on the issue in recent years. An adjudicator is crucial to safeguarding the long-term future of our producers and suppliers. I am pleased that, at long last, the UK Government finally published a draft bill on a groceries code adjudicator in March. However, I think that I speak for many people in Scotland and in the Parliament when I say that I am disappointed that the process has taken so long. We will continue to urge the UK Government to establish the groceries code adjudicator as soon as possible.

Yes. It is important that everyone in the food supply chain receives a fair share of every pound that is spent on food in Scotland. That is why we have for a long time pressed for much more transparency and for someone to enforce the contracts between the players along the supply chain. The most powerful part of that supply chain appears to be the big retailers. It is important that our primary producers who are at the bottom of the supply chain—our farmers, crofters and fishermen—have someone who stands up for them, to ensure that they are not abused. It is a pity that the UK Government’s proposals do not offer the new adjudicator enough teeth to perform their job properly. As I said, we are also disappointed about the delay in introducing the legislation.

I agree with the member, who makes a good point. Our dairy farmers and milk producers are some of the producers who are most affected by the imbalance in power across the supply chain. We know that to our cost in Scotland, where many milk producers have gone out of business. The adjudicator will certainly have a role to play. The European Union’s high-level group on milk has made proposals on the dairy sector, which we are pushing the UK Government to adopt in the UK, to help Scottish producers. Dairy farmers in Scotland are proposing measures of their own to help to make the industry more viable, which we are looking to support if we can.

Guidance to local authorities on the new carbon metric was published on the Scottish Government’s website on 15 March. The carbon metric will be phased in and will replace weight-based figures as a means of measuring local and national recycling performance by April 2013. The carbon metric provides an understanding of which materials have the greatest carbon impact on our environment. Its key purpose is to prioritise the recycling of materials with the greatest benefit to fighting climate change.

Notwithstanding the member’s point, we should praise Fife Council for leading many other councils in Scotland with its high recycling rate. I have the official figure with me, so I can correct the assumption that I made in answer to a previous question that the recycling rate in Fife was just under 40 per cent by saying that the rate is 47 per cent. As I said, the council has put in place innovations that will increase the rate to 70 per cent in some streets in Fife—that is up at the highest levels in the whole of Europe. We should congratulate Fife Council on the progress that it has made. Transport of waste over considerable distances for treatment is an issue that is not unique to Fife but one that faces many councils in Scotland. The answer is to ensure that we get the infrastructure in place in the coming years. I would like plastics reprocessing to take place in Scotland, and I think that members would like much more reprocessing to take place in Scotland, which would create jobs and ensure that some of the recyclable materials that are collected would not have to travel over long distances.

The Government carried out a formal stakeholder consultation during the most recent review of the Scottish Agricultural Wages Board, in 2009. We are committed to reviewing the wages board again during this parliamentary session.

I can certainly give the member a guarantee that trade union involvement will be at the heart of any review that we carry out. I know that he has a long record of standing up for the retention of the wages board and has strong views on the issue. As he will be aware, previous Administrations have also reviewed the wages board and we will carry out our review during this parliamentary session.

The Scottish Government is working closely with the south of Scotland alliance to ensure that it makes the strongest possible proposal to secure broadband delivery UK funding for its broadband plan. My officials are part of the project team developing the bid and are advising it on how best to secure funding for the project.

I hope that the south of Scotland alliance is successful in its bid for the funding. The Scottish Government will, of course, work closely with the alliance on that. Of course, as the member suggests, if much more resource had been dedicated to the subject, all rural communities would be on an equal footing and we could equip all our rural communities with what they need for future economic development in the 21st century.

Since 2008, the Scottish Government has provided more than £3 million of funding through the Scotland rural development programme and the European fisheries fund to support the growth of the food and drink supply chain across southern Scotland.

I agree. Some of the excellent initiatives that the member mentions have received elements of Scottish Government funding to help them to move forward. There is fantastic food and drink produce in the south of Scotland. I am sure that, between today and Sunday, we will all sample some of it at the Royal Highland Show. I thoroughly enjoyed starting to do so this morning. Part of the ambition of the first ever food policy in Scotland, which was brought forward by the Scottish National Party Government, is to join up all the different agendas. The member rightly pinpointed some of the agendas that food and drink in Scotland impact on. That is why we can make the most of Scotland’s food and drink potential.

It is fitting that today’s debate is on the eve of the Royal Highland Show. The Highland is the foremost showcase for the best of rural Scotland. I urge members to pay a visit in the next few days. They will have a great time and will be bowled over by what they see and, of course, what they taste. Scotland is blessed with a wealth of natural resources: the land that we farm, which gives us a sense of place; the seas that we fish; and the wind, waves and water that give us the power that our society needs today and into the future. Our natural resources are central to our Government’s purpose of sustainable economic growth. As we look to the future and the big issues that face society here in Scotland and globally, we are reminded that Scotland has an abundance of the natural resources that most nations would give anything to possess—resources that can deliver energy security, food security and water security, and that can help us to tackle climate change and to safeguard biodiversity. The key challenge that we face is how to make the most of that natural jackpot not only to maintain but to improve our people’s quality of life, at the same time as protecting our precious environments—in short, how we ensure that sustainable development is at the heart of everything that the Government does. We know that the success of our economy is dependent on the success of our environments. In the face of increasing demands for our natural resources from this country and abroad, we need to get the balance right. That is why we have developed our first land use strategy, to understand what our land can deliver for Scotland and to identify the conflicts between competing uses. Now that we have that framework in place, we will deliver the action plan to ensure that, in the years ahead, what happens on the ground reflects the principles that are reflected in the strategy. It is not just land that we need to protect. As we are a maritime nation, our seas are also crucially important to our future. The Marine (Scotland) Act 2010—our first marine act—is now in place, and we have much to do to take forward our marine planning regime and to establish marine protected areas, to ensure that we safeguard our precious and unique marine environments. If we play our cards right, we can ensure that our natural resources deliver prosperity for our rural communities. Our natural resources and spectacular environment can help rural Scotland to punch above its weight in its contribution to our nation’s success. That is the picture that was described in “Our Rural Future”, the result of the “Speak Up for Rural Scotland” consultation that we held a few months ago. One of the key opportunities that was identified in the document illustrates how we can ensure that our rural communities benefit directly from the resources on our doorsteps. Our rural land and seas are set to produce renewable energy that will power our nation in times ahead. Our consultation told us that the opportunities that the renewables revolution presents must not be squandered and that there must be direct and lasting benefit from renewable energy for communities throughout Scotland. Onshore, we need to ensure that all renewables projects deliver community as well as national benefits. Increasingly, Government funding for renewables is linked to community benefits. Our communities must also enjoy the benefits of our absolutely massive offshore renewables potential. Let us be clear—the windfall from our offshore renewables sector must stay here in Scotland, not bypass our communities on the road to London. We do not want to repeat the missed opportunity of North Sea oil. That is why today the Scottish Government has delivered to the United Kingdom Government our case for control over the Crown estate, asking for it to be devolved to Scotland, where it belongs. Our communities should not only enjoy the benefits of our renewables potential but have the opportunity for ownership. For example, with help from a Government grant, communities in Westray in Orkney drew up plans to install a wind turbine that will generate almost £4 million for them over its 25-year lifespan. They will use that income to tackle fuel poverty, extend provision at the local learning centre and improve the golf course. As a Government, we will support community empowerment and confident communities. Of course, we want to do much more than has been happening. Producing clean energy is one way in which communities can tackle climate change, but other ways exist, as our climate challenge fund has shown, so we will maintain that fund for the next five years.

It is important to site all renewables projects in the right locations. Many local authorities have plans to ensure that that happens. If Neil Findlay has concerns, he might wish to speak to his local authority. The Scottish Government has given local authorities guidance on the issue. Renewables are one way of tackling climate change. It is fair to say that, in the previous parliamentary session, climate change took centre stage. We have in place world-leading legislation to support the low-carbon economy of the future and our focus now turns to delivery. The Minister for Environment and Climate Change and I will work with colleagues across the Government and the Parliament to ensure that all sectors in Scotland make their contribution. The report on proposals and policies to meet our targets up to 2022 demonstrates that we can do that. We still look for higher ambition from the UK and Europe to match our own. The minister has just returned from the environment council meeting, at which he emphasised that point. It is fair to say that Scotland is being recognised across Europe for its breadth and depth of thinking on climate change. To tackle climate change and save valuable resources—financial resources and precious materials—we as a society must continue our journey towards a zero-waste Scotland. Our ambitious zero-waste policy is making great strides in preventing waste from going to landfill and the methane emissions that that causes. An innovative carbon metric, which classifies waste by emissions impact rather than weight, is a European first. How we deal with waste is vital, but land use in Scotland—particularly agriculture—is responsible for many of our emissions. Thankfully, our farmers have shown commitment to reducing on-farm emissions. Implementing sustainable farming practices can save money, cut carbon and reduce volatile input costs for businesses. Early action can achieve millions of pounds’ worth of benefits to the industry by 2022, and we must continue to support our farmers’ efforts. Farmers’ commitment to responsible stewardship of the land provides the raw materials for an industry that is worth £11 billion a year to the Scottish economy. Scottish food and drink’s record growth in recent years has been buoyed by increased recognition of premium Scottish produce at home and abroad—for instance, overseas exports rose by 28 per cent between 2007 and 2010 alone. We can all agree—as members will find out at the Royal Highland Show this week—that Scotland’s larder is second to none. The world cannot get enough of our salmon, our whisky and our venison—and so the list goes on. We all want the Scottish brand to be the number 1 choice here and overseas. I am delighted to tell Parliament today that, to support that, we will deliver an extra £1.1 million of funding to Scotland Food & Drink. That funding will support events such as Scottish food and drink fortnight and cultural highlights such as the Royal National Mod and the Edinburgh book festival, to ensure that they showcase Scottish food and drink. That will all help to promote Scotland as a land of food and drink. That fully deserved reputation depends in part on Scotland’s unspoiled environment and natural resources. Our food and drink sectors depend on the raw materials produced by our primary producers, such as our farmers and crofters, who also care for the environment that provides our food and drink with such a clean and green image. That is why we need the right policies and the right support to be in place for our primary producers. That means that we need to get the best outcome possible from the formal negotiations that start later this year on the common agricultural policy’s future. As I explained to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee this morning, I will argue for fairness, flexibility and simplification, as our priorities for the future of the CAP. We deserve a fair share of the overall budget and we need the flexibility to address the diverse circumstances faced by Scottish farmers, including those working less favoured area land. We need a simplified CAP, which cuts red tape and delivers a proportionate monitoring and enforcement regime. Scottish agriculture is distinct and requires distinct solutions. The United Kingdom coalition may want to slash the CAP budget and get rid of the direct payments that our farmers and crofters, particularly in our more remote areas, depend on, but this Government will demand a fair share of the CAP budget, demand food security and make the case for on-going direct support to keep, for instance, our hill farms and more fragile areas afloat. Some reform is needed, but it is clear that Scotland’s farmers are not safe in UK hands. That is why this Government—our ministers and this country—needs to be in the room in Brussels when the crunch decisions are taken.

Once the UK Government lets Scotland into the room, I will welcome that. We will request a meeting with our UK counterparts to agree a greater role for Scotland in European negotiations. We believe that we have a mandate from Scotland to seek a bigger role and that is what we will do. We will also seek a greater role in fisheries negotiations. Reform is needed if we are to guarantee a sustainable industry, a healthy marine environment and vibrant fishing communities. The Commission will come out with proposals in July and implementation will follow in 2013. We have some lead-in time and we must use that potential for influence as much as possible to promote Scotland’s priorities, but our guiding principle is clear: Scotland needs greater responsibility for fisheries management returned from Brussels to here. We have long argued for a simplified and decentralised fisheries policy and for the return of decision-making powers to Scotland, where they belong. We are making the case to give us the tools to help us to tackle, for example, the scandalous waste of fish discards in our waters. We are making inroads by working together with the industry, but if we get more of a say, we can do more. We also need to protect our historic fishing rights. Europe is talking about unrestricted international quota trading, which will hand our historic fishing rights into the hands of multinationals based overseas. That will spell doom for many of Scotland’s traditional fishing industries. It is vital, in relation to both the CAP and the CFP, that Scotland has a strong voice in Europe. That includes Scottish ministers not only attending but participating in European Council of Ministers meetings. The people of Scotland spoke last month and, on this and other issues, the UK Government now has the opportunity to show that it has listened. The future holds massive opportunities for rural Scotland. We have the resources to power our economy, feed our people and underpin successful rural businesses. There are challenges, such as high fuel prices and constrained budgets, but we have a marvellous environment that spawns many of the raw materials that can drive our economy forward, and here in Scotland we have many of the raw materials and resources that are becoming increasingly scarce in the rest of the world. If we use those sustainably, empower our communities to secure the benefits and connect our communities to the rest of the world, we can offer rural Scotland and the whole nation a brighter future.

Will the member give way?

I thank the member for his belated permission to intervene. Does the member agree that one of Brian Pack’s most excellent recommendations is for headage payments for livestock producers in the more remote, less favoured areas? Is the member willing to have a word with the Tory UK Government in London about supporting that recommendation as well? So far, it does not appear to be doing so.

The transferring of responsibility for the administration of the Crown estate and control of the revenues to the Scottish Parliament is a priority for the Scottish Government. It is our firm belief that we must reform the outdated and outmoded arrangements for management of the Crown estate to help Scotland to realise the massive potential of our enormous offshore renewable energy resources and our sea bed.

On the member’s point about the location of that post, I agree that it would be absurd if the post relating to our offshore renewables were to be based in London and not in the north of Scotland, where many of the resources are. That highlights a lack of transparency and the Scottish Parliament’s lack of control over the Crown Estate’s activities. I hope that the Crown Estate makes the right decision—I know that it is being lobbied hard by interests from the north of Scotland, the member’s constituents and the member himself. On Michael Moore’s handling of the Scottish Parliament’s call for the devolution of the Crown estate, it would be seen as a breach of faith if he did not support an issue that his party has been campaigning for north of the border. The Parliament and Scotland will be aware that intense negotiations are going on between the First Minister and the United Kingdom Government in which the top priority is devolution of the Crown estate, so that this country and no one else will benefit from the exploitation of the natural resources on our doorstep.

As we stated in our manifesto, we will keep the Forestry Commission as a publicly owned body and our forestry estate as an asset for the nation.

I am aware of the case in Jim Hume’s region, although I tell him not to believe everything that he reads in the papers. Wind blow in Scotland’s forests is of course nothing new; we are one of the windiest countries in the world and the forestry sector deals with that on an on-going basis. Although I respect the fact that the handsome majority that the SNP achieved at the election gives us a mandate to deal with a range of matters, even this Government cannot stop the wind blowing in Scotland.

Existing animal welfare legislation is under consideration and the Government will announce its intentions about whether to replace some of the older animal welfare acts and make new regulations under the 2006 act later in the year.

As I have indicated, we are considering our next steps for promoting animal welfare in Scotland. The member has raised a number of important issues and I am open to representations from her, other colleagues and, indeed, outside organisations. Of course, many of the issues that she has raised are not as clear-cut as one might think on first impression; for instance, evidence on the treatment of wild animals in circuses is, as she will be aware, inconclusive. However, we are paying close attention to what is happening south of the border, as it might have implications for what happens north of the border. I guarantee to the member that we have an open mind on these matters.

Yes, because the Scottish Government believes that Scottish public assets should be managed in Scotland for the benefit of Scotland’s people. Devolving responsibility for the Crown estate to the Scottish Parliament would ensure that its management was aligned with Scottish Government priorities and we could use the revenues generated to benefit rural Scotland directly in delivering sustainable and vibrant rural communities.

I certainly agree with the member’s sentiments. The Crown estate is outdated and outmoded, and responsibility for it should be transferred to the Scottish Parliament. Also, it is estimated that up to £100 million of revenue has flowed south since devolution. Most members would agree that that money should have stayed here in Scotland to benefit our own communities. Unfortunately, some of the other parties at Westminster voted this week against the Scottish National Party’s attempt to have responsibility for the Crown estate passed to the Scottish Parliament, including, shamefully, the Liberal Democrats, who are campaigning north of the border for devolution of the Crown estate but voting against it at Westminster.

The Scottish Government believes that discards of fish are a scandalous waste of resource brought about in large part by the failed common fisheries policy. We are committed to working towards the elimination of discards, and the initiatives that we have developed with the Scottish fishing industry and environmental non-governmental organisations are leading the way in Europe. I hope that the Commission will now make proposals that build on Scotland’s achievements.

I remind the member, in light of his inaccurate information, that the current compliance rate among the Scottish fleet has never been better and that the Scottish white-fish fleet has halved the discard rate of North Sea cod since 2008, which is the biggest achievement in Europe. I suggest to the member that he investigate those facts and get his information right in future.

We have taken this final opportunity to propose a few minor drafting adjustments to the bill to tidy up some loose ends. Amendments 1 and 2 amend section 22A(3)—I have just noticed that Jamie McGrigor is yawning already. [Laughter.] They amend section 22A(3) to remove any doubt that the risk designation that is given by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency continues to apply during any appeal to the Scottish ministers against that risk designation. Amendment 4 simply corrects the reference in section 26(6) to notices under subsection (4), which is incorrect, to notices under subsection (5). Amendment 13 makes section 67(4) clearer by inserting a specific reference to section 69, which is already referred to, rather than retaining a slightly opaque reference to that section. Amendment 15 simply clarifies that appeals against the issuing of stop notices may be made to the Scottish ministers. Amendment 20 corrects a reference in section 105 so that it refers to the whole of the act as intended, rather than just part 3. I trust that members will support those amendments, and I move amendment 1. Amendment 1 agreed to. Amendment 2 moved—[Richard Lochhead]—and agreed to.

Section 22A was inserted at stage 2 to enable reservoir managers to make appeals to the Scottish ministers against SEPA risk designations. An appeal may be made after a SEPA review of its initial risk designation for a reservoir. The Institution of Civil Engineers raised concerns about the consultation requirement in section 22A. Section 22A requires the ICE to be consulted before ministers determine an appeal, but the ICE does not think that it is appropriate that it should be consulted on individual cases. As a result, we agreed to lodge an amendment to address its concerns. Amendment 3 removes the consultation requirement, and in its place enables ministers, when considering risk designation appeals, to appoint—at their own expense—an engineer to make a recommendation on the risk categorisation. The appointed engineer must be a member of an appropriate panel. That ensures that engineering expertise can still be sought by ministers if circumstances warrant it. A similar issue arose after stage 2 in relation to the amended section 71. The power in section 71 was altered at stage 2 to allow SEPA to issue stop notices to reservoir managers who are carrying out an activity that is causing a risk of an uncontrolled release of water, even when the activity itself is not an offence. To ensure that stop notices in those circumstances are issued only when it is necessary, the bill was amended to require SEPA to seek expert engineering advice before issuing such a stop notice, by consulting the Institution of Civil Engineers. The ICE has concerns about that consultation provision that are similar to those that I have just mentioned in relation to section 22A appeals. Amendment 14 therefore replaces the requirement to consult the ICE with a requirement to appoint a suitably qualified engineer to make recommendations about a stop notice. It also requires SEPA to take into account any recommendations that are made by that engineer. We have consulted the ICE on amendments 3 and 14, and it is content with the proposed changes. I move amendment 3. Amendment 3 agreed to. Section 26—Appointment and removal of panel members Amendment 4 moved—[Richard Lochhead]—and agreed to. Section 45—Inspections: duties of inspecting engineers etc

During our continuous dialogue with the Institution of Civil Engineers, a number of final adjustments to sections 45 and 48 were identified as necessary to ensure that the different types of measures in the interests of safety are appropriately supervised, monitored and reported on. Amendment 5 separates the supervision of maintenance safety measures from other safety measures and places them under the monitoring regime of the supervising engineer rather than the inspecting engineer. As required maintenance measures in the interests of safety are likely to be on-going, we believe that monitoring by the supervising engineer is more appropriate. The remaining amendments in the group are consequential on that change. Amendment 10 makes it a duty for the supervising engineer to monitor the reservoir manager’s compliance with any maintenance safety measures that are specified in an inspection report. Amendments 11 and 12 require the supervising engineer to notify the reservoir manager and SEPA of any failure and to report on it in their annual written statement. I move amendment 5. Amendment 5 agreed to. Section 46—Inspection reports: compliance

We amended the bill at stage 2 to enable a different suitably qualified engineer to supervise specific measures in the interest of safety that are set out by an inspecting engineer in an inspection report. That will allow flexibility for a reservoir manager to appoint an engineer who is different from the inspecting engineer to perform a particular task. That is intended to promote competition and best value for the benefit of the reservoir manager. If another engineer is appointed by a reservoir manager, that engineer will be known as the “other qualified engineer”, as stated in the bill. Although the stage 2 changes were made in collaboration with the Institution of Civil Engineers, it has suggested a number of final adjustments to section 46 to enable the new provisions to work more effectively in practice, and we believe that the amendments are appropriate. Amendment 7 enables the other qualified engineer to issue the final compliance certificate as well as the interim compliance certificate. A final certificate is issued when all the measures that are specified in the inspection report have been undertaken by the reservoir manager. Amendment 7 means that either the original inspecting engineer or the other qualified engineer can issue the final certificate. Amendment 8 allows a single final certificate to be issued that covers interim certificates that were given by different engineers. Amendment 9 makes it a requirement for the inspecting engineer or the other qualified engineer to send copies of interim and final inspection compliance certificates to SEPA. Amendment 6 is simply a consequential amendment. It deletes section 46(2A), the content of which is included in amendments 8 and 9. I stress that the amendments in the group do not alter the basic requirements that are already on reservoir managers to ensure that the safety measures that are identified in an inspection report are taken. The amendments simply adjust the procedures for their supervision and the certification of their compliance. I move amendment 6. Amendment 6 agreed to. Amendments 7 to 9 moved—[Richard Lochhead]—and agreed to. Section 48—Supervising engineer and monitoring of reservoir Amendments 10 to 12 moved—[Richard Lochhead]—and agreed to. Section 67—Enforcement notice: safety and other measures Amendment 13 moved—[Richard Lochhead]—and agreed to. Section 71—Stop notices Amendment 14 moved—[Richard Lochhead]—and agreed to. Section 72—Stop notices: procedure Amendment 15 moved—[Richard Lochhead]—and agreed to. Section 94—Affording of reasonable facilities to engineers

As I explained in relation to the previous group, stage 2 amendments to the bill enabled a different suitably qualified engineer, who is known as the other qualified engineer, to supervise specific safety measures in an inspection report. The amendments in the previous group enhance the role of the other qualified engineer, allowing them to issue the final compliance certificate as well as interim compliance certificates. To reflect the stage 2 amendments and the stage 3 amendments in the previous group, amendments 16, 18 and 19 have been identified as desirable consequential amendments to recognise the role of the other qualified engineer. They amend sections 94, 97 and 98 to give other qualified engineers facilities to carry out their functions, to allow ministers to make regulations about their role, and to require SEPA to be notified about any revocation of their appointment. I move amendment 16. Amendment 16 agreed to. Before section 96A

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am doing my best to keep up here. Amendment 17 seeks to address concerns that were raised at stage 2 by Peter Peacock and the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee about ensuring that appropriate guidance is in place to assist with the bill’s implementation. I agree that guidance will be essential to successful implementation and have therefore lodged amendment 17, which seeks to place a duty on the Scottish ministers to produce guidance on part 1, including guidance on any orders or regulations. The Scottish ministers must also keep the guidance up to date and, after a review, republish the guidance with appropriate revisions. Moreover, before the publication or republication of guidance, ministers must consult SEPA, the ICE and any appropriate persons. I hope that the amendment addresses Peter Peacock's concerns and I ask Parliament to support it. I move amendment 17.

I just want to thank Peter Peacock for contributing to the debate. Amendment 17 agreed to. Section 97—Assessment of engineers’ reports etc Amendment 18 moved—[Richard Lochhead]—and agreed to. Section 98—Notice to SEPA of revocation of appointment or resignation of engineer Amendment 19 moved—[Richard Lochhead]—and agreed to. Section 105—Offences by bodies corporate Amendment 20 moved—[Richard Lochhead]—and agreed to.

If only the passage of all bills were as smooth, Presiding Officer. I am, of course, delighted to open the debate. I hope that all members are still feeling bright and breezy after stage 3 and I look forward to their speeches in this closing debate on a bill that has been with us for a number of months now. We are putting the finishing touches to what will prove to be an essential long-term piece of legislation for Scotland. A particular spirit of collaboration has led to the bill passing through Parliament in a very constructive and positive way. Because of its very technical nature, there have been more than a few opportunities for humour at various stages of the process, but that has not prevented the members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee from recognising the real impact that the bill will have on public safety in Scotland. Their diligent scrutiny should be roundly praised. At this point, I record my thanks for the hard work that has been put in from all quarters. The resulting legislation will equip Scotland with a modern, innovative approach to regulating reservoirs without placing unnecessary burdens and additional bureaucracy on reservoir managers. We must recognise the truly catastrophic impact that the failure of a reservoir could have. In the very same week in October 2010 that the bill was introduced, a breach of a dam in Hungary cost 10 lives and injured a further 120 people. Although the impact of the Hungarian incident was exacerbated by the fact that the dam was holding back a vast quantity of toxic sludge—something that would not be held in reservoirs in this country—the sheer volume of liquid released was, on its own, enough to cause considerable damage. Moreover, I remind members, if anyone needs reminding, that in 2008 we had our own near failure of a dam at the Maich fishery in Renfrewshire. A disaster that had the very real potential to cost lives and cause extensive damage to infrastructure was only narrowly averted but, even so, people still had to be evacuated. The Maich fishery was not regulated because it was below 25,000m3 in capacity; that would have been remedied by just one of the significant and necessary changes to reservoir legislation that are made by this bill. The incidents in Hungary and Renfrewshire, to name but two, provide stern warnings that we must do everything in our power to stop anything like that ever happening in Scotland. I have no doubt that this legislation will do exactly that. It will promote a safer, stronger and more secure environment for the people of Scotland. It might sound like a cliché, but it is entirely true: this bill will help to protect lives. At this point, I am required to signify Crown consent for the bill. Before proceeding, and for the purposes of rule 9.11 of the standing orders, I wish to advise the Parliament that Her Majesty, having been informed of the purport of the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill, has consented to place her prerogative and interests, so far as they are affected by the bill, at the disposal of the Parliament for the purposes of the bill. I express my gratitude to all those who have been involved in the bill’s development. We have had vital input from many individuals, organisations and public bodies. I thank specifically the members of the reservoir safety stakeholder group, who have been a major influence in shaping the bill. I am sure that that influence will continue throughout the implementation stages. Their expert advice has been very valuable. I thank my colleague Roseanna Cunningham, the Minister for the Environment and Climate Change, for the considerable progress that she made with the bill, and record my appreciation of the work that has been done by the members of the Finance Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee, and particularly the members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee. Their scrutiny of the bill has been thorough, well thought out and constructive, and I was pleased that we all agreed on most—indeed all—of the issues at stage 2. I also thank the clerks, who have worked diligently to support the bill and all the work of their respective committees. Finally, I place on record my sincere thanks to my officials in the bill team and the Government and parliamentary legal teams. They have worked extremely hard on a demanding technical bill with a challenging timetable. I am sure that dissolution of the Parliament cannot happen soon enough for our committee and Government officials and that they are looking forward to the six-week break that is just around the corner. I am confident that everyone who has worked on the bill agrees that the collaborative approach that has been taken with stakeholders and across party lines has been central to its successful development. I will outline some of the bill’s key elements, although I am sure that many members are familiar with them by now. The bill will introduce a risk-based system of regulation. Reservoirs with no communities living downstream of them will be subject to less enforcement and will benefit from the reduced costs that that will deliver. Reservoirs that are close to communities and businesses will be more meticulously assessed to provide the highest possible level of protection. We have reduced the minimum volume for regulation to 10,000m3. That change has been based on the most up-to-date technical advice available from the Institution of Civil Engineers. All managers of reservoirs of more than 10,000m3 will be required to register their reservoir with the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. That registration will be free to reservoir managers for the first six months. Once the reservoir manager has registered, SEPA will categorise the reservoir as high, medium or low risk. The categorisation will determine the level of regulation. The enforcement role will pass from local authorities to SEPA, which will hold the details in a central register of all reservoirs in Scotland and will receive details of maintenance and construction work from the appointed engineers and reservoir managers. Finally, we have retained the role of the Institution of Civil Engineers, which has been a crucial feature of reservoir safety for more than 30 years. Its knowledge will continue to be invaluable to reservoir managers and, of course, SEPA. To conclude, I believe that the bill will position Scotland’s system at the forefront of risk-based systems of reservoir safety and that it will make a significant and lasting difference to those who are at risk of flooding from reservoirs. It will protect Scotland’s people and property for many years to come, and I believe that it deserves the support of every member. I am pleased to move, That the Parliament agrees that the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill be passed.

Will you be buying the book?

I thank members for their beneficial and constructive contributions to the debate. I know that Elaine Murray was concerned that we would be making so many speeches on the subject so close together, and she was worried that we had long memories. My constituents are always telling me that politicians have very short memories, so I assure her that we have forgotten what each of us has been saying. I pay tribute to Peter Peacock, who is standing down from Parliament shortly. I do not know whether this is his last debate in Parliament, but it is certainly his last debate on my ministerial responsibilities. Even though we have not agreed on every issue, I pay tribute to the valued and thoughtful contributions that he has made in this chamber and in committee. [Applause.] He referred to the fact that I will perhaps mention this debate in my memoirs. I was going to give him a special mention, but he went on to say that he would not buy a copy of my memoirs, so I have dropped that idea. Nevertheless, I wish him all the best for the future. John Scott was brave to take on Stewart Stevenson. He was clearly not aware that Stewart Stevenson is the Scottish National Party group’s chief scientist as well as our chief medical officer and chief engineer—as John Scott will have learned from the response to his intervention. He should have known better than to take on Stewart Stevenson. It was good to have a speech by a real scientist, Elaine Murray, on the Labour benches, during the debate as well. It has given me great pleasure to bring the bill to the chamber. It has perhaps not been seen as the most attention-grabbing piece of legislation, as members have said, but we can all agree that it is a vital requirement for Scotland’s future and the safety of our communities. Indeed, the main reason why we decided to strengthen reservoir safety legislation was to ensure that we, in Scotland, never see the sort of attention-grabbing headlines that are prompted by reservoir breaches elsewhere in the world. As I mentioned at the start of the debate, the consequences of a reservoir failing are too unthinkable for us not to do everything in our power to prevent that from ever happening. We are in agreement that there is a need for new and improved reservoir safety legislation if we are to continue properly to protect the people of Scotland. However, legislation alone will not make the necessary improvements to reservoir management. The Scottish Government has set in place a framework for taking forward the implementation of the bill. That work will build on the strong partnerships that have been developed during preparations for the bill. A number of issues were raised during the debate, and I will try to address one or two of them. Maureen Watt and others asked whether there will be enough engineers to carry out the work that the bill will require. We have taken the issue seriously and referred to it at stage 2 when I attended the committee. I advise those members who raised the issue that, in 2010, 60 people were appointed or reappointed to the reservoir panels. The figure for 2010 was slightly higher than the average for a number of years, which was only 40. We can all agree that the trend is going in the right direction and that we can take some satisfaction from those statistics. Reference was made to the costs that will be borne by reservoir managers and owners as well as those who will have to carry out improvements to meet the obligations that will be placed on them. I reiterate what I said at stage 2 about SEPA’s charging regime. SEPA will publish a detailed consultation paper on any proposed charging schemes and any schemes will have to be signed off by Scottish ministers. Members can rest assured that we will take into account the nature of the charging schemes when they are put in place.

We will certainly take that into account to ensure that the charging schemes operate on a cost-recovery basis and are proportionate. The other financial issue to be raised was to do with the financial provision that the Government proposes to make to assist small businesses with the new costs that may arise as a result of the bill. We amended the bill at stage 2 to allow financial help to be provided to the owners of newly regulated reservoirs in extreme cases. We all accept that the bankruptcy of any business is in nobody’s interests. If we did not help, that might result in the cost of the required maintenance falling on the public purse in any case, which is why we lodged the amendment on that. However, any such assistance will not be required before 2015 at the earliest, when we will know the risk categories of all reservoirs of between 10,000m3 and 25,000m3. By then, the risk will have been assessed and the scale of any necessary remedial action will be known. I should also make it clear that the level of necessary financial assistance will be assessed on a case-by-case basis to ensure that it goes to those who really need it. It will, of course, be a temporary measure to assist with any capital investments. Thereafter, reservoir managers should be able to maintain their reservoirs to ensure that the safe standards that they have reached continue. If not, they should consider whether they wish to own or manage reservoirs in the future.

Financial assistance will be given only to those who have to bring their reservoirs up to the standards that are required and those who are in the circumstances that I have just outlined. No other financial assistance is envisaged. I see that I am just about out of time, so I will say simply that the bill brings new opportunities and, of course, new challenges. I want to thank everyone for their enthusiasm and their commitment to the bill as we meet Scotland’s reservoir management needs in the 21st century. Many members have mentioned climate change and other threats to Scotland. The bill is about making Scotland a safer place, and I commend it to Parliament.

Scottish Government officials are involved in regular discussions with a range of stakeholders concerning support for renewable power from organic waste.

I commend Fife Council for the progress that it has made in that regard. It is unacceptable that, as a country, we produce 2 million tonnes of food waste a year, 0.5 million tonnes of which goes to landfill. I commend Fife Council’s projects and urge other councils to follow its lead. I assure the member that, through the zero waste plan that the SNP Government has adopted, we want to promote anaerobic digestion and other waste treatments that turn food and other organic waste into renewable energy and heat. A lot of work is under way to achieve that.

Each year since 2007, the Scottish Government has secured mackerel quota from the south-west England hand-line group to ensure a summer mackerel fishery in the south-east of Scotland. In 2010, 149 tonnes of quota was acquired and landed. I expect that arrangement to continue in 2011. No sprat fishing is currently allowed in the Firth of Forth under European Union regulations.

The member will be aware that one reason why the sprat fishery is closed is that we do not want to put at risk the North Sea herring fishery. However, if the Fife fisheries development group believes that the issue is worth pursuing, it should request the appropriate scientific derogations to allow it to undertake some scientific surveys. If it comes to the Scottish Government with the evidence, we will certainly take that up with the European Union.

For the purposes of rule 9.11 of the standing orders, I wish to advise the Parliament that Her Majesty, having been informed of the purport of the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill, has consented to place her prerogative and interests, so far as they are affected by the bill, at the disposal of the Parliament for the purposes of the bill.

I met a delegation of leading Scottish dairy farmers on 7 February 2011 to discuss what options are available to alleviate the pressures in the supply chain.

I thank the member for raising that important issue. He is right: the supply chain is not working for the primary producer. I see in today’s press that the chair of the NFU’s milk committee is saying that each dairy farmer is losing around 4p a litre, which is evidence of the difficult situation that dairy farmers face. As the minister in Scotland, I am putting pressure on John Scott’s colleague in the United Kingdom Government in London to deliver a supermarket ombudsman—it was promised, but we are still waiting for it. That is one tool that could give more power to the primary producer in the supply chain. As soon as that is delivered, it will be a step forward. However, I appreciate that there is a lot more to do. On what the European Union is doing, a number of proposals from the high-level expert group on dairy could help dairy farmers in Scotland. The member raised the issue of compulsory contracts between the suppliers—the dairy producers—and the customers, which in this case are the retailers and processors. The UK Government is taking the position that there may not be compulsory contracts south of the border. If the UK Government takes what could be a weaker position, it would make it more difficult for us to take a stronger position north of the border, because the same processors and retailers operate on both sides of the border. I urge the member to speak to his colleagues at Westminster about that issue.

The member raises good points. Scotland is standing together on the issue, because we all want the country to be able to produce its own milk. The way things are going, that may not be the case unless we can give more profitability and power to the primary producers in the supply chain. I very much welcome all parties in Parliament continuing to work together towards that objective. We all have to work together to put pressure on the regulatory authorities, which in this case are the UK Government and the European Union, both of which say they will take measures. However, they should recognise that there is a huge sense of urgency about the issue. With each week that passes in Scotland, it appears that more dairy farmers are leaving the sector. We cannot allow that to continue. The alarm bells should be ringing in the UK Government and at EU level.

The Scottish Government and its agencies are actively supporting the food and drink sector’s growth to meet the target of £12.5 billion turnover by 2017. Since 2007, the industry has seen record figures, with turnover increasing by more than £1 billion during 2007-08 and exports increasing by 15 per cent between 2007 and 2009. It is our intention, through our national food and drink policy, to continue to help the sector to fulfil Scotland’s potential and be a world leader.

I agree that labelling is extremely important. We are lucky in this country in that we have a reputation for top-quality food and drink. The more we can communicate that message to the consumer—as the member indicated, not just in this country but elsewhere in these islands and overseas—the better it will be for our primary producers, processors and everyone in the food and drink sector in Scotland. At the moment, the food regulations are making their way through the European Parliament and the European Commission. The Scottish Government is pushing for mandatory country-of-origin labelling right down to the Scottish level for all meat and dairy products, which would be a huge step forward in supporting those sectors.

Specific elements of the common agricultural policy have been discussed at meetings of the UK delegation ahead of agriculture and fisheries council meetings in Brussels, most recently on Monday of this week. There was a general discussion on the CAP at ministerial level during a breakfast meeting in London on 19 November last year, which was also attended by ministers from the other devolved Administrations.

I certainly agree that the UK Government’s policy on the future of the CAP poses a massive threat to Scotland’s farmers and crofters and, indeed, the wider food and drink sector, which we have just discussed. The UK Government is pushing a policy that may be appropriate for the home counties in the south of England but which is certainly not appropriate for Scotland’s needs and circumstances. If that policy takes hold here, it could be disastrous for Scotland. The member referred to the UK Government’s recent submission to the European Commission on the future of the CAP, in which it said: “There must therefore be a very substantial cut to the CAP Budget”. That is the last thing that Scotland’s farmers and crofters need in the current circumstances. We should resist such a measure, because it could lose Scotland hundreds of millions of pounds. As the member said, the people who would suffer the most are farmers and crofters in the more outlying areas of Scotland.

As we have just discussed, the effects of DEFRA’s recommendations could be disastrous for Scottish agriculture. The Pack inquiry highlighted the need for direct payments and limited coupled payments to continue, and the Scottish Government supports that. Research suggests that removing pillar 1 direct payments from the CAP would cause significant declines in livestock numbers throughout Scotland.

As the member highlights, additional support for farmers and crofters in the more remote areas of Scotland in what are known as less favoured areas is essential. It is extremely important that we continue to provide such support, and that is certainly the Scottish Government’s policy. As the member identifies, there are countries such as Scotland that have specific needs and circumstances that must be met by the new common agricultural policy. For instance, in Scotland, unlike England, 85 per cent of land has less favoured area status and two thirds of it is suitable only for rough grazing. South of the border, only 15 per cent of land has LFA status. That indicates the difference in the scale of the challenges that are faced north and south of the border. Getting the CAP and future support mechanisms right is very important to sustaining agriculture in rural Scotland.

The Food Standards Agency’s proposals on the reform of meat hygiene charging were recently consulted on. In Scotland, all meat plants, including rural abattoirs, were contacted to seek their views. The FSA is analysing the responses to the consultation before its board makes recommendations to ministers. The Scottish ministers will then look closely at the potential impact on rural abattoirs and the wider meat and agricultural sectors. Parliament will of course be aware that the Scottish Government expressed concerns in recent years about the impact on such sectors of full cost recovery of meat inspection charges under the previous proposals.

The key to ensuring that rural abattoirs remain viable in this context is to ensure that the final proposals that are adopted by the FSA are appropriate for rural abattoirs and the wider meat and agricultural sectors. That will certainly be the aim of the Scottish Government. The member will also be aware that, in its proposals, the FSA takes into account the needs of rural and smaller businesses where there is a lower throughput of livestock. Indeed, it is obliged to do so by European Union regulations.

I would certainly be in favour of there being more abattoirs in rural Scotland, but we must recognise that they have to stack up commercially to be viable. There have been examples of new rural abattoirs in Scotland in recent years, and the Scottish Government offers support for their establishment where it can. Clearly, each case must be treated on its merits, but the abattoirs have to be commercially viable.

I am always willing to look at solutions in a Scottish context, and I will continue to do so in relation to meat hygiene inspection charges. The member highlights again the need to ensure that the FSA proposals are appropriate. He will be aware that, in those proposals, the FSA has given a commitment to reduce its own cost base before it passes on any higher charges to the meat sector in Scotland. I repeat that we will look closely at the impact of the proposals on the viability of Scotland’s meat sector.

The Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill will introduce a new regime to better protect the people of Scotland from the risk of flooding from reservoirs. In recent years, incidents at reservoirs here and in other countries have led us to review Scotland’s legislative framework for reservoir safety. For instance, in August 2008, a near failure of the dam at the Maich fishery in Renfrewshire required the evacuation of residents downstream, the closure of public roads and the activation of emergency works to prevent an uncontrolled release of water. That near miss had the potential to cost lives and to cause extensive damage to property and infrastructure but, as the Maich was less than 25,000m3 in capacity, it was not regulated under the Reservoirs Act 1975. The 1975 act is based solely on capacity. Under it, all reservoirs of more than 25,000m3 in capacity have the same inspection and supervision requirements. The bill will introduce a new system of regulation that is based on the level of risk that each reservoir poses. That makes sense for two reasons. First, reservoirs with no communities downstream will be subject to less regulation and will benefit from significant savings. Secondly, reservoirs that are close to businesses and communities will be more rigorously assessed to provide the highest level of protection. We have set the minimum volume for regulation at 10,000m3 on advice from the Institution of Civil Engineers that that is the level above which an uncontrolled release of water could cause injury or death. All managers of reservoirs that have a capacity of more than 10,000m3 will have to register their reservoir with the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. Registration will be free for the first six months to encourage reservoir managers to register early. Once a reservoir has been registered, SEPA will classify it as high, medium or low risk. If reservoir managers are unhappy with the risk classification of their reservoir, they can appeal. Managers of low-risk reservoirs will need only to register, to keep basic records, to put up an emergency information board and to produce a simple flood plan. Managers of medium-risk reservoirs will, in addition, have to appoint a qualified civil engineer to supervise the reservoir and will have to have the reservoir inspected when that is recommended by the supervising engineer. High-risk reservoirs will have to be inspected regularly. With high and medium-risk reservoirs, the reservoir manager will have to carry out any mandatory repairs and maintenance works that are specified by the inspecting engineer to maintain the safety of the reservoir. The role of the Institution of Civil Engineers has been a central feature of reservoir safety for more than 30 years. The knowledge of the engineers will continue to be invaluable to reservoir managers and to SEPA, which will take on the enforcement role for reservoir safety from local authorities. SEPA will hold a central register of all reservoirs in Scotland and will receive details of any maintenance and construction work that is taking place from the appointed engineers. Under the 1975 act, local authorities are constrained by the limited enforcement mechanisms that are available to them. Professor Richard Macrory’s 2006 review on improving regulatory compliance found that, in many cases, criminal prosecution may not be the most effective sanction. The report concluded that flexible and risk-based tools were more likely to achieve the desired outcome. That is why we are creating a more flexible and dynamic system of enforcement, in line with the Scottish Government’s aim of better regulation. That will give SEPA access to a more appropriate and effective range of tools to encourage compliance, which should further guarantee the safety of the public. During the bill’s development, we have taken steps to engage with the public, key stakeholders and other experts. The overwhelming majority of respondents to our public consultation were in favour of the implementation model that is set out in the bill. Our reservoir safety stakeholder group has provided crucial insight into reservoir safety issues and has contributed to the bill’s development. I take the opportunity to thank the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee for its diligent scrutiny of the bill and for its support for the bill’s general principles. I also thank the many individuals and organisations who gave evidence to the committee. I would like to mention some of the key points that the committee raised in its stage 1 report and some of the amendments that the Government intends to lodge at stage 2. The committee highlighted the potential costs that may be incurred by individuals, but the cost of maintaining a reservoir properly should be balanced against the potential cost to a reservoir manager of dealing with the consequences of the failure of a poorly maintained dam. The bill is designed to reduce the risk to the public and to reservoir managers. We are open to considering whether provision for financial assistance should be made but, for the reasons that I have mentioned, we will do so only in the limited circumstances in which the costs of bringing a reservoir up to the required standard are clearly impossible for a small business owner to pay. The committee also highlighted areas in which some unintended practical problems could arise as a result of the current drafting. To that end, I confirm that we are considering lodging amendments at stage 2 to resolve those issues. The proposed amendments will, for example, require SEPA to consult the ICE before publishing guidance on the risk designation process; remove the requirement for an inspecting engineer to be appointed at all times; and make it clearer that routine maintenance that does not affect the safety of a reservoir is not mandatory. I have given a rapid account of the bill’s main features and some of the key changes that we expect to introduce at stage 2. We will work closely with local authorities, SEPA, Scottish Water and others to put in place the appropriate regulations, guidance and resourcing to take that forward. In conclusion, the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill represents a crucial step towards achieving our aspiration of managing effectively the risk of flooding in Scotland. Through the bill, Scotland will introduce a modern system of risk-based reservoir management that puts public safety first. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill.

I have been instructed to speak slowly, so I am sure that this will be at a good pace, Presiding Officer. I am pleased that we have had an opportunity to debate the Reservoirs (Scotland) Bill, which ultimately will make Scotland’s reservoirs much safer. We have more than 1,000 reservoirs in Scotland, of which about 660 are currently regulated. The bill will capture many of those that are not currently regulated, to protect the public. As John Scott said, we all like bills that capture the public’s imagination. Although we cannot pretend that this bill does so, the consensus is that it is an important bill nevertheless, given the consequences of flooding for communities and property. In the past few days and weeks, we have seen such consequences from around the world on television. When a reservoir collapses or is breached, it can devastate communities, as we know from our history and from events around the world, most recently in Hungary, where there was the dreadful incident to which members have referred. As Elaine Murray said, the bill complements the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Act 2009. That shows that the Scottish Parliament is taking account of extreme weather conditions, our changing climate and the potential impact of flooding. Wherever possible, we must provide a safeguard against those. I am pleased with the debate and I am grateful to all the members who have spoken for their insights. I assure the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee that the Government and I, as the cabinet secretary, will respond to its stage 1 report. As Sarah Boyack said, we have not had much time to do so, as the debate has happened rather soon after the publication of the report. The debate has been helpful, but I intend to give a much more detailed response to the committee in the coming days. I hope that that gives members some comfort. I am confident that our proposed stage 2 amendments will go a long way towards meeting the majority of the committee’s remaining concerns. It has been good to explore some of those concerns in more detail during the debate. We will reflect on the concerns that have been expressed as we prepare the stage 2 amendments. Further thanks are due to the various stakeholders who have helped to shape the bill through their expertise and active participation in the consultation process and all the meetings that have taken place. All that good work emphasises the widespread support for the bill, which is important, and the agreement on the need to put in place a new and robust system for managing reservoir safety in Scotland. As members have requested, we will continue to work with all stakeholders as we proceed. I will address some of the issues that members have raised. The issue of costs crept up in a number of speeches and we heard about the potential for those who own or run reservoirs to incur more costs. I am keen to point out that, if someone cannot afford to maintain their reservoir in a safe condition, they should perhaps not own a reservoir in the first place. As a society, we want only those who can afford to own and run reservoirs to do so—they need to be able to put in place the measures that must be taken to protect the public and local communities. If someone cannot do that, perhaps they should not own a reservoir in the first place. The new regime will help reservoir owners who, because their reservoir is low risk, have perhaps been paying a bit more than they need to. They might not have to pay so much in regulatory costs in future because the new regime will be risk based. Whereas some people will have lower costs, others who are brought into the regime will face costs for the first time. We do not want any business to go bankrupt because of the potential costs of keeping a reservoir safe. That is why I indicated in my opening speech that, as the Minister for the Environment and Climate Change said to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, we will consider whether there is a case for assisting people in the specific circumstances in which they have a small business that would be made bankrupt because of the regulatory costs that they have to pay.

There will be costs for owners and managers of reservoirs that have a higher risk designation under the new regime. SEPA will work with all owners of reservoirs to address issues of extra cost. Much effort will be put in to ensure that we minimise the costs, but someone has to pay somewhere. Many members mentioned the financial burden on SEPA of taking on board responsibility for the bill. The Government will work closely with SEPA to ensure that it has the necessary resources. As we all know, SEPA has been going through several changes in recent months and years. In effect, those changes are making it a good-value and hyper-efficient organisation, which is what we all want.

A lot of work is taking place between SEPA and the Government. Much of the cost to which the member refers will be picked up by SEPA and the Government. However, as the member knows, SEPA will be able to recover much of those costs from reservoir owners and managers—that is only right—and the fee scales are laid out in the bill’s financial memorandum.

I know that costs are of great importance to many committee members. I will clarify that point, as well as the numerous individual debates within it, when I write to the committee in response to its stage 1 report. Bill Wilson said that there was total agreement on all issues between the Government and members in the chamber. It was perhaps unfair of him to say that, because it meant that we did not have much to debate. However, I assure him that, although I welcome the positive stage 1 report, there are a couple of issues in it on which the Government does not agree. The first is recommendation 13, which suggests that weirs “should be excluded without qualification”. We do not think that that is appropriate because in Scotland, certain large structures that hold back large quantities of water are commonly described as weirs rather than dams. We do not want weirs to escape regulation so it is important that we do not rule them out. The second is recommendation 19. In response, I note that although we would encourage reservoir managers to take out public liability insurance, we do not support making that compulsory because it would place additional ancillary costs on some reservoir managers. Indeed, our position is supported by the Association of British Insurers. I say to Bill Wilson that there are some issues on which there are grounds for debate in the weeks ahead. Peter Peacock discussed the implications of the bill for the planning system in respect of the role of reservoirs. “Scottish Planning Policy” already states: “Planning authorities must take ... flooding from all sources ... into account when preparing development plans and determining planning applications.” Reservoir flood inundation maps and flood risk management plans will therefore inform decisions alongside other planning considerations. We have to keep a close eye on that. If there is further need to update guidance to local authorities, we will ensure that that happens. Bill Wilson discussed the weighting of the various criteria that are considered when the level of risk posed by any individual reservoir is being looked at. I put it on record that risk to life will always be of paramount consideration, but environmental and cultural heritage also have to be considered because they are important factors when the risk posed by any individual reservoir is looked at. Jim Hume mentioned the threshold of 10,000m3 and asked how that threshold was decided and what its significance is. The threshold is based on advice from the Institution of Civil Engineers and others, but regulations under the bill will allow any reservoirs with a smaller capacity to be brought within the bill’s ambit. We do not want to bring reservoirs into public ownership—Jamie McGrigor touched on that, among other issues. We prefer reservoirs to be owned and managed by the private sector, organisations or individuals, as long as they are aware of their responsibilities to keep their reservoirs safe. That is the really important point. Ironically, I see the Presiding Officer indicating that I am now running out of time, so I will finish. We all recognise that the bill is an important one that will protect the public. We recognise that work is still to be done, which is why the bill will be implemented in a couple of stages and why the new reservoirs that it will capture have until 2015 to be registered—we have a few years between now and then to capture them. The bill is also about taking on board the potentially devastating consequences for communities, life and property of flooding caused by a breach or collapse of a reservoir. I commend the bill to Parliament and thank members for their contributions today.

The Scottish Government published its statement “A Digital Ambition for Scotland” in October 2010. It makes clear our aspiration for next generation broadband to be available to all by 2020. The statement is being followed with a comprehensive digital strategy for Scotland, which will be published soon. The strategy will contain specific actions that will enable the achievement of our ambition and ensure that rural and remote communities are not left behind. Scotland is set to reap early benefits from the United Kingdom Government’s recently published UK-wide broadband strategy. We successfully made the case for one of the UK’s rural market testing projects for next generation broadband to be located in the Highlands and Islands. That project is expected to bring more than £30 million-worth of infrastructure improvements to the region. Work is also under way to progress a substantial project in the south of Scotland in a second bidding round. Additionally, in December 2010, the Scottish Government announced the five winning bids for the LEADER broadband challenge fund, under which €1 million will be distributed to support small-scale rural broadband projects.

I would be delighted to examine closely the project that Nanette Milne mentions. It is clear that ensuring that we are connected to the next generation of broadband is the way forward for economic development in rural and more remote communities in Scotland. If we can learn any lessons from what is happening elsewhere, we should certainly learn them, but we should also build on our existing success in Scotland.

We welcome the helpful and constructive contributions that the Royal Society of Edinburgh—and, indeed, Reform Scotland—is making to the digital Scotland debate. My officials and the Scottish Government are carefully considering a number of recent digital reports. I will be happy to write to Willie Coffey about our current engagement with the UK Government. I alluded to some of it in my first answer to Nanette Milne. The issue is certainly shooting up the economic development agenda in Scotland and we welcome all contributions from all organisations.

Mike Rumbles highlights the reason why we need the broadband providers to get their act together in certain parts of Scotland. There are still a few communities that are not connected, as he highlights in the case of his constituency. Of course, any schemes that we have run in Scotland have been oversubscribed, which shows the level of demand. If there were ways in which Mike Rumbles’s colleagues in the UK Government could identify more resources to help the Scottish Government to connect rural Scotland to the next generation of broadband, that would be most helpful. It is clear that demand exists; the Government and the Parliament have to find the resources to meet it.

I congratulate Alasdair Allan on securing this important debate and I congratulate members on their eloquent speeches. The fact that so many members spoke in the debate illustrates the strength of feeling in all parties on the proposals that we are considering. As many members said, the issue is of vital importance to all Scotland and not just to areas in which coastguard maritime rescue co-ordination centres are under threat of closure. Maritime safety in our waters must surely become compromised if the measures are implemented. We all want to pay tribute to all our coastguard staff and volunteers the length and breadth of Scotland. Last year they responded to more than 3,500 calls and they often act in dangerous and harsh conditions to help people in peril. As we heard, two of my constituents, who are based at RAF Lossiemouth, were taken to hospital in Inverness today by the coastguard helicopter that is based in Stornoway and, as we speak, local coastguard teams are in action to look for debris in the water. The UK Government’s announcement on the future of our valuable coastguard service came as a shock to the Scottish Government, given the absence of formal discussion on the matter beforehand. Of course, this is not the first time that maritime issues of concern to Scotland have been handled in such a cavalier fashion. A similar thing happened in October last year, when the withdrawal of UK Government funding for the emergency towing vessels was announced. Following the loss of the Tornado off the west coast of Scotland today, the local emergency towing vessel is in action with the coastguard teams to look for debris. All that takes place against the backdrop of the loss of the Nimrods and their search and rescue capabilities. That, in turn, is linked to the closure of RAF Kinloss, where the air rescue co-ordination centre that currently tasks the coastguard helicopters is based. There is also continuing uncertainty about the future provision of the UK search and rescue helicopters. As we are a maritime nation, all the uncertainty about maritime safety is of huge concern to all members, as John Farquhar Munro and others said. It is difficult to comprehend the justification for the scale of the proposed cutbacks. In relation to the coastguard service, it is unacceptable that none of the devolved Administrations is even listed as a consultee, even though existing co-ordination centres in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are all under threat of closure. I assure members that the First Minister intends to write to the Prime Minister to express frustration that matters with clear implications for Scotland are not being handled more sensitively. Members may be aware that I have already written to my counterpart in strong terms on those issues. The Scottish Government will also make a submission to the formal consultation in due course. Opposition to the proposed closures is gaining momentum. The First Minister recently met Alasdair Allan and Tavish Scott to discuss their joint campaign to save the coastguard centres at Stornoway and Lerwick, but we should not forget the other centres at Fife Ness and Greenock, which are also under threat of closure, and the campaigns that they have initiated. Duncan McNeil highlighted Greenock, and Fife Ness was raised by members from Fife and elsewhere. We are acutely aware that, as well as having implications for maritime safety, the closures would have an impact on jobs. Only Aberdeen appears to be safe from closure and, if the plans that have been set out are implemented, Scotland’s coastguard co-ordination centres will be reduced from five to two, only one of which will be open 24 hours. The MCA proposes a reduction in the total number of co-ordination centres in the UK from 18 to eight. Scotland has 60 per cent of the coastline and 60 per cent of the total sea area of Great Britain, but the proposed reduction would leave us with only 25 per cent of the co-ordination centres. In anyone’s book, that spells danger. It is not a good ratio for Scotland. I repeat: only 25 per cent of the co-ordination centres would cover 60 per cent of the sea area. We are all concerned about the risks that would arise from a greatly reduced co-ordination service. Under the proposals, watchkeeping officers might become overloaded with work. The fear must be that, if they had to respond to a major maritime incident, seemingly minor incidents in the area might not be handled as efficiently as they are at present and, as a consequence, lives might be put at risk. As many members said, the issue is the potential for lives to be put at risk at sea or on our coasts. It is important that coastguards acquire and maintain local knowledge. That must surely be difficult if they are located hundreds of miles away from the scene of an incident. Some people argue that centralisation could result in the better use of more sophisticated equipment and in cost savings, but that should not happen at the expense of losing valuable expertise about remote and often inaccessible coastal areas with often unfamiliar names. Indeed, it has been suggested that the subtle differences in the sound of Gaelic place names that are in common use in the north-west of Scotland and the Western Isles are likely to cause difficulties. Alasdair Allan, Tavish Scott, Alasdair Morgan and other members paid a lot of attention to the need for local knowledge, and some of the potential problems that they described would arise. There must surely also be an issue for the voluntary coastguard rescue service. Although we are told that the service is not under threat of being cut back, it is proposed that the existing management arrangements be altered, and no regard appears to have been paid to the impact that the centralisation of the co-ordination centres may have on local volunteers’ morale. Like all the members who spoke in the debate, the Scottish Government has real concerns about the UK Government’s ability to manage the valuable public service that the coastguard co-ordination centres provide. Financial savings appear to have been placed before maritime safety. The Scottish Government will seek views on how the coastguard service can best be managed in Scotland. That includes considering the merits of devolution—as suggested by John Farquhar Munro and others—which would align the service with the other blue-light functions that operate in Scotland. As we know, Scotland stands poised to reap the rewards of clean, sustainable energy from our seas through the installation of numerous offshore wind, tidal and wave-power developments in the future. As other members have said, that is just one reason why we will undoubtedly see an increase in marine activity, which may bring with it associated risks for other mariners. It is therefore crucial that the valuable service that our coastguards provide is not compromised in any way. We need a coastguard service in modern-day Scotland that is capable of delivering for Scotland, and we need to keep safe those who use our seas and coasts. The debate has shown that members stand united to achieve that aim. The Scottish Government, all political parties and the Scottish Parliament can work together to ensure that we secure the best outcome for Scotland in the weeks and months ahead. Meeting closed at 18:10.

Mr McGrigor will be aware from the correspondence that he and I have shared of all the arguments surrounding deer farmers and the single farm payment scheme. I regret that they do not have automatic access to the scheme and, furthermore, I am sorry that there is nothing that can be done under the existing direct payment regulations to change the position. I have asked our future common agricultural policy stakeholder group, which includes a Scottish deer farming representative, to discuss the recommendations arising from the inquiry into future support for agriculture in Scotland and to consider this particular issue. I assure the member that the Scottish Government will consider carefully any issues that are raised by the stakeholder group when we write our considered response to all the inquiry's recommendations.

I assure the member that we have considered the issue carefully. He will be aware that single farm payment entitlements are based on subsidies that were received during the  2000 to 2002 reference period and that Scottish deer farmers, along with many other unsupported sectors, do not receive single farm payments under our historic system of payments. That was not signed up to by this Administration; it was, of course, signed up to by previous Administrations. I assure the member that we take the contribution that the venison industry in Scotland makes very seriously. At the moment, supply cannot keep up with demand, which is a good sign for that top-quality Scottish product. We have funded a number of feasibility studies into ways in which we can help to grow the venison sector, and we are working with the sector in that regard. Of course, from 2013 onwards, there will be a new common agricultural policy, which will give us the opportunity to influence who receives support in the future.

I believe that these annual fishing debates are very important and, unlike members in some other Parliaments elsewhere, I believe that we should continue to hold them because the speeches that we hear are extremely valuable. I welcome the fact that we all recognise the importance of sea fisheries to Scotland in this year and throughout the 21st century and accept that we have to maintain that contribution to our economy and, of course, secure a good food resource for our people. It is also recognised that this is not just about the fleet at sea but about the onshore sector, where tens of thousands of people work in processing that fantastic food product. We need to keep things in perspective. I noted Jamie McGrigor's comment that it would be a disaster for the west coast of Scotland if there was a 15 per cent cut in the nephrops quota. No one is more concerned than I am as minister when such cuts are proposed but, given that the likely uptake on the west coast is about 60 per cent this year, it does not keep things in perspective to say that that cut would be a disaster for the west coast. We must also remember that, rather than declining, the value of sea fisheries rose by 10 per cent last year. We have spoken about the pressures facing the white-fish sector, but even the commercial fishery value rose by 5 per cent. Fishing remains important to Scotland, and we must keep things in perspective, but we must not  mask some of the serious problems facing particular sectors in Scotland's fishing communities. The sectors are trying to cope with the fallout of the recent recession at the same time. As members have said, we face an important fortnight. This week, we have the talks between the EU and Norway, where the approach to many of the key stocks of importance to Scotland will be discussed and agreed. Then we have the remaining few days of the coastal states negotiations over the mackerel stock. Scotland's view is that we must not reward irresponsible behaviour by the Faroese or Icelanders, but we need a deal. No one will win if there is no international agreement in the years ahead. Let us learn from what happened to blue whiting. In 2005, catches of blue whiting were just under 2 million tonnes; by 2011, the advice is that the TAC should be set at 40,000. That is a 98 per cent reduction, because the same states that are involved in the current coastal negotiations on mackerel failed to reach an international agreement about blue whiting. Does any member seriously want that to happen? I say to Tavish Scott and others that we will take a hard line, but our line will also be that we should get an agreement. That is the best thing to do for the long-term viability of the stock; otherwise, in Shetland and elsewhere in Scotland, the £335 million annual income that we receive from the fishery will simply disappear. We cannot allow that to happen.

I certainly agree that we must not reward irresponsible behaviour, and we continue to take that line with both the Norwegians, who are a major player in the negotiations, and the EU. I was surprised to learn that the Scottish Government and fishing industry were being attacked for agreeing initiative upon initiative over recent years. I remind members that most decisions on Scottish fishing communities are taken in Brussels. Most are completely ill fitted to Scotland's needs and are therefore damaging to Scotland's fishing communities. It is the duty of the Government and the Parliament to work with our fishermen to mitigate the damage from the common fisheries policy. That is why we have had a number of exciting initiatives over the past few years—to mitigate the effects of the bad decisions  and to help our fishing communities to cope with them. I say to Peter Peacock that, in opposition, I was critical of the previous Administration's policies in some regards because, too often, I felt that we just shrugged our shoulders and swallowed what Brussels threw at us rather than coming up with some innovative solutions to ease the pain for Scotland's fishing communities. I did not disagree with everything, but that is certainly the basis of some of my disagreement with previous policy. Let us consider the cod recovery plan. The approach to that has been attacked as being new initiative after new initiative. The cod recovery plan proposed a significant cut in days at sea for the Scottish industry. The Scottish Government took the decision that we should introduce a new scheme that rewards fishermen with more days at sea for adopting certain conservation measures. That has worked: this year, we have managed to give fishermen 40 per cent more days at sea than they would have had if the buy-back system had not been put in place. Are Tavish Scott and the others who attacked the initiative after initiative suggesting that we should have just lain back and accepted a 40 per cent cut in days from Brussels? I take the attitude that we should use our imagination and ingenuity and do what is right for fisheries conservation and for our fleet to mitigate some of the damage from Brussels. We will do that with a range of other measures, too. Finally, on catch quotas, we are trying to mitigate one of the biggest flaws in the CFP: discards. We all hate discards—the public, the scientists, the environmentalists and the fishermen themselves hate discards—and we are trying to do something about it. I say to Tavish Scott that that is why we have another new initiative: to do something about it and not let year after year to go by with massive discards in the North Sea. Catch quotas are based on the fact that the scientists, when they are working out the total allowable catches, assume that there will be a significant level of discards—in the case of cod, 30 to 40 per cent. The catch quota for cod is based on allowing the fishermen to land some of that fish, which the scientists say is going to be taken out of the sea anyway, as opposed to having to dump it, in return for stopping discards overall. In other words, if we allocate a share of what is expected to be discards to landing quotas in return for having no discards, more fish are left in the sea and the fishermen benefit because they can land more fish. That is what this new initiative is about. The 17 vessels that have participated in the cod catch quota throughout this year have had £1 million of extra income from that initiative. There is therefore a financial incentive for the fishermen, who benefit from taking part in the scheme, and it  is good for fisheries conservation as well. It is not a panacea; it will not fix all the industry's ills. However, we are pushing to expand the scheme to haddock one day soon and to increase the number of vessels that are participating in the cod catch quota this year. This is a challenging time for Scotland's fishing communities, but there is a lot of optimism in the fleet. It is a very valuable industry for Scotland and we must fight hard at the annual negotiation to get the best possible deal, which is what the Scottish Government will be doing.

You are taking part.

I am pleased to open our annual fisheries debate, as we approach the end-of-year negotiations. At this moment, my officials, along with our fishing leaders, are in Bergen, working together to represent Scotland at key European Union-Norway negotiations. I record my appreciation—and no doubt that of the Parliament—for the role played by our fishermen and the huge contribution that the wider industry makes to Scotland in economic terms and by bringing some of the world's best seafood to our tables. Our fishermen work in some of the harshest conditions and, every year, some of them make the ultimate sacrifice doing the job that they love. The industry has to put up with everything that is thrown at it by distant regulators, commentators and, dare I say it, politicians. Despite the challenges, the value of sea fisheries in Scotland rose by 10 per cent last year and is now worth £443 million to the Scottish economy. Last year, 74 per cent of Scotland's key commercial fish stocks were set in line with scientific guidance. That compares with only 40 per cent in 2001. The Scottish industry has a reputation for being the most innovative and conservation oriented in Europe. Society needs fishermen to play a greater role in fisheries management and conservation—to demand not just the right to fish but the right to conserve. It is clearer than ever that we cannot achieve sustainable fisheries in Europe until we reform EU fisheries management. The biggest indictment of the common fisheries policy is surely the discarding of huge amounts of marketable fish. We all agree that the CFP is now a busted flush. Fishermen, politicians, scientists and environmentalists such as WWF Scotland and RSPB Scotland are all now speaking with one voice to Brussels. The CFP has failed Scotland, society and our environment. We are all now united in a serious attempt to bring an end to discards. Last year, action by Scottish fishermen and the Government reduced discards of North Sea cod by one third—an achievement unmatched by any other European fishing nation. That illustrates Scotland's determination to reduce discards. It is galling, therefore, that one third of cod caught in the North  Sea is still discarded. That is more cod than can be legally landed by our vessels. That dreadful waste is a by-product of the common fisheries policy and the failure of the cod recovery plan, which also needs radical surgery and is extremely ill-suited to the mixed fishery that we have in Scottish waters. Under the cod recovery plan, all member states will suffer cuts regardless of their contribution to reducing mortality. That is wholly unacceptable. Scotland's sacrifices should be recognised. That is what we seek in this year's negotiations. A further unworkable flaw in the cod recovery plan is the days-at-sea regime, which we have sought to mitigate over the past three years. Effort limitations only really impact on around 150 of Scotland's 1,500 vessels. Another 300 affected vessels have a sufficient effort to allow them to fish as before. However, for those affected, the restrictions are unfair and counterproductive. Most of all, fishermen should be allowed to land more of what they catch and should not be forced to discard it. Thankfully, a few Governments, including those in Denmark, Scotland and the United Kingdom, are working together to establish a system that can stop that disgrace—a system in which a fully documented fishery incentivises fishermen to avoid discarding. In return, they are free from the restrictive effort limits and are awarded a higher quota. Removing discards from the equation means that we can reward vessels with higher landings for removing fewer fish from the sea in the first place. It is a rare win-win situation in fishing management. Successful pilots have been run in Scotland and Denmark and more are planned or are under way in the UK, Germany and the Netherlands. At the ministerial conference that I hosted in Aberdeenshire on 1 October, North Sea states including, significantly, Norway welcomed and promoted catch quotas as a means of reducing discards, improving stocks and helping fishermen. The roll-out of catch quota systems is a key priority for this year's negotiations, although it is not a magic bullet and will not solve all the difficulties. Any country that wants to adopt a regime that prevents discards and reduces mortality should be allowed to do so, and should not have to give something back in return for the privilege. We all know that some sectors face tough times. On the west coast, demersal fisheries have experienced a prolonged period of very poor recruitment. It is clear that there is no scope for a directed cod and whiting fishery in the west of Scotland, which is now a fishery that is dominated by nephrops.  We propose to set a zero total allowable catch for west of Scotland cod and whiting fisheries, with a small allowance for bycatch of those stocks, and we are working with the industry on that at present. Our proposal will prevent the targeting of those very vulnerable stocks while reducing discards. Much has been said about the scientific advice that has led to the European Commission proposals this year. It has been criticised by fishermen and scientists alike, and where we believe there are strong reasons for questioning the science, we will do so and are doing so. For example, we will oppose cuts for west coast monkfish and megrim. Recent data indicate that a 15 per cent increase in west coast megrim is justifiable, and we must optimise the sustainable yield on those highly valued stocks. The west coast fishermen have few other white-fish options available. We must ensure that we do not lose focus on the current impasse on mackerel, which is Scotland's most valuable stock. The opportunistic behaviour of Iceland and the Faroes has been condemned far and wide, and Scotland has been the loudest voice. A solution will not be easy, but we will keep our nerve and ensure that the outcome does not compromise the viability of the Scottish fleet. I discussed that issue and others this week with UK ministers—and today with Norwegian ministers—as well as with the European Commissioner for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries. We will work as hard as we can to secure the best sustainable fishing opportunities that are available for Scotland at this year's negotiations. The key issue is that Scottish fishermen should come away with some reward for their many achievements this year. We have led by example and we deserve to secure a good future for Scotland's fishing communities. That is what we will set out to do at this year's vital annual negotiations. I move, That the Parliament notes efforts to secure a fair outcome in the forthcoming EU fisheries negotiations; believes that any deal must respect the need to harvest fish stocks sustainably in the interests of Scotland's fishermen and coastal communities and recognise Scotland's fishing industry's contribution to fisheries conservation, and urges the European Commission to support efforts to reduce wasteful discards.

The Scottish Government considers animal welfare to be of considerable importance. The Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Act 2006 increased the penalties for animal cruelty, imposed a duty of care on animal keepers and gave inspectors the power to seize animals in danger of suffering.

As the member is well aware, we have taken steps to regulate snaring. We have to strike a balance between animal welfare and the interests of the countryside. She will be aware that, as well as laying the Snares (Scotland) Order 2010, which came into force on 11 March and contains a number of new regulatory measures, we are progressing two changes to the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 through the Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Bill. They will say that all snares must be fitted with identification tags and that there must be compulsory training for those who wish to set snares. The Government has taken a number of substantial steps forward. We do not support a ban on snaring, for the reason that I outlined at the beginning. We have to strike a balance between the interests of Scotland's countryside and our land-based industries, and animal welfare. I thoroughly believe that the measures that we have introduced achieve that balance.

The Scottish Government is committed to promoting sustainable food procurement across the public sector and one of the outcomes of our national food and drink policy will be guidance to the public sector to support that commitment.

I totally agree with the member's sentiments. Over the past few years, huge inroads have been made in persuading public authorities to source their food, particularly fresh produce, more locally. Indeed, Stirfresh, which is based just outside Montrose, now supplies between 4,000 and 5,000 tonnes of fresh produce a year to Scotland's schools and hospitals. As I said, we will update our guidance for public authorities early in the new year to encourage such sourcing. Under the public procurement process, Scotland has now been divided into geographical lots, which will allow more individual local contracts to be signed for food and fresh produce. I believe that that will be a big step forward.

Scotland's dairy farmers received £49 million in 2009 in single farm payments and are due to receive £47 million in 2010. The difference is due to fluctuation in the exchange rate. The Scottish Government has also provided dairy farmers with more than £13 million of funding since 2007 under the Scotland rural development programme. Scotland's dairy processors have also benefited from more than £5 million of funding since 2008 under the food processing, marketing and co-operation grant scheme.

I share—as I am sure all members do—Aileen Campbell's concern over the future of the dairy sector in Scotland. At present, it appears that many dairy farmers are being squeezed by competition among retailers, who often appear to use milk as a loss-leader to attract customers into their stores. That is all very well if the bottom line of the supermarket is taking the hit, but it sometimes appears that dairy farmers pay part of the price. I am sure that the whole chamber wants to address that matter. How can we work together to address some of the issues? First, the European dairy high-level group will report shortly. Clearly, the Scottish Government will pay close attention to the group's recommendations, which will of course be relevant to the dairy sector not only in Scotland but across Europe. In Scotland, we continue to discuss with the dairy sector the way forward for an industry for which the issues are often complex. Over the next week or two, another dairy farming summit will be held in Edinburgh at which all stakeholders and, I hope, a number of members of the Scottish Parliament will get round the table. I agree that the issue will not go away in the short term. We have given a lot of support to help our industry to become even more efficient. Certainly, the industry is doing what it can. Although not all dairy farmers suffer to the same degree, the issues that they face are of big concern in the context of the future of Scotland's food sector.

As the member will be aware from much correspondence between us and with other members in recent years, the issue goes back some years. There is no likelihood of the Scottish Government's current position on the issue changing. Many dairy farmers in Scotland face many different pressures. We must find solutions that help all dairy farmers and address some of the flaws in the current market.

The member makes a good point. I hope that the retailers will attend. They attended the previous dairy summit; we are waiting to hear from some of them whether they will attend the forthcoming summit. It is difficult for us to achieve solutions for the dairy sector in Scotland if not all the key players in the supply chain are around the same table. Although I recognise that, for competition reasons, we cannot discuss certain themes at the meeting, I hope that the retail sector will turn out for it.

The European Commission audit of 2006 expenditure on the single farm payment scheme has still to be drawn to a final conclusion, so it is too soon to assess the overall financial impact on the Scottish Government and our farmers. However, my officials are working assiduously to minimise any possible impact on the farming community from the audit of the payments and processes that were directed by the previous coalition Government.

The member highlights the Scottish Government's impressive track record on making single farm payments on time from 1 December onwards. I have tasked our rural payments and inspections directorate to pay at least 70 per cent of eligible claims by 1 December. We are proud of that track record and want to stick to it this year, as we have done in previous years. The member makes a good point about the resources that are required to deal with all the common agricultural policy regulations and with the payments. I am convinced that we have applied enough resources to that to ensure that we can stick to our good timetable for making single farm payments.

Following the United Kingdom Government's decision to withdraw funding from the Sustainable Development Commission, the Scottish Government is considering the best way forward on scrutiny of sustainable development. We will announce decisions soon, in the context of the Scottish spending review.

The member raises a number of important issues. I agree that there is a need for independent monitoring of how the Scottish Government's activities contribute to sustainable development. Although I cannot give the member any guarantees about the funding situation—he will be well aware of the funding pressures that face the Scottish Government—I give him an assurance that, once we are in a position to take final decisions, we will closely consider how the independent scrutiny role can continue in one form or another. The Scottish Parliament has a very important scrutiny role, and Audit Scotland, the United Kingdom Committee on Climate Change and many other channels are available to ensure independent scrutiny of the Scottish Government with regard to sustainable development. We will carefully consider the need to ensure that that scrutiny continues, but I am not in a position right now to say exactly how it will continue.

I thank Dave Stewart for giving way to me in my role as the constituency member for Moray. As he indicates, the people of Moray are certainly "Up for the fight". I use the opportunity to express the very deep gratitude of the people of Moray for the cross-party support that they are receiving for their campaign. I agree with Dave Stewart that it is complete folly to cancel the Nimrod contract when BAE is completing the aircraft, which are badly needed, and when the UK Government has already spent billions of pounds of public money on that defence capability. Does he agree that, at a time when the defence footprint in Scotland is disproportionately small, it would be even greater folly to jeopardise the future of RAF Lossiemouth by not basing the Tornadoes at that base, given that the defence, economic and social case is extremely strong? Finally, does he agree that it would be a betrayal of not only the people of Moray but the whole of Scotland were that base to be run down or closed?

Through the Scottish Government's funding support, the Carbon Trust offers energy site surveys to Scottish businesses with an annual spend of £50,000 and over, including those in the agriculture sector. We also support the Carbon Trust's industrial energy efficiency accelerator, which works with many energy intensive sectors, including animal feeds and dairy.

The member raises a good issue, which is the contribution that our farmers and those in the agriculture sector can make to greening Scotland, reducing our emissions and securing business benefits from that. I assure the member that many initiatives are under way to help the agriculture sector to take advantage of energy efficiency measures, ways of lowering their emissions and waste management processes, including anaerobic digestion. The rural development programme offers some kind of support for that kind of initiative, and we are also considering new ways in which loans can be made available to the agriculture sector in order to get some of those measures under way.

Progress continues to be made in diverting waste from landfill in the north-east. For instance, two in-vessel composting facilities have recently opened, with the support of the Scottish Government and zero waste Scotland. Together with existing facilities, the new composting facilities divert food, garden and other organic waste from landfill, reducing climate change impacts, producing fertiliser or soil additives that are used on local farms and, in the case of anaerobic digestion, producing a biogas that can be used for renewable energy.

We agreed with all councils in Scotland that the penalties would be suspended, not cancelled, in the light of the need to work closely together during the next few years, as we have done in the past few years, to achieve Scotland's national targets. We warmly welcome Aberdeen City Council's recently published waste strategy, which sets out many ambitious targets. I hope that the member agrees that it represents a big step forward. We must all work together to ensure that we go down the road towards a zero waste society.

I join the member in congratulating Keenan (Recycling), which has started commercial food waste collection in Aberdeen. That is a major step forward in collecting relevant waste from the commercial  sector for recycling and getting the benefits that I talked about in my response to Lewis Macdonald. With regard to the larger issue of food waste, I launched this week Scotland's biggest anaerobic digester at Deerdykes in Cumbernauld, which will take 30,000 tonnes of food waste from that part of Scotland and beyond, from the national health service, local supermarkets, hotels and so on. It is great to see such progress in relation to tackling food waste, which is something that costs us all money and comes at a cost to the environment as well. We should get benefits from it and not treat it as waste. Of course, the Government's zero waste plan will roll forward more plans for segregated collection of food waste from homes and businesses in the years ahead.

The Scottish Government has launched Scotland's national food and drink policy, through which we will work with a range of stakeholders including Scotland Food & Drink Ltd, our enterprise bodies, Scottish Development International and VisitScotland to grow Scotland's reputation as a land of food and drink.

I join the member in warmly welcoming the additional jobs at the Vion food processing plant in Cambuslang. I also join him in paying tribute to the workforce, who have put some uncertainty behind them and turned it into good news. It is a sign of the confidence in Scotland's food sector, and particularly the meat processing sector, not only in the member's constituency but elsewhere, given that Vion has also provided good news in Coupar Angus, where it has a significant workforce. I also pay tribute to all the agencies that have been involved and point out that the Scottish Government has worked closely with the company in recent months and years. I am glad to see that its heavy investment in Scotland is paying dividends.

The member raises an important issue for the future of many fishing communities in Scotland. The mackerel fishery is Scotland's most valuable fishery, which is why the Scottish Government is working with the UK and  other member states in Europe and treating the issue very seriously. The fact that the Icelanders and the Faroese have set no quotas poses a significant risk to a stock that has been sustainably managed for the past 10 years. I requested to speak at the European fisheries council on Monday, when the matter was discussed at the Commission's request to find out the latest views from member states on future tactics, and we made our position clear. We were grateful to have the opportunity at long last to sit at the top table at the fisheries council to put the case on behalf of the Scottish industry. That case is clear: we must not reward irresponsible behaviour, we must ensure that those countries come back to the negotiating table, and we must get a fair and equitable deal.

The Scottish Government has met a number of local authorities that are involved in the joint procurement of waste treatment facilities. The Scottish Futures Trust and zero waste Scotland, which provides expert advice and assistance on a number of waste issues on behalf of the Scottish Government, also regularly meet local authorities to discuss joint working and procurement matters.

I certainly hope that the fantastic project that was opened in Cumbernauld will be replicated throughout Scotland. That would play a major role in taking Scotland down the zero waste road. I was delighted to see John Wilson at the official opening at the Deerdykes facility. He has made a good point: all kinds of agencies were represented there. It is important that local authorities were there too, and we must remember that we are  talking about a Scottish Water project. By working together across the board, the public sector—local government, Scottish Water and other public agencies—can certainly move Scotland forward in that regard.

I am not sure whether the member is living in a parallel universe. She may be aware that the UK Government is about to impose massive budget cuts in Scotland, which we are doing our best to resist. It would be helpful to have her support in that—I am sure that she will provide it—so that, in the future, the capital funds are available, for local authorities in particular, to fund waste treatment facilities. Of course the private sector must play a role. We are talking about a requirement for billions of pounds of investment in the coming years. I think—I am sure that many members will agree—that taking Scotland down the zero waste road is extremely important and takes priority. We need the private and public sectors to play a role. If Elaine Smith thinks that the funds will be available from the public purse to pay for all the facilities that are required to protect Scotland's environment, I am afraid that she is not on the same planet as I am.

Dairy farmers deserve a fair price for their milk. The Scottish Government is holding a further dairy summit in November and has supported dairy farmers with over £13 million of funding since 2007. In addition, Scottish dairy farmers have received £2.5 million from the European Union dairy fund in the past year to help those who have been severely affected by changes in demand and prices over the past year. Dairy prices are, of course, set by the market, and competition law prevents the Government from being involved directly. It is up to an individual milk producer to discuss pricing arrangements with its registered milk purchaser.

The member has made a number of good points. It certainly appears to be the case that retailers' competition for market share is being funded to a degree by the low prices that are paid to producers. That is wholly unacceptable for the sustainability of the dairy sector in Scotland. It is vital that dairy farmers get a fair share of every pound that is spent on milk. Milk is an extremely healthy product, but a situation in which the supermarkets, through competing with each other and other retailers, sell milk for less than the price of water is not healthy. Quite clearly, it is untenable and unsustainable for milk producers to be paid less than the cost of production for their product. I hope that retailers and others who are involved in the supply chain are listening closely to the views that are being expressed by MSPs and the Parliament.

The Scottish Government contributed £0.25 million to a United Kingdom prevalence study, which reported in 2009 that Johne's was present in around a third of UK dairy herds. We are taking a number of other actions, which I will not describe right now.

We have a range of inputs from farmers in the north-east and throughout Scotland on tackling Johne's disease, which costs the industry a great deal of money—a cost that could be avoided—and other animal diseases. That is certainly one way in which to increase profitability and to address other issues in the livestock sector in Scotland. I assure the member that the farming industry is working hand in hand with the Government on the issues.

This has been a good debate, with a lot of consensus on the importance of the food and drink industry in Scotland and on the importance of celebrating it, as we have been doing over this Scottish food and drink fortnight. There have been some disappointments—I am very disappointed to learn that I feature in only seven photographs in the food policy document. I am sure that the point that David Whitton was trying to make was that I should feature in many more. However, disappointments have been few and far between, as it has been a good debate. We can argue over the figures for employment levels in food and drink and the economic value of food and drink in Scotland. Because the industry is now a priority, it is important to bring together the various agencies, with their statistics and figures, to ensure that we are using the same methodology—we have different methodologies at the moment, and some people concentrate on manufacturing jobs in the food and drink sector, whereas other bodies, including the Scottish Government, include jobs to do with food and drink across the whole supply chain. Looking at those figures in different ways gives different results. We need uniformity in our approach and in how we use figures as a base for where we go from here.  Irrespective of any argument over figures, I hope that we can all agree on the importance of the sector and on the fact that it is going in the right direction. Food and drink policy is going in the right direction, and the employment statistics and economic value statistics are all going in the right direction, too. As food and drink minister, I have been lucky enough not only to enjoy lots of food and drink from Scotland over the summer months but to visit many businesses the length and breadth of the country. The week before last, for example, I visited the Lockerbie creamery. There is a good-news story there, and the staff spoke of their plans for developing new products in the future. I visited Vion in Coupar Angus. There is good news there, too, with the company wishing to capitalise, through its meat products, on Scotland's reputation for quality and provenance. More investment decisions are being announced at what is a major employer in that area. Last week, I visited Braehead Foods in Kilmarnock, which deals in Scottish game. Again, there is a good-news story there—the company has grown over recent years and has opened a cook school, which is doing very well. Also in the past few weeks, I went to Mackay's in Arbroath to look at its new products, in particular the marmalades and chutneys. Mackay's is a traditional company, but it is doing extremely well. The figures are rocketing, and the firm aims to get into new markets and new products. It is success story after success story. The wider food and drink sector in Scotland is not without its challenges. Some sectors have been impacted by the economic climate. Overall, however, it is a good-news story with lots of success to talk about. I, too, have visited Macphie of Glenbervie, which was mentioned by David Whitton and other members. Not only has it a lot of good news to tell about its new products and new markets but, as Mr Whitton pointed out, it takes very seriously its role in skills and development and in attracting young people into the food and drink sector. It has set a fantastic example for other Scottish companies. I do not know whether David Whitton was too busy counting the number of photographs in the document in which I feature, but I have to tell him that, despite what he said, I did mention skills and training in my opening remarks. Indeed, I pointed out that, compared with the handful of apprenticeships that we previously had in the food and drink sector, there are now 600. I thought that, at the food of the future event that, as members have pointed out, the Scottish Food and Drink Federation held last week in Parliament and which many of us attended, it was fantastic to see the  video featuring young employees from Macphie of Glenbervie and other Scottish companies and heartening to hear them say that they saw their future in Scotland's food and drink sector. That project alone, which is receiving £180,000 from the Scottish Government, will help 3,000 children in Scotland's schools learn about the food and drink industry. A lot more is being done. For example, we are working up proposals for a national food skills academy in Scotland. I hope to make an announcement about that in the near future, but I can say that staff from Macphie of Glenbervie have also put a lot of effort into that initiative.

I am not sure that there is any evidence to support that claim. Of course, we have to keep such issues under review to ensure that we are aware of any impact that the board might be having. Scotland's food and drink policy has given rise to a lot of firsts. For example, many members highlighted the need to work with retailers and supermarkets in Scotland. I said in my opening remarks that, in the past three years alone, demand for Scottish brands not only in Scotland but in England and Wales has increased by 30 per cent, much of which has been down to awareness among our retailers and supermarkets that they need to work more closely with our smaller producers, in particular, and to respond to consumer demand. When people go to the supermarket, the local shop or wherever, they want to see our fantastic Scottish produce on display and have the opportunity to buy it. Liam McArthur's comments about the use of the saltire are important. My point was that many people associate the saltire, on which, of course, supermarkets and retailers are capitalising, with quality, provenance and something that they will enjoy eating and drinking. However, we must be careful that the sign lives up to its reputation and that it is not exploited by manufacturers who have not contributed to that reputation and therefore do not deserve to get sales through it. However, although that debate is important, we should not attack the saltire. It is a fantastic symbol and is responsible for the increase in sales that I mentioned earlier. Some small Scottish producers want to become bigger; others do not. Although it is important that we work across the supply chain to ensure that small producers can get their products sold in some of the bigger supermarkets, we must also  work with companies that want to become the big household names of the future. We want to add value to the fantastic raw materials that our farmers and crofters produce and the seafood that our fishermen land at the quayside. Many of these companies are growing and our food policy must support them in becoming much bigger companies and employers of the future. As John Scott and others pointed out, our fishing and agricultural policies will have to be linked to our food policy if we want the fantastic raw materials on which our processing and manufacturing sector relies to be there for ever more. It is important, therefore, that we get the common agricultural policy right and that it delivers support for our primary producers—Scotland's crofters and farmers. We also have to get the common fisheries policy right because, if we do not, we will not have as much stock in our sea or as many fishermen in our coastal communities. Just as we do not want to waste food in our homes and businesses—as Elaine Murray made clear in her speech—we do not want the fantastic food in our seas to be wasted through discards. That is just a complete waste. In the bigger picture, we as a planet must face up to many challenges. The global population is forecast to increase from 6.1 billion to 9 billion by 2050, which will place a huge demand on the planet's resources. That is why we must tackle issues such as food waste, because the demand for food, for instance, will increase by 50 per cent. World energy demand will also increase by 50 per cent and demand for water will increase by 30 per cent by 2030. We must recognise that we are part of the planet and that we cannot afford to waste natural resources, but we must also acknowledge that Scotland is not short of energy or the ability to produce food and drink and that we are certainly not short of water.

That situation gives our food and drink businesses a big competitive advantage and will give the whole of Scotland a big competitive advantage in the decades that are ahead. It is important that we protect the country's capacity to produce food, which we are good at doing.

Scottish food and drink fortnight is all about celebrating the fact that we are fantastic at producing food and drink, thanks to our natural environment and the skills and talents of our people and the businesses in which they work. I urge all members to continue to work across Scotland with our primary producers, retailers, the Scottish Government and all our agencies not only to celebrate food and drink but  to ensure that the industry goes from strength to strength and that the nation gains all the resulting benefits.

Today is a special day for Scotland, and positive images of our nation are being beamed around the world, no doubt, as we speak. Today is also about celebrating an industry that helps to put Scotland on the map internationally. We have been celebrating that industry for these two weeks. It has been almost three years since the Parliament unanimously agreed with the Scottish Government the need to develop a national food and drink policy. At that time, I said that a food revolution was taking place the length and breadth of Scotland and that we wanted to support and accelerate it. Today's debate celebrates the fact that that food revolution continues, thanks to the work of the industry, the Scottish Government and its agencies, the people of Scotland and consumers. Our food and drink are a national strength and, as we focus on economic recovery, they have a big role to play in the nation's economic success. The debate takes place during food and drink fortnight and is intended to highlight the important role that that celebration plays. This is also Scotland's year of food and drink, during which, as a nation, we are celebrating the wealth of produce that is on offer from Scotland's larder. Almost two weeks ago, I had the honour to launch the eighth food and drink fortnight at the Dundee food and flower festival. Every year, the fortnight gets bigger and more successful, and we should all applaud its aims. It encourages us to discover, buy and enjoy the food and drink that are produced on our own doorstep; it supports the people who make the great products that we enjoy; and it challenges restaurants, caterers and suppliers throughout Scotland to source and champion quality Scottish produce. The fortnight helps to build Scotland's reputation for excellent quality food and drink. At the launch in Dundee, I was impressed by the range of products on offer, with award-winning products such as venison salami from the Deeside smokery and fruit wines from Cairn O'Mohr. This year witnesses the biggest food and drink fortnight yet. More than 130 events have been taking place  the length and breadth of Scotland, which is a substantial increase of 30 per cent from last year. The event has come a long way since it was started, in 2003, by the Scottish Countryside Alliance Educational Trust. I am sure we all applaud the trust for its vision and commitment, which has got us where we are today. Over the years, the event grew until it became a national showcase for food and then drink, which was formally included for the first time last year. So, this is the right time for it to be handed over to the new organisers, Scotland Food & Drink. Scotland Food & Drink is the organisation that is charged with building even more success for this fantastic industry. As part of Scotland's year of food and drink, EventScotland has helped some of the events that have taken place, including Dundee flower and food festival and eatBute, to make even better use of fresh, seasonal produce. We are not the only ones who are saying that our larder is fantastic. The International Culinary Tourism Association recently declared Scotland one of the most "unique, memorable and interesting places" for food and drink on the whole planet. That study reaffirms what many of us here already know: Scotland is a land that is rich in primary produce and represents quality. The interest in quality, healthy, sustainable and local produce has never been greater. It is remarkable to witness communities not only celebrating the larder on their doorsteps but linking in our food and drink industry and the provenance of our produce with local economic development and environmental sustainability. Earlier this week, I was privileged to launch the Cairngorms food for life development plan, which aims to increase the production and consumption of local food, and to expand the national park's food economy through business growth and new business development while reducing its carbon footprint. As I hope members will agree, that is a great idea that will help local businesses, forge a stronger link between food and tourism and help our environment. At the weekend I was delighted to attend eatBute, which is an event that very much forms part of the island's future and links food producers with tourism and job creation. When I returned home to Elgin, I was able to enjoy a fantastic Saturday evening meal comprised solely of ingredients that were produced on Bute and which I had bought earlier that day. There is a buzz right round Scotland about this great natural asset that we have. The selection of the best of Scotland's produce that is on offer at all  the events during the food and drink fortnight is testament to that. The economic impact is being felt not just locally, in many of the communities that I have mentioned, but nationally, too. The buzz is supported by some impressive sales figures, which show that we are punching above our weight in the recent economic climate. Members should listen closely: retail sales of Scottish brands across these islands have increased by a fantastic 30 per cent over the past three years. The saltire is increasingly associated with quality, and consumers are now looking for it on supermarket shelves and elsewhere more than ever before—and not just on these islands. Last year, there was a record increase in Scottish food and drink exports, with international sales reaching an all-time high of more than £4 billion.

There are of course different figures: there are figures for the value of what has been exported, and figures for the value to the Scottish economy. That accounts for some of the different figures that members may see in relation to the subject. The value of exports from Scotland overseas has now reached a record £4 billion. More produce is being sold by producers directly to consumers. Nearly a third of shoppers say that they specifically purchased locally produced food during February 2010, which is double the number that did so in 2006. That is vital to the success of many of our more fragile rural economies. Farmers markets are a critical element of rural life, connecting farmers with consumers in a unique and profitable way. The Scottish Government recently gave £200,000 to support farmers markets in Scotland, and we will, I hope, see many more of them flourishing throughout the country. Those figures illustrate very well the surge in year-round consumer demand for Scottish produce, but we should not rest on our laurels and take all that good news for granted. That is why the Government and all our agencies continue to support our businesses and engage with the consumer wherever we can.  We have worked tirelessly over the past three years to support the sustainable growth of our food and drink sector. Our actions, through the development and implementation of Scotland's first ever national food and drink policy, have ensured that we have adopted a clear, consistent and coherent approach for a healthier, wealthier, fairer and greener Scotland. It is an approach that has met with international recognition. The European Commission has been impressed by the holistic nature of the policy, and we have had contact from countries as far away as Japan and Australia that are interested in what we are doing here. Only a few weeks ago, a Canadian member of Parliament with an interest in the subject took time out from the Edinburgh festival to meet our leadership forum, which is a group of sectoral experts who oversee policy delivery in Scotland. She was able to witness at first hand the great work that is being done, and she is now considering how to transfer our approach and apply it to the development of a similar policy in Canada. A successful business environment is key to our policy, and will help Scotland Food & Drink in our shared goal to grow our industry from £7.5 billion to £12.5 billion by 2017. We really need to support all these businesses. Since May 2007, the Government has supported 126 food and drink businesses with £25 million-worth of assistance through our food grant schemes. I know that many members take a close interest in public procurement, which also has a significant role to play for our businesses. That is why Robin Gourlay from East Ayrshire Council has been seconded to the Scottish Government. He is working on making it easier for small and medium-sized enterprises to enter public procurement contracts. As many people know, Robin is a world-recognised expert on school food procurement. Indeed, we have seen East Ayrshire Council quoted and mentioned in a number of United Nations reports in recent months. Robin Gourlay has already delivered a guide that demystifies the procurement process for SMEs and he is hard at work on revising our sustainable procurement guidance. There is evidence of increasing interest from SMEs in public contracts. For example, there were 18 expressions of interest in the national health service milk contract, whereas last time there was only one, so we can see that great progress is already being made. For companies to win such contracts, it is essential that they have efficient and effective supply chains. We are helping them with that as well. The Scottish Agricultural Organisation Society's cultivating collaboration—or C2—project is already reaping rewards. Some 180 companies and 65 organisations have  participated in the project, which has the Government's backing, and SAOS is working with 39 supply chains ranging from micro-scale SMEs to large businesses. We want to make it easier for producers to get the big contracts with the supermarkets, food service companies and so on. That is important work. We need to ensure that the best skills are available to businesses to support their work. That is why we have funded 600 modern apprenticeships in food and drink over the past year, compared with only 15 the year before. Those are positive and specific outcomes, but we can support the industry in many other ways. I enjoyed the opportunity to visit a number of companies and producers during this summer's Cabinet tour. The Cabinet hosted a number of receptions at which we celebrated the year of food and drink and met many people and businesses who are involved in producing the great food and drink that we have in Scotland. Given that we have fantastic Scottish ingredients, I am sure that many of us continue to be frustrated by not knowing what is on our plates when we are at a hotel, restaurant or whatever. That is why the Government launched a provenance resource to help caterers and restaurants with practical ways to raise the profile of local food with consumers. The provenance on a plate toolkit has generated increased sales of fresh, seasonal produce, raised consumer awareness of local produce, and built stronger links with local food suppliers. It is important that tourists and people who live in Scotland know what is on their plates when they eat out, and that the people who serve up the food go to the effort of letting people know when the food is local and the provenance and the story behind it. That is what the initiative is all about. It will play a part in helping to aid understanding of what it means to buy Scottish. I hope, as I am sure many other members do, that Europe takes the opportunity to support our stance when it legislates on labelling, which we hope will be as soon as possible. We continue to press our European and indeed our United Kingdom colleagues for a quick resolution to the labelling issue. I hope that progress is being made on that in Brussels. Scottish food and drink fortnight's continued growth and success in celebrating our wonderful produce serves only to enhance Scotland's reputation as a land of food and drink and to deliver many economic benefits throughout that important industry and the rest of Scotland. I ask everyone in the chamber today to join together in celebrating Scottish food and drink fortnight, celebrating Scotland's fantastic image for top-quality food and drink, and of course celebrating  the important industry that takes our fabulous raw materials, adds value and gives us all that economic success.

The Scottish Environment Protection Agency has indicated that in 2008 an estimated 549,000 tonnes of food waste was generated by the retail sector, including our supermarkets, and a further 314,376 tonnes of food waste came from food manufacturers, which constitute a significant part of the supply chain.

The member highlights an on-going debate on how to use food waste. Quality Meat Scotland, on behalf of the red meat sector, has in place a moratorium on the spreading of compost from food waste on fields that may be used for feeding livestock. At the moment, a lot of discussion is under way between Zero Waste Scotland, the public body that is responsible for zero-waste policy, and Quality Meat Scotland, the body that is responsible for promoting red meat produce. We hope that that will reach a good conclusion in the near future. I would be happy to send a note to the member outlining the nature of the discussions that are taking place.

A statement setting out the principles to be followed in designating MPAs in offshore waters adjacent to Scotland was laid in the Scottish Parliament on 12 March 2010. We recently consulted on a draft marine nature conservation strategy as well as draft guidelines on the selection of marine protected areas. A programme of work to inform site designation is under way in partnership with Scottish Natural Heritage and the Joint Nature Conservation Committee.

The member raises the important issue of protecting the unique bird species that we have in Scottish waters and in Scotland as a whole. As the member knows, we have consulted on the priority marine features that would be considered when designating marine protected areas. We are considering the responses to that consultation. I will certainly take on board the member's concerns in that regard. However, I point out that many of our seabirds are already protected under the birds and habitats directives, so protection is largely already in place. We are considering the responses to the  consultation on what we take into account in designating the marine protected areas.

I can only refer Robin Harper to my previous answer. When we are looking at priority marine features, not everything can be a priority. Therefore, we have to take into account to a certain extent what is already protected by legislation elsewhere and may not therefore require the designation of a marine protected area. However, that is why we held the consultations: to listen to the views from the various stakeholders and members of the Parliament about what should be in the final list of priority marine features.

I met a range of ministers from DEFRA on 23 June, when we discussed a wide range of issues including how the Scottish and United Kingdom Governments will work together in future on both domestic and European business. I used the opportunity to outline the distinct nature and policy needs of Scotland's farming, food and marine sectors.

The member raises a very important issue about the future of Scotland's livestock sector in particular. We have always had a concern that although we have policy responsibility for animal health matters in Scotland, we have not had the budget. We need that important part of the jigsaw to be put in place. While there is a delay in devolving the budget,  which most people in Scotland want to see—particularly our farmers and all parties in this chamber—the longer we leave it, the more likelihood there is of the budget in London reducing, which means that our share over time will become less. The sooner that our share is devolved to Scotland, the better, and I very much welcome the commitment from the new United Kingdom coalition Government in London to work with us to have the budget devolved—at long last—by 1 April next year.

My officials made progress at the meeting with European Commission officials on 9 June 2010 and are now working on clarifying future implications for the industry with United Kingdom colleagues. Details will be announced in due course, but the member will understand that this has to be worked out carefully.

All parties and the Scottish Government share the desire for a much more proportionate penalty regime. We took the opportunity of the Royal Highland show last week to discuss the need for a proportionate penalty regime with Commissioner Cioloş, the European commissioner for agriculture, and the chair of the European Parliament's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, Paolo de Castro. I, along with Iain Smith and others, do not think that it is fair for a cattle farmer to be penalised, for example, 3 per cent of his single farm payment for a couple of identification errors when he might have several score or several hundred cattle and it might be quite easy to make a mistake. I felt that the commissioner gave us a sympathetic hearing, and the devil will be in the detail of whatever successor penalty regime is put in place. We have to discuss that carefully with the European Commission. On a timescale, I would not hold my breath. It will not be all that soon, because the renegotiation of the common agricultural policy post-2013 is coming up very soon. We will have to wait and see whether we have to wait until the new common agricultural policy, but we will put as much pressure on Europe as possible to implement the changes sooner rather than later.

The zero waste plan is based on the recognition that most waste is a resource that continues to have a potential value. Conserving, reusing and recovering the value of those resources will be more cost effective in the long term than losing that value through disposal. Where new infrastructure is needed to treat waste, it will be funded through a combination of investment by local authorities and the private waste management sector.

The member has asked a number of questions; I will deal with as many as I can remember. The SFT is taking a proactive role with a number of local authorities that are looking to procure waste treatment infrastructure. The aim is to ensure that we do so as cost effectively as is possible. On the issue of how much finance might be given to local authorities by the Scottish Government to deal with this, given the current financial climate and the serious cuts that we face to our budget in the coming years, we will have to consider at the next spending review what help the Scottish Government can give. The situation will be very difficult. However, we should be positive about the position that we are in, because many local authorities in Scotland are considering procuring new waste treatment infrastructure, and many proposals are already in the pipeline. Local authorities see the issue as a priority and are willing to finance it through their own means and through the general local government settlement that is given to them by the Scottish Government.

Apology accepted; the issue is important. I refer the member to the response I provided to question 2.

I am looking forward to my new relationship with my DEFRA counterparts in the new coalition UK Government. I found the previous relationship to be challenging at times. Often, DEFRA ministers would say to me, "The answer is no; what's the question?" I hope that we can have much more of a respect agenda with the new ministers in London. Of course, the respect agenda goes two ways. We have to be shown respect by the UK Government, and we will show respect to it. Our rural and coastal communities face many important issues in the next few years, not least the renegotiation of the common agricultural policy and the common fisheries policy, as well as a number of UK issues, such as the devolution of the animal health budget for our livestock sector, which was referred to in a previous question. I give the chamber and the member an assurance that I will be co-operative with my UK counterparts and work hard with them to deliver a bright future for Scotland's rural, farming, food and fishing communities.

The member will be aware that the UK Government has made a commitment to work closely with us to achieve the devolution of the animal health budget by 1 April next year, and I am determined that we will stick to that timetable. Of course, we are disappointed that the budget was not devolved for 1 April this year, which was the original plan that had been agreed with the previous UK Administration. Hopefully, as part of the respect agenda that we have just been discussing, we will make substantial progress this year and will be able to stick to that important timetable, before the animal health budget at the UK level becomes so small that it will hardly be worth devolving.

We said no.

I last met representatives of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation at the fisheries expo in Glasgow on 21 May. The most recent meeting with officials took place last week.

I assure the member that I am giving urgent attention to a number of the concerns that face the white-fish sector, in particular, at the current time. The conservation credits scheme is one of a number of innovative steps forward that we have taken by working closely with the fishing industry against the  challenging backdrop of the damage that the common fisheries policy is causing to Scotland. The member mentioned the amendment to the number of days of sea that has been implemented by the conservation credits scheme steering group this year. One of the innovative results of that new relationship is that we can buy back some of the days that were cut by adopting the further conservation measures that the fleet could put into practice. That is a significant achievement, which has been made despite the constraints of the common fisheries policy. I will give my attention to a number of the issues that the member raises.

Information on specialist food production is not held centrally, but I can comment on food production more generally. The latest available figures show that, in 2007, the food and drink supply chain generated value added of almost £9 billion for Scotland's economy. The member might be interested to know that Scottish food export sales rose by 20 per cent to £934 million in 2009  and that total international sales of Scottish food and drink increased by 6 per cent to £4.06 billion in 2009, which was an all-time high. I am sure that the Parliament welcomes that.

I am sure that if the member attends the Royal Highland Show in a couple of weeks' time, as other members no doubt will do, he will see on display at that major event the products of many successful food producers in rural Scotland. Many new companies that produce specialist foods in Scotland are, of course, doing very well. I am sure that members welcome the fact that, despite the very tough economic backdrop, demand for local food has been sustained and consumers are standing by local food producers in Scotland. I take Christopher Harvie's point about exports. Over the past year or two, many businesses and others have raised the lack of access to export credit guarantees, in some cases with the Scottish Government but mainly with the United Kingdom Government. We continue to monitor the situation closely. A range of support is available to producers. Support is available in the export field from Scottish Development International and other agencies and through our own grant schemes and support mechanisms in Scotland. Many companies that are doing very well in specialist foods have benefited from significant grants in recent years.

The member has raised what is an on-going concern for growers of malting barley in Scotland. My understanding is that around 90 per cent of the barley that is used for Scotch whisky originates in Scotland. I know that that is a concern to some producers, who think that the figure should be much higher. Whisky producers argue, of course, that they would not necessarily want to put all their eggs in one basket, in case Scotland suffered a bad harvest, for instance, which could lead to problems for the  wider whisky sector. It is only right that all whisky producers in Scotland source as much of their barley as possible from Scottish producers so that we can make it clear that all the elements of a good bottle of Scotch whisky originated in Scotland.

The Scottish Government is working at all levels to press the European Commission urgently for more proportionality in the penalty system under cross-compliance. Indeed, I directly raised the issue with the Commission in March this year and specifically raised it in recent conversations with the new Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Secretary of State and the new DEFRA Minister of State. Scottish Government officials will meet European Commission officials on 9 June to press the matter further.

Wales and Northern Ireland, for instance, are taking actions similar to those being taken in Scotland to increase the penalties that we believe must be enforced in order to protect Scotland's wider single farm payment level. We have investigated what has been happening in some other countries. The member is perhaps alluding to claims that we are taking a much tougher approach in Scotland than is being taken elsewhere. We have no evidence of that. We agree with the sentiment of the member's question that the current penalty system is disproportionate. We fully accept that. We cannot have people with large herds, for instance, suffering large penalties just because of one or two mistakes with their paperwork. That is disproportionate and we should address that, but we must also put things in perspective. We should bear it in mind that last year's single farm payment, for instance, was 15 per cent up on the previous year's payment. We reckon that only  around 30 farmers received single farm payments that were lower than those of the year before because of the penalties. That is out of 20,000 single farm payment claimants in Scotland. I hope that that helps members to put the matter into perspective. Although we have a disproportionate penalty system, we have to avoid the European auditors penalising Scotland for not enforcing the regulations properly. That would lead to huge fines and, potentially, a huge slice of single farm payments being kept by Brussels. Farmers would then suffer even more than they do as a result of the disproportionate system.

Land eligibility is at the core of the issue to which the member refers, and none of the regulations on that have changed as such. We held public meetings around Scotland, which many farmers attended, to update farmers on the exact eligibility criteria. In addition, we put information on our website and worked with the various farming associations to ensure that they were able to filter the information down to their members. I accept that there was a problem with the printed guidance that was sent out to the industry, which I am told was down to printing difficulties. I very much regret that the guidance arrived so late, but we granted an extra couple of weeks, to the end of May, for applicants to amend their forms if they felt that there were adjustments that they had to make. We are taking a sympathetic, pragmatic approach to accepting those forms but, as I said, we have to enforce the regulations. If the European auditors come to Scotland, or other countries, and see that what we or they are doing is not right, we or those other countries will fail the audit. We are trying to avoid major fines in the form of a reduction in our single farm payments.

Through the national food and drink policy, the Scottish Government works with partners to deliver a wide range of actions that support the food and drink industries in Scotland. In particular, I was delighted to attend the Scotland food and drink excellence awards last month, which were hosted in Moray, and over a third of the winners were from north-east Scotland. On Saturday, I will attend the taste of Grampian festival and I look forward to sampling the best of the north-east's larder. I urge all north-east MSPs to attend that magnificent event.

The resource to which the member refers is only one of many made available to north-east food and drink companies. Since March 2008, 44 projects in the north-east have received awards of almost £9.5 million under our food processing grants. I can assure the member that not only the £300,000 but a range of other resources are being made available to help build Grampian and north-east Scotland's already magnificent reputation for food and drink. I will be happy to send the member a list of some of the more successful projects to make him aware of the exciting things that are going on in respect of food and drink.

The member will be pleased to know that I recently launched an initiative—I will send her the details, in case she missed it—that is all about promoting local procurement, which we would all like to see in public authorities in Scotland. I launched the initiative at a high school in Perth, where some excellent work is taking place. I assure the member that the Government is pushing this agenda as hard as possible and that we share her view that our public authorities, hospitals, prisons,  schools and so on should, as far as possible, when they legally can, serve up Scottish food and drink to their customers, their patients or whoever. That is one way of supporting the industry and, of course, helping our people to access good Scottish food and drink.

The Scottish Government has allocated £80 million from the zero waste fund direct to local authorities for 2008 to 2011 to deliver services and waste management infrastructure. That money is, of course, above and beyond the record levels of funding provided to local government over the period 2008 to 2011. The Scottish Government, through capital grant schemes administered by zero waste Scotland, is also supporting the development of infrastructure to treat organic waste and reprocess plastics. A range of other measures has also been taken.

We do not like anything to be thrown on the scrap heap these days. That is, I hope, one of the objectives of the zero waste plan that we will launch next week. The member highlights a good issue. Some of our cities and larger communities face a big challenge to install recycling infrastructure to help tenement residents. There have been some trials, and I know that Glasgow, for example, as Scotland's largest city, faces a big challenge and is looking into a number of solutions to tackle the problem. I give a commitment to the member that I will continue to urge local authorities, zero waste Scotland, SEPA and others to work together to address the issue.

I guess that the answer is: watch this space. We will address the issue in our  zero waste plan, which we launch next week. The Parliament debated the plan in the chamber just over a couple of weeks ago. The member highlights the very good point that we should not send that kind of waste to big holes in the ground—in other words, to landfill. We cannot continue to waste resources that have a value.

This has been a good debate. I am delighted that all parties wish to travel in the same direction and that we all find it unacceptable that in this day and age in Scotland we continue every year to send tens of millions of tonnes of waste, which is a valuable resource, to big holes in the ground. I agree with many members that there is a sense of urgency, because we want to tackle the issue sooner rather than later. The Liberal Democrats suggested that there has been a delay in publishing the Scottish Government's zero waste plan, which is due to appear in the next two or three weeks. I remind the chamber, especially a number of the parties that are represented here, that back in 1999 SEPA published the Scottish waste strategy. Four years later, SEPA and the then Scottish Executive published the national waste plan. It took four years for the previous Administration to get its original plan off the ground. In January 2008, the Scottish National Party Government, with the support of the other parties that are represented in the chamber—which we welcomed—announced its intention to have a new emphasis on moving towards a zero waste society. Two years later, we are on the brink of publishing Scotland's first zero waste plan. I have looked at my public comments on the issue. I said that the plan was due to be published in spring 2010, so I am surprised that the Liberal Democrat amendment states that there has been a delay in its publication. I appeal to the Labour Party and the Conservatives to note that it says on the internet today that spring in Scotland is due to end on 21 June 2010; I checked that before I came to the chamber. The secret cult of which the Liberal Democrats may be members may have a different calendar, but the calendar to which most members stick says that spring ends and summer begins around 21 June. I appeal to the Labour Party and the Conservatives to show common sense, of which I know they have volumes, and to accept that the Liberal Democrat amendment is not accurate. I am sure that they will not wish to support it. I am happy to support the Conservative and Labour amendments, as they highlight  important issues that we must keep at the forefront of our minds. A number of complex issues have been raised. Elaine Smith and Michael McMahon, among others, referred to the need to build infrastructure in Scotland to ensure that, as a nation, we meet the important targets that have been set. However, the fact that Elaine Smith and Michael McMahon represent the same party and are sitting on the same bench in the same part of the chamber highlights some of the difficulties and complexities that are associated with building the right infrastructure in Scotland. Michael McMahon said that councils must take brave decisions on applications for infrastructure and appeared to suggest that the Scottish Government should work with local authorities to ensure that such decisions are taken. Elaine Smith explained that she was campaigning against projects in her constituency—for perfectly valid and correct reasons, no doubt, but the difference between the two members' positions sums up the complexities to which I have referred.

I am not arguing against the member's sentiments. I merely pointed out that he commented that councils were rejecting too many applications and that that highlighted the complexities of the issues that we face as a country, because another Labour member on the same bench was arguing against having some waste facilities in the communities that she and Michael McMahon represent. Tough choices lie ahead. Do we want to have a lot of landfill sites? Do we want barren landscapes, because we have used up all the resources, or do we want to have treatment facilities in some parts of the country instead? Those are difficult debates for our communities and it is only right that they should have a say in where some of the facilities are based. We will have to take some big, brave decisions in the months and years ahead if we are to achieve some of the targets. Affordability is always an issue. I am surprised by some members, particularly on the Labour benches, calling for more direct funding from the Scottish Government, when we are all aware of the financial climate in which we are working. Less funding will be available to the Scottish Government in the future, not more. I ask Labour  members, in particular, to think before they speak and call non-stop for more funds from the Government to address some of the important issues.

I was referring to Elaine Smith, who called for more direct funding from the Scottish Government for some of these projects. I am highlighting the financial difficulties and the realism that is called for.

I am sorry. I have taken a number of interventions so far. We cannot afford not to take action. Landfill taxes will have to be paid if local authorities do not take the relevant action and there are other penalties that could come down from the EU for Scotland, as a country. Those will, in turn, impact on local authorities if certain targets are not met. Local authorities are recognising that a good financial case is stacking up for building some of the facilities and for taking the right action around the country. I have a list of infrastructural projects that are in the planning system for many communities in Scotland. Some are, no doubt, controversial and some are absolutely essential if we are to achieve the targets. Much has been happening over the past two or three years. We met our landfill directive target for diverting biodegradable municipal waste from landfill 18 months ahead of the 2013 deadline. Councils are now recycling approximately 36 per cent of municipal waste and are on track for the 40 per cent target by the end of this year. We have streamlined and simplified the delivery landscape for our zero waste advice and guidance and we now have the single zero waste Scotland delivery programme. The Climate Change (Scotland) Bill, which addressed some of the waste issues that we have been debating today, has gone through Parliament. A new dialogue is taking place with the retail sector. Many people mentioned the role of our shops and retail outlets in packaging and related issues. From going into our local supermarkets and seeing the number of bags for life that customers are using, we all know that things are changing in that regard. Scotland's first recycling zone has been built in the past couple of years and reverse vending machines have been installed in some supermarkets in Scotland. There have been a lot of firsts over the last couple of years. We are heading in the right direction.  We need a new emphasis and that is what the zero waste plan is about. I welcome the fact that many members have acknowledged the need for that new emphasis. The zero waste principle is about the fact that, as Robin Harper said, we should see waste as a valuable resource. We should treat all waste with equal importance. The emphasis, so far, has been on household recycling and municipal waste. Next, we will have to tackle all waste in Scotland. We must look at landfill bans, new regulatory measures, mandatory collection of food waste from households and early separation of materials to make all of that much easier. That is the new emphasis that we all agree on and which will be at the heart of the zero waste plan that will be published. As John Scott mentioned, the issue of commercial and industrial waste must be at the heart of that plan. We do not have good robust data on commercial and industrial waste. We have to tackle that, and it will be addressed by the plan when it is published. We know the broad-brush figures, but we do not know where all the commercial and industrial waste goes and how much of that waste is transported. We must identify that in the first instance, perhaps before we can identify proper targets that we want to adopt. Let us, at least, welcome the fact that the industrial and construction sectors in Scotland have adopted a target in the past year or two to halve the amount of waste that they send to landfill by 2012. That is going in the right direction, and we have seen more producer responsibility legislation in this Parliament and throughout Europe in the past year or so. Considerable progress has been made, much of it since devolution in 1999. People were elected to this Parliament because they wanted to protect Scotland's special environment and resources. We have taken many decisions, on a consensus basis, to ensure that that happens. We need the support of the people of Scotland, who are changing their habits and lifestyles to support that aim. We also need the support of community organisations. I support the point made by Robin Harper and others that we owe a huge debt to social enterprises and community bodies that have played such a role in their communities. Some £2.5 million every year goes, through the proper channels, to fund that type of activity. However, I am happy to look into the points that were raised by Cathy Peattie about some of the wider impacts of local decision making. We need the support of businesses, households and communities to travel down the road towards a zero waste society. I welcome today's debate. I have taken note of a number of good points and we will do our best to ensure that some of them are reflected in the zero waste plan, which has not  been delayed and will be published in the next two or three weeks.

I said that we are potentially moving away from having a cap—the current cap applies only to municipal waste—to regulating instead what can be put into energy-from-waste plants. The advice that we received through the consultation is that that is a better regulatory tool.

I am delighted to open this afternoon's debate on waste in Scotland, which I am sure all members will agree is an event of equal importance to anything else that might be happening in the United Kingdom at the current time. Members will recall that we launched a major public consultation last summer on proposals for a zero waste plan for Scotland. I promised then to come back to Parliament after the consultation to give members a further opportunity to express their views on the key issues that they would like the plan to address. This afternoon's debate, albeit that it is a brief one, delivers on that promise. The public consultation was a resounding success. It attracted nearly 250 responses from councils, businesses, third sector bodies, individuals and many others. It is clear that the people of Scotland really care about waste and want to make a difference. I am confident that, in developing our policy proposals, we will take into account many of the key points that were raised. In addition to the public consultation, I was pleased recently to see the views of key stakeholders—which I am sure we have all received—including those of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and WWF Scotland. We broadly agree with the majority of the points that those organisations made. I am keen to hear members' views today, before we finalise our proposals for the zero waste plan. I am confident that there is a broad consensus on how we can move forward together to achieve our goal of a zero waste Scotland. Waste is part of all our lives, and the figures are sobering. In 2008, we produced almost 20 million tonnes of waste from households, industry, business and all parts of society, and our councils spend about £400 million of public money each year on collecting and treating waste. As WWF Scotland states in its briefing for the debate, if we keep consuming the earth's resources at the current rate, we will need more than one planet to survive. Clearly, that is not sustainable.  The nation is beginning to get the message on waste and efficient use of resources. The amount of waste that is thrown out by households is falling steadily and the quantities that we recycle have risen dramatically. On average, councils are already recycling more than 35 per cent of the waste that they collect, and the best-performing councils recycle as much as 45 per cent. Some councils still have some way to go. However, the nation could be said to have picked the low-hanging fruit on recycling. We all have a growing recognition that, from now on, every step will be more and more challenging. We have made encouraging progress since devolution, but it will be a lot tougher to make an equivalent leap forward in the next 10 or 15 years, and anyone who pretends that it will be easy is kidding themselves. However, we must continue to move towards a zero waste society, which is why we hope to publish within the next few weeks our zero waste plan for a Scotland where waste is reduced to a minimum and all resources are used as effectively and efficiently as possible. We have already taken a number of important steps in recent years and months. We are working closely with local authorities to encourage them to continue to increase their recycling rates and we have set up a single co-ordinated zero waste Scotland programme to support businesses, local authorities and individuals more effectively. Up to now, the public and the business community have had to deal with too many public sector organisations—that point was well made by the Federation of Small Businesses only this week. We have also passed ground-breaking legislation to address the climate impacts of waste. However, we have more to do in order to understand better the carbon cost of Scotland's waste. Again, we will have to work on that in the years ahead. Our proposals build directly on the responses to the consultation. I hope that we will reach agreement on the issues so we can map out a clear future for waste and the use of resources in Scotland, and unlock the big decisions and investments that will be needed in the times ahead. Zero waste means thinking not simply about waste, but about resources. We need to recognise and preserve the economic and environmental value of all the resources that we use in this country by, for example, preventing waste in the first place, by reusing materials, by recycling resources or by recovering the value of these things in some other way. Disposal must be our last resort and should be used only if no other option is available. Although previous waste policies have focused on the waste that is collected by councils from our doorsteps and local businesses, the fact is that  household waste represents less than one fifth of all the waste that is generated in Scotland each year. The construction and demolition industry produces over 40 per cent of all waste, while the rest of the commercial and industrial sector accounts for another 40 per cent. If we are serious about reducing waste and using resources better, we need to look at all of Scotland's waste. I know that that view is shared by many people in the chamber and beyond. To achieve those goals, we need the right systems and infrastructure to collect, sort and treat all the resources that we currently treat as waste, and local authorities and the waste management sector need to invest in systems to separate materials and recover their value. Of course, that will provide many economic opportunities. A top priority for any waste policy must be a reduction in the amount of valuable resources that are sent to landfill. The landfill tax is already making the option increasingly expensive and we believe that it is now time to consider legislation to ban certain materials altogether from being sent to landfill if they can be reused, recycled or recovered. Such an approach was widely supported in the consultation. It would make sense, for instance, to ban landfill of biodegradable wastes such as food and garden waste. Although such waste is responsible for significant greenhouse gas emissions from landfill, it can be treated to recover its energy value. Again, that approach has a lot of support. Indeed, I note that the three main United Kingdom parties had similar commitments in their recent manifestos. In an effort to support that approach to landfill bans, we need to consider whether different materials should be separated as early as possible in the process to avoid cross-contamination and other problems. Food waste is a major part of the equation. Scotland currently produces over 2 million tonnes of food waste a year, which is a waste not only of good precious food, but of money. Although, in tackling issues such as food waste, we should remember that the problem will always be with us to some extent, we nevertheless have to collect some of this waste separately to get back as much value as possible. Zero waste means recovering the maximum value from resources that were previously treated as waste. Again, there will always be some waste that cannot be reused or recycled; in such cases, recovering its energy content will be the best option. As we will all accept, there are concerns about how energy from waste is used. Our present policy is based on capping at 25 per cent of all the waste that local authorities manage, the amount of waste that they can treat by energy from waste through incineration. However, we are considering  a new approach. After all, the cap applies only to 4 per cent of all waste in Scotland: if we are aiming to tackle all waste in Scotland, our energy-from-waste policy should have the same aim. As a result, we feel that legislating on the materials that can be used in energy-from-waste plants would be a much better way of regulating things and would allow us to emphasise that we are focusing on all waste in Scotland, and not just on the municipal waste that local authorities collect. I could go on about all the—

I am in the hands of the Deputy Presiding Officer.

Many members and organisations such as the Sustainable Development Commission and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency agree that energy from waste has a role in that respect. The approach has been adopted in other countries and, indeed, in the UK election campaign a number of parties were calling for a huge increase in the use of energy from waste in England and Wales. Of course, if any applications for such plants are submitted in any part of Scotland, the planning process will need to take into account local authorities' views. I will conclude, because I am well over my time. We have moved a long way in Scotland on this issue, and we must pay tribute to the Scottish public for upping recycling rates since devolution. That said, there is still a long way to go. We as a society must continue to change our behaviour if we are to protect our environment and manage Scotland's waste more effectively. We must see waste not as a problem but as one of the planet's valuable resources. If we work together and build on the zero waste plan, which we will launch in the next couple of weeks, we can take Scotland down the road towards being a zero waste society. I move, That the Parliament notes the need for a coherent zero-waste policy approach to encourage waste prevention and efficient use of all resources; supports measures to increase recycling and deliver high-quality recycled materials, to ensure resources are recovered and treated in the most environmentally beneficial way and to minimise the disposal of resources into landfill, and looks to the forthcoming Zero Waste Plan for Scotland to provide clear long-term policy stability for the necessary investment to deliver a zero-waste Scotland.

The Scottish Government funds Keep Scotland Beautiful as part of the zero waste Scotland programme to help to raise awareness of and, of course, participation in the excellent national spring clean campaign. The 2010 campaign has been by far the most successful yet. More than 83,000 volunteers took part in just over 1,400 clean-up events throughout Scotland in April. Our zero waste Scotland programme also funds Keep Scotland Beautiful to support local authorities and others in tackling litter on an on-going basis.

Shirley-Anne Somerville highlights the sad fact that there are still many people in our society who drop litter, which is, of course, damaging to Scotland's image and our environment. I am delighted to hear that she took part in the spring clean, and hope that other members had the opportunity to do so as well. A number of options are available to local authorities to tackle littering. They can provide infrastructure and they can make use of legislation to issue fines. Some local authorities in Scotland issue fines to people who have been caught littering, but others do not. I urge all local authorities to use the legislative tools that are available to them to tackle litter in their communities.

Any decision to implement fortnightly collections for residual household waste is a matter for individual local authorities, having had regard to local needs and circumstances. However, the Scottish Government recognises that the introduction of fortnightly collections for residual household waste can, when introduced in conjunction with a high-quality recycling service, significantly improve recycling rates and reduce the amount of waste that households produce in the first place.

Councils have plenty of opportunities to learn from the experience of other local authorities that have adopted fortnightly collections. For instance, 19 of Scotland's local authorities already have fortnightly collections and Scotland's top 12 performing councils on recycling have adopted fortnightly collections. That speaks volumes about the link between the decision to adopt fortnightly collections and the recycling performance of the local authorities that do that. Plenty of information is available for local authorities through the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and directly from the Scottish Government. However, each local authority is able to implement its own policy in that regard.

As the member says, European Union rules are, unfortunately, clear on the issue—they prevent support towards the purchase cost and maintenance of such crops. However, for farmers and growers who are considering diversifying into new crops such as bog myrtle, the rural priorities scheme can provide support of up to 50 per cent—or 60 per cent for young farmers—of the costs that are associated with the provision or upgrading of buildings, new machinery or equipment and, of course, information technology. We will continue to look for other ways in which we can assist the sector. I welcome the decision last year by Highlands and Islands Enterprise to award almost £0.5 million of public funding to support Essentially Scottish Botanicals, which remains at the forefront in developing the potential of bog myrtle in Scotland.

We are paying close attention to the success of the company that is involved in the field, which is an exciting one. I agree with the member about the potential, but we should not lose sight of the substantial public funding of £0.5 million over three years from Highlands and Islands Enterprise for that company. We must not leave the impression that no public support is being provided for companies to take up such commercial opportunities. I understand that current supplies of bog myrtle to the company are adequate, so it is not as though there is evidence of a requirement for further incentives to promote more growing of the crop. Of course, we will continue to monitor the situation closely, because we agree that bog myrtle has huge potential for the Scottish economy.

Ian McKee has just made the best-possible advert for the use of bog myrtle in Scotland. No doubt sales will rocket and it will become an even more commercially attractive enterprise.

Since devolution in 1999, local authorities have made excellent progress. Recycling performance has improved from 5 per cent to just under 36 per cent for the rolling year to September 2009. Local authorities continue to make progress towards the 2010 target of 40 per cent recycling and composting and I have every expectation that local authorities will maintain that momentum. In addition, Scottish local authorities have continued to make progress in contributing to meeting Scotland's share of the UK landfill directive target, which is to divert biodegradable municipal waste from landfill. In 2008, Scotland's landfill total was 1.79 million tonnes of biodegradable municipal waste against a target of 1.8 million tonnes. That suggests that the 2013 target has been met already.

I do not think that the member is suggesting that the Scottish Government should take away planning powers from local authorities. Of course, local authorities will have their reasons for the decisions on the applications that are lodged for waste management facilities. However, I agree with the member that Scotland has to face up to its responsibilities for managing its waste. That might require some difficult decisions in the years ahead. The chamber will be interested to know that we are due to publish our zero waste plan for  Scotland in the next few weeks. The Parliament will have one final opportunity to influence the plan next week in our parliamentary debate. I hope that Michael McMahon and others will take part in that debate and have their views heard. I assure all members that the views of the waste management industry have been taken into account in our zero waste plan and that local authorities are at the heart of how we will develop it.

Sarah Boyack might be pleased to hear me say that I could not agree more with her point. She will recall that, like her, I have made the point many times in the chamber that, for a long time, we have picked the low-lying fruit of household recycling, which has been immensely valuable in getting the public on board for the recycling task that we face as a nation. Of course, the majority of waste is produced by the commercial and industrial sectors, so joining up the domestic with the non-domestic sources of waste is certainly the way forward. I hope that I give comfort to the chamber by saying that that has been taken on board in the zero waste plan and we look forward to hearing members' views in next week's debate.

I welcome the Treasury Committee's acknowledgement of the frustration in Scotland with the extent to which current arrangements for the Crown Estate commissioners take account of Scottish interests. Building on the Treasury Committee's recommendations and working constructively with the Crown Estate, we will be seeking to ensure that full weight is given to Scottish interests.

We share the member's sentiments and hope that the Crown Estate takes forward some of the actions that he suggests. I assure the member that Scottish ministers are actively considering our options and are paying close attention to some of the recommendations in the report. We have no doubt that the people of Scotland, this Parliament and our local authorities would much rather that the Crown Estate was accountable to the Scottish Parliament than elsewhere.

That is a fair question that concerns an issue in which the Scottish Parliament should take a close interest. Given that, since devolution, the Crown Estate has contributed to the United Kingdom Treasury £1.8 billion, of which we estimate the Scottish contribution to be £100 million, and given the widespread view that there is little visible benefit from that £100 million that has flowed to Westminster from Scotland's seabeds and land that is under the control of the Crown Estate, we should pay attention to some of the changes to the current arrangements that are being proposed by many commentators and the Treasury Committee.

I welcome any step in the right direction by the Crown Estate. Of course, over the past few years, we have seen a more constructive dialogue between the Crown Estate, the various sectors, the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government. However, there is a widespread belief that there is a long way to go in that regard, and I am sure that the sectors to which the member refers would much rather that  the rent that is being paid flowed to the Scottish Government or local authorities and did not leave Scotland and go elsewhere.

The first steps towards an integrated maritime policy for Scotland have been achieved through the recent enactment of the Marine (Scotland) Act 2010, which received royal assent on 10 March. The marine planning provisions are key elements of that act, and will allow us to manage the competing demands on marine resources more effectively. The fishing industry and all those with an interest in the sea will be able to participate in the preparation of the national and regional marine plans.

Mr Welsh makes a good point. He rightly highlights the need to balance all the interests in our seas in the years ahead. That is the primary purpose of the marine plan, which has a strong planning dimension to it to ensure that we can balance the competing interests. It is important that people in our traditional sectors who make their living from the sea can continue with their operations and make their livelihoods at the same time as those in our newer sectors come on board, particularly in renewable energy. The plan is at the heart of the debate on how we balance those interests, so that everyone can sit around the same table, look at our seas and how we can use them productively and sustainably, and ensure that everyone gets their fair share of their use.

Scottish Government and Glasgow City Council officials continue to work together to improve recycling services, and we expect future discussions to give greater emphasis to commercial waste.

Bill Aitken raises an important issue, and I agree with the sentiments behind the question and those echoed by the chap he referred to. We have the zero waste plan, which we are going to publish in the next month or two. As members will be aware, we have already given a commitment to have a new emphasis on all waste in that plan. That is why we are saying that we want a zero waste Scotland and why I hope that the Parliament will get behind the concept. It is not zero household waste; it is zero waste Scotland. There will therefore be a much greater emphasis on commercial and non-municipal waste, because 85 per cent of our waste in Scotland comes from the commercial and industrial sectors, compared with the 15 per cent that is household waste, which has had all the attention in recent years in recycling targets. Bill Aitken and the chap he referred to both make a perfectly valid argument, and I hope that Bill Aitken will take part in the debate on the zero waste plan that we hope to have in the next few weeks.

The Scottish Government has long recognised the specific challenges that face Glasgow in its efforts to meet some of Scotland's recycling targets. As Anne McLaughlin says, Glasgow sits at the bottom of the recycling league in Scotland, and if Scotland's biggest city cannot make substantial progress that will hamper our ability to achieve our national targets and move towards becoming a zero waste country. We need a zero waste Glasgow, and bespoke advice has been given to Glasgow City Council on issues around waste management. I am pleased to note that the council is now taking its responsibilities seriously and is planning a £135 million investment in waste treatment facilities, which the member mentioned.

As I have said, we hope to publish the zero waste plan in the next couple of months, and I hope that Parliament will have an opportunity to respond to the recent consultation and to have a say on the contents of the final plan in the next few weeks. Sarah Boyack raises a sensible point. As a former minister with responsibility for the environment, she will be well aware that, in the past, the focus was on household recycling. Now, however, I think that we have a degree of cross-party agreement that we must shift the emphasis to all waste, including the 85 per cent of waste that is commercial and industrial waste. I agree that there are advantages for city councils such as Glasgow if they adopt a more holistic approach to waste in their planning. Perhaps the debate on targets has not yet concluded. It is at the heart of our deliberations around the zero waste plan.

The Scottish Government funds the flycapture project, which is a national database for recording fly-tipping incidents. Flycapture is available free of charge to all Scottish local authorities, and 28 local authorities are signed up to it at present. Local authorities and other duty bodies maintain information about littering within their areas.

I know that Professor Christopher Harvie has fantastic knowledge of all things German and I am intrigued to find out more about Germany's special waste policies. We recognise that some waste is more hazardous and dangerous than other waste. We have implemented a number of European regulations on, for example, the collection of batteries, which Christopher Harvie mentioned. If Christopher Harvie has in mind any specific lessons that we could learn from what is happening in other countries, which the Scottish Government is always keen to do, he should write to me. However, there is already a lot of legislation on dealing with such waste, and I will happily write to him with some information on that.

The NFUS has submitted its formal written response to the inquiry. There have been informal discussions with the NFUS on the subject of the inquiry—indeed, yesterday, I met the president and chief executive of the NFUS, and it was one of the many subjects that we discussed. The procedure for the Pack inquiry is that stakeholders send their views directly to Brian Pack, who will make recommendations to Government.

I assure the member that, when I attend agriculture councils, I take every opportunity to raise such issues in the margins with my fellow ministers from other EU member states. As the next few months go by and the European Commission's proposals become clearer, we will want to seek to influence them even more. That means that we will need to have even more discussions with other agriculture ministers to seek to influence their views and, of course, to get Scotland's message across at the same time. On whether the Pack inquiry is premature, that is certainly not the view of Scotland's farming community. The public meetings that Brian Pack has held throughout Scotland have attracted literally thousands of farmers. They have been a huge success and there has been a huge degree of interest, understandably, in the future of Scotland's agriculture policy. There is general consensus, which I hope the member shares, that Scotland should be leading the debate. Given the importance of agriculture to Scotland, we should determine as quickly as possible the most important principles that Scotland should follow in future agriculture policy. We should determine what is best for Scotland and, once we have the ammunition, take the argument to the European Commission and to other member states, as the member suggests.

I assure Liam McArthur and his Orkney constituents that there is clear recognition that there must be direct, continuing  support for the most disadvantaged areas of Scotland. Whether that support is delivered through future LFASS arrangements, as I am sure it will be, and to whatever extent it is reflected in future direct support from Brussels, which remains to be seen, it is clear that distance from markets, the climate and many other factors should influence the degree to which farmers are supported. A debate is taking place in Europe about the future of less favoured area payments. All the signs that I see suggest that Scotland is comfortable in that debate, because almost all of Scotland would be covered by the criteria that might be laid down by Europe, albeit that there might be some arguments about some of the margins on the mainland. Of course, when we pay out the fund within Scotland, we have our own influence over which parts of Scotland get which rates. I assure Orkney's farmers that their location and the challenges that our island communities face will continue to be at the forefront of our minds.

Progress has been made on a number of fronts. The Scottish Government has rationalised the number of inspections and continues to encourage proportionate auditing of the common agricultural policy so that regulation is appropriate to the risk. Scotland's environmental and rural services partnership continues to improve the experience of service delivery for farmers and other rural land managers. Since its launch at the Royal Highland Show in 2008, SEARS has rationalised inspection activity, reduced charges, tackled bureaucracy, listened to customers and improved access to services. However, I accept that we should not rest on our laurels, as there is a lot more to be done.

As the member will be aware, given the CAP and European Union regulations it is often difficult to keep up to date with the number of regulations that we have to implement in Scotland as we take forward some of these policies. However, I hope that I can assure  the member that we have delivered on our promise to tackle red tape and bureaucracy where that is within our control. Of course, we are also continuing to try to influence external forces. As I said in my opening answer, there are many examples of the progress that we have made. That said, I take the member's point. There is a lot more to be done and we have to continue to make our arguments, in particular to the European Union, given that a lot of the more nonsensical regulations that we get come from EU policy.

The Scottish Government funds Keep Scotland Beautiful's annual national spring clean, which will take place again throughout April. As of today—with almost a month still to go—volunteer numbers are already at 36,140, so we are heading for record participation levels. I urge all members to become involved in their local spring clean tidy-up.

I agree. I also urge the local businesses that the member mentions to sponsor their local spring clean and the local organisations that are participating in it. Many  schoolchildren across Scotland will be participating in this year's national spring clean. I support the member's message that all such businesses should be socially responsible and should work with their local authorities, local schools and others to keep our streets clean.

I know that this subject is close to your heart, Presiding Officer, but I assure you that everything I will say is what you would have said in any case. There is no doubt about that. First, I will respond to the point Jim Hume, who wound up on behalf of the Lib Dems, made. He wondered why we are having this debate, given that other consultations take place in other portfolios and there are not always debates in the middle of the consultations. The key difference is that there has been an interim report and it has sparked a massive public debate, which is taking place throughout Scotland and involves our rural and farming communities. It is only right that Parliament should have the opportunity to reflect on the interim report as we look ahead to the final report. Karen Gillon made a good point about ensuring that there are opportunities for the Parliament to engage with that final report. I assure members that that will be the case. Sarah Boyack's point about the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee engaging on the issue was also good—but that is a decision for the committee. I hope that it will, in some shape or form, address some of the issues that we are discussing. I am pleased that all the members who have spoken in the debate, from all parties, recognise the important role of agriculture in Scotland's future and the roles that our crofters and farmers play within it. I am also pleased that we have generally recognised that Brian Pack is the right man for the job as far as this inquiry is concerned. As many members have said, he has taken some difficult messages across Scotland and exploded some myths at the same time—but despite that we have not had to allocate bodyguards to him as he has gone around meetings with farmers. They have all engaged thoroughly on this complex issue, which is important for the future of their livelihoods. It is important that they engage. Brian Pack is dedicated to his role. I heard that his blog on this subject recently showed that when he went on holiday to Tenerife he was on the beach reading his evidence papers on the future of Scottish agriculture. I suspect that he was the only person on the beach in Tenerife who was reading about the future of Scottish agriculture. Robin Harper asked me to paint a vision of the future. Perhaps the vision that we can all paint today is of Brian Pack in his swimming trunks on  the beach in Tenerife reading about the future of Scottish agriculture. I can assure members that when I glanced at the public gallery today, Brian Pack was taking copious notes on their speeches. I hope that that shows us all that this has been a worthwhile debate.

Yes, on that topic.

I am sure that that will be reflected in his final report when it comes out in a few months' time. One key issue has been the need to target the support that is provided in Scotland for public goods, which I will come on to shortly. The debate takes place against the background that we do not know what the CAP budget will be. Negotiations are to take place on the size of the EU budget, then negotiations will take place among the member states on the size of the CAP budget within the EU budget, so there is a degree of uncertainty. Although I agree with the Lib Dems' statement in their amendment that we hope to have a substantial agriculture budget available to Scotland, we cannot look into the future and we must recognise that while farmers understandably want direct support to continue—we all support that—we would rather live in a world where it was not required, so we should not cement it as something that we want to have in place indefinitely in the decades ahead.

Yes, the discussions have been taking place to some degree, but of course they are largely for the future. Negotiations and discussions between ourselves and the UK, which will include the Brian Pack report once it is published, will largely be for 2010 onwards. Discussions are therefore at an early stage. Sarah Boyack, Robin Harper and others mentioned the contribution that there must be towards what Brian Pack refers to as the five securities that we face: food security, climate change issues, energy security, biodiversity and water security. The backdrop is the pivotal economic role that agriculture plays, particularly in some of the most fragile communities in Scotland.  Because we will have declining budgets in some shape or form and because we must prepare for that, it is more important than ever that Scotland's farmers produce for the market. We also have an opportunity to influence the market, which is where the national food policy and demand for Scottish produce, which some members mentioned, kicks in. Let us not forget that our two most powerful food and drink brands are underpinned by Scottish farmers. Our Scotch beef brand is in the livestock sector, which is fed by the arable sector, and Scotch whisky is dependent on Scotland's arable sector. That is why we can increase demand for Scottish produce. There has been a 21 per cent increase in demand for Scottish produce since the Government came to office nearly three years ago, so we are making good inroads. Only last week, Simon Howie Butchers Ltd recorded a 20 per cent increase in butchery sales; sales of potatoes by Albert Bartlett and Sons (Airdrie) Ltd are up by 15 per cent; and 40 per cent of Scots visited a farmers market last year compared with only 25 per cent as far back as 2004. Members have raised a variety of complex issues, but let us be very clear: if there was a silver bullet we would not have needed the Pack inquiry. We are faced with a complex issue. We must acknowledge that. I want to touch on the tensions involved, some of which members have mentioned. First, we want a link between direct support and genuine activity, but we do not want to return to headage payments. How do we do that? We need some answers. We want to get rid of the anomalies to which many members referred, such as no support for new entrants through the single farm payment, but then we hear that we do not want too much change. That is a tension that we must somehow reconcile. [ Interruption. ]

We also hear that we want to support the most productive parts of Scotland to maintain Scotland's ability to produce food and other public goods. By the same token, we must bear in mind the challenges that face some of our more fragile communities. We must balance that. We want an adequate CAP budget to deliver all the outcomes that we want, but we know that the EU is potentially facing financial issues, and we do not know what the size of the budget will be. Again, that is a tension that we must face. We keep hearing the call to make the CAP simple and less bureaucratic, which we all support, but by the same token we hear demands from different sectors and different parts of Scotland that the CAP should be tailored to their particular  circumstances. Again, that is very difficult to reconcile. I have already explained that we cannot support the Lib Dems' amendment, but we support all the issues that are raised in the amendments of the Labour Party, the Greens and the Conservatives. Robin Harper asked us to lay out a vision. I did that last week when I spoke to the farmers at the NFUS annual conference. I would like to plagiarise my speech last week to lay out that vision again, because if we want to paint a picture for agriculture in the 21 st century we should paint one that gives Scotland an outstanding reputation. [ Interruption. ]

We all want an agriculture sector and a Scotland that has an outstanding reputation for food and drink that commands a premium in the marketplace, at home and abroad. We want to combine that with our unspoilt landscapes, which are home to a rich variety of flora and fauna that attract millions of visitors to Scotland each year. We want all of that delivered by productive, profitable and efficient agricultural businesses that have adapted to a low-carbon future. I believe that if we work together and get the support of the other member states and the UK Government, whoever that may be—of course, if we had our own voice it would be a lot easier; we have launched a consultation on the referendum today to help us achieve that—and ensure that this nation's voice is heard, we can make our vision a reality. I therefore ask the whole Parliament to rally round the Government's motion and some of the amendments.

Today's debate is in response to the public consultation on the interim report of Brian Pack's inquiry into future support for farming in Scotland. The debate gives members an opportunity to express their views on the crucial issues that are covered by the inquiry. I am delighted that Brian Pack is here to listen to the debate. He will, of course, make himself available after the debate in case members want to speak to him. In the past few weeks, Brian Pack has travelled the length and breadth of Scotland with his roadshow of meetings that have so far been attended by more than 1,300 farmers. With more snow bringing havoc to many parts of the country as we speak, we are all aware of how the extreme weather has caused some serious problems for the farm sector. Insurance companies are dealing with many more claims than usual for farm buildings that have collapsed under the weight of snow. However, the Scottish Government can also have a role with regard to costs, such as the cost of alternative housing for lambing and calving, which farmers could not have insured against, and which raise animal welfare issues. After listening to farmers and many MSPs, I was pleased to announce last week that the Government will make available up to £3 million to help the sector to cope with that kind of cost. As well as exceptional weather conditions, we have also seen exceptional economic conditions in recent times. However, food production is a good business to be in during a recession, and the exchange rate has played a helpful role by making Scottish products more competitive and by increasing the value of European support. The value of output went up last year for sheep, for cattle and for horticulture. Scotch beef sales in the pre-Christmas period were up by 8 per cent, lamb exports increased by more than 10 per cent and the horticulture sector is now valued at a considerable £239 million. However, it was a less buoyant year for the cereals sector. Prices were down, and I know that there are concerns about what will happen in 2010. Tenant farmers have been affected by those issues and, of course, by some significant recent rent increases.  I am sure that most people will agree that it is important to put those trends into context. The long-term picture is that the global population is projected to rise to 9 billion by 2050, which will greatly increase the demand for food. Further, people are changing their eating habits, which will also drive up demand. That is why, despite the weather and other challenges that farmers have to cope with, there is a mood of optimism in the sector. That was evident at two of the events that I have attended in recent weeks: last week's National Farmers Union Scotland annual conference in St Andrews, which was also attended by many MSPs; and, before that, the Perth bull sales. Farmers are planning to invest and expand. There is a bright future for them to look forward to. However, the future will bring new challenges and, after 2013, we will have a new common agricultural policy. It is against that background that the Scottish Government set up the Pack inquiry. It will put us on the front foot, so that we know what we need to do for Scotland and can argue for it in London and Brussels and with other member states. The biggest individual element of farm support is the single farm payment, which has been the subject of much recent discussion. We have the single farm payment because, when the original common agricultural policy led to the surpluses of the 1970s and 1980s, European Union policy changed and direct payments to farmers were introduced. Payments were originally coupled to production through headage of livestock or area of cropping. No one to whom I have spoken wants to go back to the system that we had before, in which farmers often produced simply for the payments. As I have said many times before, I believe that the future should involve farmers producing for the market, with the public providing support for farmers who produce. It is widely accepted—and I am sure that we all support the idea—that further evolution in agriculture is inevitable. It cannot be right that next year's payments for farmers should be based on what they produced between 2000 and 2002. During the past decade, some farmers have expanded their businesses, while others have reduced their farming activity but still receive the same payments. We estimate that, under the current rules, about 4 per cent of single farm payments may be going to land that is not supporting proper agricultural production, which I hope we all agree is unacceptable. Meanwhile, farmers who have entered the industry since entitlements were awarded, and farmers in sectors that were not supported under the previous regime, receive nothing at all.

I am not sure what Jamie McGrigor means by "asked to reduce their stock for environmental reasons", but it is clear that farmers have to deliver a number of public benefits, of which environmental protection and safeguarding is one. For some of the reasons that I have just outlined, the new EU commissioner, whom I am due to meet on 22 March, has reiterated that the historically based system will have to go. That will be a major part of the package of budget and CAP proposals for 2014 onwards. This year, the commission will continue to gather views from Governments and various stakeholders throughout Europe and in Scotland. Towards the end of the year, it will issue an informal paper, and it will make its formal proposals in 2011. Those proposals will, under the new Treaty of Lisbon rules, be negotiated jointly between the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament, and the final decisions are likely to be made in 2012 or even 2013. We face a lengthy process, and it is vital that we influence it from the beginning to ensure that, at the very least, our key principles are accepted at the earliest possible stage. The Pack inquiry will equip us to influence the policy agenda in Scotland's interest in advance of the formal negotiations, and to take up detailed positions once the negotiations are under way. The inquiry is a crucial piece of work, and many farmers have said to me that there is no better person to chair it than Brian Pack. I am extremely grateful to him—as I am sure we all are—for taking on that task, and to his committee of advisers: Wilma Finlay, Johnny Mackey, Davie MacLeod, Steve McLean and Professor John Grace. The inquiry is at the halfway stage of its work programme, and the interim report sets out its initial thinking. The report is thought provoking; we know that more than 20,000 farmers are working out what it means for their individual businesses, but we in the chamber need to debate what it means for Scotland. The closing date for written responses is 5 March, although farmers and crofters in the Western Isles have been given longer to respond—until 19 March—to allow for the fact that their public meetings do not take place until 15 and 16 March. I urge as many people as possible to contribute their views to the consultation. The schedule is arduous and Brian Pack and his committee have a tough job ahead, which involves balancing the interests of Lowlands and  Highlands, east and west, and the livestock and arable sectors, at a time when we do not even know the size of the CAP budgets. We all look forward to the final report, which will, I hope, be delivered in June. Scotland is certainly leading the way in addressing some difficult issues. One such issue involves deciding on the type of payment system that should replace the historically based single farm payment. The interim report sets out one possible model for a future scheme, which uses area-based payments and activity-based top-up payments, but it makes clear that that is just one illustration. There is no doubt that the current debate will produce many other options. I am sure that we all wish to urge stakeholders to focus not simply on finding flaws in the interim recommendations, but on working out constructive ideas for what the new system could and should look like. For instance, Brian Pack's illustration uses the Macaulay Land Use Research Institute's system as the basis for the area-based elements. Scotland is fortunate to have particular expertise at the Macaulay institute, which gives us options that may not be available elsewhere. However, some people might favour a different method for dividing Scotland up, and comments on that issue would be welcome. Comments are also welcome on precisely how payments should be distributed under the new system. One thing is clear: if we accept that change is inevitable because the historical system is unsustainable, redistribution is also inevitable. Any new scheme that is based on avoiding change will be a non-starter. Redistribution is a big issue and I am pleased that the industry is taking it seriously. The interim report specifically asks for comments on ways in which to address the impact on particular regions or sectors. It also flags up the important role that is played by other support measures such as less favoured area support scheme payments. There is a link between those issues and the question of timing. On the one hand, it is understandable that some people want an extended transition period to soften the landing but, on the other hand, the sooner we put the anomalies behind us, the better. The interim report proposes that we wait until the rules for post-2013 are known and that there is change fairly quickly thereafter. That has sparked heated debate and alternative ideas are doing the rounds—ideas that might or might not be permitted by the EU when the rules are agreed. Here, too, comments from stakeholders and MSPs will be extremely valuable and gratefully received by the inquiry team. The interim report also seeks views on some short-term issues, one of which is the link between farming activity and support payments. The report  sets out what is possible under the current legislation. That is quite limited, but we are determined to address that issue. We have already tightened the rules, for example in the changes to LFASS that we announced last summer, but the Pack inquiry will help us to determine what else can be done. It will equip us to negotiate for stronger rules in the future CAP while respecting the rules of the World Trade Organization.

We are conscious of that. When we have a better understanding of what the options could be, we will want to model them to see what impact they would have on our farming communities on the islands and on the mainland. We all agree—and the recent discussions in the agricultural press support the view—that there are no easy answers and no quick fixes. This is a key time for farming in Scotland. It is essential that we make the best possible use of the current regime and agree on what we need to argue for in Europe to ensure that Scottish agriculture continues to play its part in achieving our goal of sustainable economic growth. I wish the inquiry the best of luck and urge all MSPs to express their views today and take part in the debate. I am happy to say that we support all the amendments, with the exception of the Liberal Democrat amendment, which I am afraid is poorly worded. It sets in stone the single farm payment, whereas we might want to have other options available, depending on the outcome of the review that is being conducted by Brian Pack. I commend the interim report to the Parliament and look forward to the debate. I move, That the Parliament notes the publication of the Interim Report by the Inquiry into Future Support for Agriculture in Scotland; acknowledges the considerable work that has gone into producing this comprehensive and considered report, and welcomes the inquiry's continuing commitment to extensive stakeholder engagement on the future application of the Common Agricultural Policy in Scotland.

I can assure Parliament that we take this issue seriously. One of the most important steps to be undertaken before we can protect any species is an assessment of the scientific and related evidence. The national standing committee for farm animal genetic resources has agreed to help us by providing advice to Scottish ministers. I am particularly grateful to the committee for taking on  that task, because it is outside the scope of its normal work. Its advice will ensure that Scottish ministers have an accurate and up-to-date assessment of the information that is required to make an informed decision on the best course of action for black bees on Colonsay and for Scotland.

I feel the urge for a site visit to Colonsay coming on in order to look into the issue in more detail. I assure the member that, as he will appreciate, we must consider a number of issues. First, it is not always easy to define native bee species. Secondly, we looked for appropriate legal powers to designate conservation areas for bee populations, but SNH concluded that it did not have such legal powers, so we are investigating that. However, we will certainly keep the member up to date on progress.

The member raises a good point. Of course, with the recent outbreak of certain diseases in bee populations in Scotland, we have postponed the publication of the national bee strategy, which will be the best forum for considering some of the issues that Rob Gibson raises. I assure him that the strategy will be published once we have learned lessons from the recent disease outbreaks in Scotland and that it will cover the issues that he has raised. It will also, of course, move the issue of the future of Scotland's honey bee and general bee populations further up the agenda.

The inquiry into future support for agriculture in Scotland is looking at all aspects of farm support and it recently published its interim report. A public consultation exercise is on-going and the inquiry's final report and recommendations are due to be published in June.

I can certainly give the member a guarantee that the issue that he raises goes to the heart of the Brian Pack inquiry, and I hope that he will be able to attend the debate on it after question time and make the relevant points. It is clear that there has been a decline in livestock numbers in Scotland and across much of Europe since support was decoupled from production—the issue is not unique to Scotland. Thankfully, there are some signs of optimism in the livestock sector so, fingers crossed, the decline that has taken place over recent years since decoupling may bottom out. Time will tell. That decline is one reason why we must reform the common agricultural policy. That is on the agenda and we must ensure that Scotland's priorities are reflected in the new CAP.

I agree that our crofters largely work in environments that are harsher than those elsewhere in Europe, and that that should be taken into account in the agriculture support system. The less favoured area support scheme payments that we make take that into account, and many crofters in Scotland benefit from those arrangements and from other support mechanisms. The issue will certainly be at the forefront of our minds when we consider the recommendations that we receive from the Brian Pack inquiry.

Excellent progress continues to be made as Scotland moves ever closer to achieving the 40 per cent recycling target. The latest data from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, which cover the period from October 2008 to September 2009, show that local authorities across Scotland are recycling almost 36 per cent of municipal waste. I offer my congratulations to the 12 local authorities, one of which is West Lothian Council, that have met and, indeed, exceeded the 40 per cent target. The Scottish Government will continue to support all local authorities to achieve and exceed the target.

I guess it depends on how we define the most efficient form of recycling, which may be open to debate. Obviously, I cannot give any guarantees at the moment on what the zero waste plan will contain, as we are currently considering the responses to the consultation. The final plan will be published in the spring, and the Parliament will have opportunities to debate it then. Local authorities might consider different forms of recycling to be the most efficient, depending on geography and other issues, so we must take that into account. We need a flexible toolbox, as it were, to allow each local authority to do what is most appropriate for its area. The good news is that most local authorities are already heading in the right direction.

The provision of waste management facilities is important, and a lot of  good work is taking place on the issue between the Scottish Government, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and councils. The Scottish Futures Trust is considering the best method for funding such facilities. Some local authorities are already moving ahead with such facilities, which is perfectly possible even under the existing arrangements. Resources have been and will be transferred to local authorities, which they may put towards such projects if they choose to do so, in line with local priorities. I am always open to suggestions from individual local authorities on how to improve the current situation. I assure members that a lot of good work is being carried out to accelerate the number of waste management facilities in Scotland.

That is a good point. Although, since the establishment of the Scottish Parliament in 1999, we have made a lot of progress on recycling targets, if there is one criticism it is that we have perhaps all taken our eye off the ball as far as commercial and industrial waste is concerned. As the member might be aware, I have given a commitment to Parliament that the zero waste plan will put a lot more emphasis on industrial and commercial waste. Although we have made lots of inroads with municipal and household waste, we must now address the wider issue. The member is quite right to raise that point.

I continue to regret the fact that, in November last year, the Council of the European Union decided to extend the west of Scotland catch composition rules until 30 June 2011.  In December, we secured a political commitment from the previous European Commission to accelerate work on alternative arrangements, with a view to making proposals in the first half of this year. We are working closely with the industry to shape those proposals, now that the new Commission has taken office. I met the new commissioner's chef de cabinet in Brussels on Monday and, as well as discussing other issues, I reiterated the need to address this current issue as a matter of priority and to find alternative, better measures for protecting cod, haddock and whiting on the west coast of Scotland.

I welcome the member's constructive contribution on an important issue for the west coast of Scotland fishing industry, particularly the white fish sector. We will take forward discussions in the spirit that he suggests. There were a number of breakthroughs, which I hope will be useful for the west coast of Scotland and for the member's constituents. We secured an increase in the megrim quota—megrim is now one of the most valuable fish stocks in Scotland—which we hope will bring extra millions of pounds into fishing communities, and we secured flexibility on where the fleet can catch its valuable monkfish quota. Such flexibility has been called for for many years. We hope that those breakthroughs will deliver good results for the west coast of Scotland and for the member's constituents. However, the member is right to suggest that there is a lot more work to do.

I thank all members for their contribution to the debate on the bill. There  have been many positive contributions; we have heard members speak of their pride on this momentous day and describe the bill as a "landmark" and a "watershed". Those are highly appropriate words to associate with the bill that I hope we will pass at decision time. The role of the Scottish Parliament is to improve the lives of the people of Scotland and I believe that we now have a bill—Scotland's first marine bill—that will make a significant and lasting difference to the way in which we manage our spectacular seas for the people and communities of Scotland. More than ever before, people are interested in the marine environment. Let us not forget that Scotland's seas generate more than £2.2 billion of marine-related industry—not including oil and gas—and that Scotland's seas provide around 50,000 jobs. We have two thirds of the UK's seas, a fifth of European Union waters and 100 ports. Under the waves of our seas, we have 6,500 species of plants and animals that we know we are obliged to look after. Thankfully, we also have the breakthrough of executive devolution, which puts this Parliament in the driving seat out to 200 nautical miles for the first time and in the driving seat for planning legislation and nature conservation in all of Scotland's waters. As members have rightly pointed out, there will be many competing demands on Scotland's seas in the 21 st century. The bill is about balancing the various competing demands, because our seas can meet so many of Scotland's needs in the 21 st century. The offshore renewables sector is about to blossom, creating thousands of new jobs and helping Scotland to meet her climate change targets. Even today, I notice that Highlands and Islands Enterprise has put out a statement about the number of communities that may benefit from construction opportunities for offshore renewables. Nigg, Arnish, Machrihanish, Ardersier and Kishorn in Wester Ross have been picked out, and six locations outwith the Highlands and Islands are also set to benefit. There is huge potential for Scotland's seas to help to meet our energy needs, tackle climate change and create thousands of new jobs at the same time. I assure Karen Gillon that we will use the renewables expertise that currently exists in Marine Scotland as we take the bill forward. Of course, our seas also provide food for the nation. An issue that will become even more of a priority in the 21 st century is where we get our food from. If we look after them, our seas can continue to provide healthy, tasty food. Indeed, I had some good Scots mackerel in the Scottish Parliament  canteen today, which reminded me of how great our seas are when it comes to providing fantastic food. In relation to tackling climate change, carbon storage is another benefit, in addition to the renewables sector, that we may be able to enjoy from our seas. As many members have said, the people of Scotland are becoming increasingly fascinated by their marine environment. When I was in Tiree for my holidays last summer, it was spectacular seeing the marine wildlife off the shores. At one point, I watched gannets diving for fish while the basking sharks were circling and the dolphins were dancing on the horizon. That is spectacular, it is in Scottish waters and we must look after it. As many of us know, in the waters off our constituencies around Scotland, marine wildlife tourism—[ Interruption .]

There is also spectacular marine wildlife off the coast of Galloway and Upper Nithsdale. As we know, marine wildlife tourism is another opportunity that Scotland's seas provide for our local economies in the future. In the past, to far too great an extent, it has been a case of out of sight, out of mind. However, as human knowledge about what lies beneath the waves expands and Scotland's marine research expertise shines a light on what we have in Scotland's marine environment, more and more people than ever before are aware that we have to safeguard and look after Scotland's precious marine environment. Only a couple of weeks ago, I was lucky enough to open Oceanlab II in Newburgh, in the First Minister's constituency; fascinating research into our ocean floors is taking place in that facility, which is run by the University of Aberdeen. As an SNP minister and as a member of this Parliament, I am proud to be associated with Scotland's first marine bill. Every single member of the Scottish Parliament should be proud today to support the bill, as I hope they are about to do shortly. Not only should the Scottish Parliament be proud, but we should be proud of what it achieves for Scotland's seas and for our marine environment and for what it will achieve for the people of Scotland, many of whose livelihoods depend on maintaining healthy seas, which is what the bill is all about. I urge Parliament to support the bill and make history today.

I am delighted to open the debate on Scotland's first ever marine bill. This is truly a historic day for Scotland, our seas and the people of Scotland who want our seas to be protected and managed properly for future generations. Scotland's first marine bill is crucial legislation that is designed to protect and enhance our world-class marine area. We are all well aware of the importance of Scotland's spectacular seas—our dolphins, basking sharks, coral reefs and seabirds, such as puffins, are already internationally renowned and acknowledged. I have already taken action this year to ban the barbaric practice of shark finning in Scottish waters, in order to provide more protection for that endangered species. Much of what we do is underpinned by Scotland's fantastic marine science resource and the bill will also be underpinned by that expertise. The marine protected areas will be driven by science and they will now also take into account, and where appropriate have regard to, socioeconomic factors. We have a proud history in marine science. More than 100 years ago, Scotland was the world leader in oceanographic and marine research. The marine laboratory at Aberdeen, which is now a core part of Marine Scotland, has records that go back more than 100 years. As we move forward, science will become even more important. Let us not forget that the nation of Scotland has a history that is intimately connected to the sea. The seas have played a huge role in defining who we are as Scots and how we view the world. Our spectacular, resource-rich seas have shaped our nation. They have driven both our economy and social change, from the rise of the city of Glasgow and shipbuilding, through to Peterhead, one of Europe's major white-fish ports, and the oil and gas capital of Aberdeen. Our island communities are shaped and largely defined by their relationship with our marine environment. Our island representatives in the Parliament are particularly well aware that the marine environment is the life blood of many communities in Scotland. From the largest communities to the single crofter on the shores of  a loch, Scots interact with the seas on a daily basis. Of course, new times require new approaches to harness the tremendous potential of our seas while delivering protection and enhancement. In a routine survey of the dredge-spoil disposal site in the Sound of Canna, Marine Scotland recently discovered and took video footage of dozens of fanshells. Fanshells are Scotland's biggest shells; they grow to about 0.5m. In this case, they were found at depths of 175m. That discovery massively expands the known population of that amazing species. The previous estimate of the live population around the United Kingdom was 14, of which three were in Scotland. Fanshells are amazing creatures that filter and improve the water in the sea areas where they live. I intend that those fanshells, and the other fantastic and unique species and habitats in our waters should be protected, and that they should benefit from the Marine (Scotland) Bill, which I hope we will pass this afternoon. The bill delivers a step change in our approach to the marine environment. It delivers enhanced protection, ensuring that the marine environment will be safe for our children, their children and generations beyond. The bill ensures that we have the tools safely to exploit the full resource potential of the seas. The renewables industry is a case in point. The bill provides us with the tools potentially to deliver 12GW from Scotland's seas by 2020, taking into account the offshore wind, wave and tidal projects that are proposed. Development on that scale would well exceed Scotland's renewable energy target of 50 per cent of electricity demand by 2020. That is one way in which our seas are helping Scotland and the world to tackle climate change. The bill heralds a new era for Scotland's marine environment. It is trail blazing. In time, the passing of the bill will prove to be one of the Parliament's proudest moments. It has been possible only because of the effort and contributions of so many people and organisations. There was a huge response to the consultation. We have held workshops and meetings with stakeholders over the past couple of years that have allowed us to listen and learn from those with an interest in and expert knowledge of the marine environment. As well as the major organisational stakeholders—Scottish Environment LINK and the Scottish Fishermen's Federation to name but two—there has been a major input from thousands of Scots, who have wanted to make their views known on the future of Scotland's marine environment. Every sector and age group has engaged throughout the process. Letters about the bill came to the Government from primary school pupils in Ullapool. I worked with the Scottish Wildlife Trust, which worked with those children and wrote to us  about its concerns and aspirations for Scotland's marine environment. Turning to the Parliament, I thank members of the Finance Committee, the Subordinate Legislation Committee and, in particular, the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee. The bill has benefited from the detailed interest and scrutiny of that committee's members, and we have a stronger and better bill as a result of the parliamentary process. I put on record our thanks to the committee clerks, who have worked extremely hard to support the committees' work. I thank my officials, who have been up many an evening burning the midnight oil to ensure that the Scottish Government continued to work closely with Parliament and with others with an interest in the bill to make it a bill of which the Parliament can be proud. The bill reflects the aspirations of the people of Scotland and members of the Parliament. Scotland's first ever marine bill is the start of a journey, a journey that will bring prosperity to Scotland and protect our wonderful marine environment. The bill allows the development of a national marine plan and the setting up of Scottish marine regions. The national marine plan will be a key document in setting out our aspirations for Scotland's seas. The marine regions will be key to involving stakeholders all around our coasts in the future of the seas. Marine planning will provide better information and greater certainty on which to base investment decisions, and the new statutory marine planning system will ensure sustainable economic growth in the seas around Scotland. The bill provides vital tools to protect and conserve our marine flora and fauna and historical assets, allowing the designation of marine protected areas. We will work closely with Scottish Natural Heritage and the Joint Nature Conservation Committee to develop the MPA network, and we will involve stakeholders closely in that project. We will also develop a new licensing and reporting system for seals, and we will improve their protection. I have heard a lot said about what the bill does for seal protection, and there have been many misunderstandings. Let us all be clear: the bill is a major step forward in protecting our seal populations and it provides a system that is fit for the 21 st century and which will help us to conserve our iconic seal species.

I am happy to put it on record that we will work with all the relevant authorities to ensure that appropriate guidance is in place on the identification of haul-out sites of our iconic seal populations around Scotland's coasts. The bill will make it easier for Scotland to address climate change and develop the huge renewable energy potential in our seas. It will deliver faster economic growth while ensuring that the seas continue to provide services for future generations of Scots. It will also help us to care for and safeguard the interests of what lies beneath the waves in our precious marine environment. For the purposes of rule 9.11 of the standing orders of the Scottish Parliament, I advise the Parliament that Her Majesty, having been informed of the purport of the Marine (Scotland) Bill, has consented to place her prerogative and interests, in so far as they are affected by the bill, at the disposal of the Parliament, for the purposes of the bill. I am delighted to move, That the Parliament agrees that the Marine (Scotland) Bill be passed.

We are dealing with a complex issue, and I appreciate the helpful and understanding way in which members have approached the amendments. I reiterate that amendments 87 to 89 are designed to ensure that existing fisheries legislation works more smoothly and to ensure that the organisations that run regulating orders can carry out their duties. Indeed, many of the changes have been proposed at the behest of those organisations. I take on board Karen Gillon's request for clarity on the Highland regulating order that was unsuccessful. I am happy to look into that and the points that she raised and, as she requests, to write to the committee with that clarification.  Amendment 87 agreed to.

Amendments 79, 80 and 83 will introduce a new offence of intentionally or recklessly harassing a seal at a designated haul-out site. They set the penalty for anyone who is found guilty of that new offence at up to six months' imprisonment or a level 5 fine, and they allow for the new offence to be enforced by marine enforcement officers. I resisted the more general amendments on disturbance and harassment offences that were lodged at stage 2, because they carried the risk of effectively preventing the use of non-lethal deterrent measures against seals as an alternative to shooting, which could result in unintended consequences for wildlife tourism, public access and leisure activities. I appreciate, however, that there are genuine issues around the harassment of seals at their most important haul-out sites. I consider that amendment 79 and consequential amendments 80 and 83 will provide seals with a suitable and proportionate measure of protection from harassment when they are at their most vulnerable. I am therefore content to accept amendments 79, 80 and 83.

First, I will address amendment 7, in the name of Liam McArthur. The power to direct a vessel to port is not new. It exists, for example, for investigating and enforcement officers under the Food and Environment Protection Act 1985, for wildlife officers under the Offshore Marine Conservation  (Natural Habitats &c) Regulations 2007 and for British sea-fishery officers under the Sea Fisheries Act 1968. I recognise Liam McArthur's good intentions in lodging amendment 7. However, our compliance officers believe that it could introduce considerable difficulties for them. Importantly, they believe that it would seriously hinder their ability properly to enforce marine legislation. When a ship is directed to port, I believe that the convention is for those on the marine protection vessel to contact the port concerned and make the appropriate arrangements. However, I am advised that it is not possible to share enforcement policy instructions. I am happy to write to Liam McArthur to set out our approach. With that in mind, I ask him to seek leave to withdraw amendment 7. Government amendment 85 provides clarity concerning to whom evidence needs to be shown when enforcement officers are exercising powers under part 6. Section 136 was amended at stage 2 by a non-Government amendment in the name of Stuart McMillan. Prior to that amendment, there was a duty to produce evidence of authorisation on request before exercising any power under part 6. Mr McMillan's amendment brought about the change that marine enforcement officers must produce such evidence, regardless of whether or not they are asked to do so. That raised the question to whom the evidence must be shown and what would happen when no relevant person was present. Amendment 85 clarifies those matters. Amendment 86 disapplies sections 136 and 137 in relation to the entry of marine enforcement officers into dwellings for the purpose of exercising enforcement powers under part 6. That is required because entry into dwellings by officers is covered by section 122, which requires that a warrant is needed for such entry. Paragraph 9 of schedule 3 has its own rules on production for evidence in this situation.

The Scottish Government sought leave to withdraw a number of our stage 2 amendments in response to the concerns of members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee. In the intervening period, further consideration has been given to those amendments and their impact. As a result, the Government has lodged amendments 89A, 89B, 89C and 89D. I will speak to them shortly. I remain convinced that the Scottish Government's amendments are necessary and appropriate, and I am of the view that concerns are unfounded. The Government's amendments will improve sea fisheries legislation without having a detrimental impact on fishermen and are appropriate in a Scottish context. They address a particular possible future difficulty with granting regulating and several orders under the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Act 1967. They also amend the long title of the bill and, at the same time, help to align the bill with the UK Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009.  Amendment 87 makes technical modifications to the Sea Fish (Conservation) Act 1967 that are required as a result of the insertion of section 141B at stage 2. Amendment 88 modifies the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Act 1967 in several ways. First, it removes the requirement for ministers to obtain the consent of the Crown Estate commissioners before granting a several or regulating order and replaces it with an obligation to have regard to the powers and duties of the Crown Estate. Secondly, it provides ministers with powers to vary or modify several or regulating orders to enable a development to take place. Thirdly, it enables ministers to make provision for the owner of an affected area to pay compensation to the grantee of a several order. Finally, it imposes on ministers an obligation to have regard to the powers and duties of the Crown Estate. Amendment 89 modifies the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Act 1967 also. First, it enables moneys that are collected by way of tolls or royalties by the grantee of a several or regulating order to be used for purposes that are connected with the regulation of the fishery and not just for the cultivation of the fishery. Secondly, it extends liability for an offence under section 3 of the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Act 1967 to include the  master, owner and charterer of a sea fishing boat. Thirdly, it enables restrictions and regulations that are made by the grantee of a fishery to be enforced by the relevant enforcement agency; in Scotland, that is Marine Scotland compliance. Fourthly, the amendment requires the grantee of a regulating order to keep and make available a register of licence holders, and extends the current protection of private oyster beds to all privately owned shellfish beds. Fifthly, it gives ministers extended powers to specify in an order the type of fishing implements that can be used in areas covered by an order. Sixthly, it removes the obligation on ministers to appoint an inspector to carry out an inquiry into a proposed order and instead provides ministers with discretion as to whether to appoint an inspector to hold an inquiry. Finally, it applies an increased maximum fine level of £50,000 on summary conviction for offences relating to several or regulating orders under section 7 of the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Act 1967. The modification that provides ministers with discretion as to whether to appoint an inspector is designed to avoid situations in which an expensive and time-consuming inquiry is triggered unnecessarily. However, I anticipate that in most cases an inquiry would take place. For example, the regulating orders in Shetland and on the Solway would be handled in exactly the same way under the new provisions as they were previously, as would the Highland regulating order application that was unsuccessful. Amendment 89A, in the name of Karen Gillon, would remove the ability of a regulating order grantee to impose restrictions, to make regulations or to have those enforced by Marine Scotland compliance. Unfortunately, the amendment would result in such orders being unworkable. For that reason, I ask Karen Gillon not to move it. Amendment 89B, also in the name of Karen Gillon, would retain the current obligation in the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Act 1967 to appoint an inspector to hold an inquiry in all circumstances where an objection is considered neither frivolous nor irrelevant. That could result in time-consuming and expensive inquiries being triggered unnecessarily. For that reason, I ask Karen Gillon not to move the amendment. Amendment 89C, in the name of Liam McArthur, seeks to provide a statutory defence for a master, charterer or owner of a fishing boat that is used in an offence on the basis that they did not know or had no reason to suspect that the boat would be used in an offence. However, subsection (1)(b) of the new section created by Scottish Government amendment 89 creates a strict liability offence. That approach is commonly used in fisheries enforcement, because it is often difficult to show intent. Enforcement officers rarely observe an  offence taking place, so they need to rely on strict liability attaching to persons where it can be shown that there has been a material breach of a rule. Liam McArthur's amendment could not extend to a master, who is responsible for what a vessel does and what happens on board, and is therefore unworkable. On that basis, I ask Liam McArthur not to move it. Amendment 89D qualifies the ministerial discretion that is provided by Government amendment 89 by providing that an inspector will be appointed to hold an inquiry where an objection raises a material concern. On the basis that the amendment describes what will happen in practice, we are willing to accept it. Amendment 100 will simply add the words "and regulation of sea fisheries" to the long title. Amendment 99 will delete the word "and" from the long title, as it is misplaced as a result of amendment 100. The purpose of the Scottish Government amendments in this group is primarily to address concerns relating to the granting of several and regulating orders in Scotland. The amendments have the support of those who operate regulating orders at present. In addition, the opportunity is being taken to make fisheries legislation in Scotland consistent, as appropriate, with that in the rest of the UK. The amendments will bring about improvements to fisheries management, they are appropriate in a Scottish context and they will not impact adversely on fishing. I move amendment 87.

I will speak first to Scottish Government amendments 73 to 76, 78, 81 and 82, which deal with seal licences. The Government amendments provide for a number of things, including: minimising unnecessary suffering; licence conditions on firearm type, weather conditions, safe distances, stable platforms and recovery of carcases for research; the need for ministers to be satisfied as to marksmanship skills; and a review of the licence system every five years. Many of those licence conditions already operate in the successful Moray Firth seal management pilot and it was always  intended that such conditions should be part of the seal licence system. However, at stage 2, it was felt that the conditions should be specifically acknowledged in the bill and I made a commitment to the committee to do so. The Government amendments deliver on that commitment. They also reflect the concerns of animal welfare groups. Amendment 72 was lodged by Elaine Murray, who, as we all recognise, has taken a close interest in seal conservation matters throughout the bill process. It provides that Scottish ministers must have regard to previous damage and/or the effectiveness of non-lethal measures in fisheries or at fish farms before they grant a seal licence. Again, it was always intended that such information would be taken into account before a licence was granted. I resisted the stage 2 amendments on the ground that they were too prescriptive, but I consider that amendment 72 provides a suitable context for putting greater emphasis on non-lethal measures in preference to lethal options, so I am content to accept it. Robin Harper's amendment 121 provides that Scottish ministers may not grant a seal licence to any fishery or fish farm "adjacent to a site important to seals", but it provides no definition of sites "important to seals". Such a definition would be needed for the provision to operate satisfactorily. I understand the desire to limit potential conflict between seals and fisheries and fish farms, but I have difficulty with amendment 121, as it fails to recognise that a significant number of sites might be considered "important to seals". Such sites could encompass large parts of the Scottish coast and surrounding waters, and would be subject to change, sometimes over short timescales, as seals moved around the coast. In essence, amendment 121 proposes exclusion zones around sites "important to seals", the number of which could be large. In such zones, fisheries and fish farms would be unable to protect themselves or their fish stocks. That would be the case even when non-lethal measures were ineffective or when management of grey seals was necessary near a common seal site. The exclusion of fish farms or fisheries from locations "adjacent to a site important to seals" might also have important implications for marine renewables, which present similar potential challenges. Surely it is more appropriate for the issue to be addressed through the wider marine planning process when genuine conflicts exist. In that way, decisions on the most appropriate location for any developments in the marine area will take into account a wide range of factors.  Scottish Natural Heritage is already a statutory consultee on fish farm sites and often raises the issue of potential conflicts. For those reasons, I join Elaine Murray in urging members to resist amendment 121. I turn to Elaine Murray's amendments 77 and 122 and Robin Harper's amendment 120. I appreciate from recent campaigns that the possibility of pregnant or nursing seals being killed is a highly emotive issue, but I must record that many of those campaigns are based on inaccurate information. The proposals in the bill will increase protection for pregnant and nursing seals. They will remove the so-called netsmen's defence, which has been exploited by some people to engage in unregulated killing of seals, including seal pups, during close seasons. The bill provides that all seal management will be carried out under licence and so will be properly regulated. It was recognised during committee consideration that a complete ban on killing all seals during large portions of the year would leave fisheries and fish farms unable to defend themselves from seal predation. That is why I resisted the amendments that were lodged at stage 2. However, I appreciate that there is genuine concern about the possibility of pregnant and nursing seals being killed, so I am happy to restate the commitment that I made at stage 2 to monitor the new seal licence system closely and, if the monitoring suggests that there is a significant problem, to consider the introduction of close season restrictions. I am therefore content to accept Elaine Murray's amendment 77, which clarifies the relevant power in the bill. Robin Harper's amendment 120 would prohibit the taking or killing of seals for any reason for three months of each year for common seals and for four months of each year for grey seals. It proposes an exception to that prohibition through what amounts to a shadow seal licence system, which will presumably duplicate the existing system and incorporate additional conditions. In effect, it would mean the development of two seal licence systems, one for the close season and one for the remaining period. I hope that members agree that that could result only in confusion and duplication for administrators, consultees, stakeholders and other people who had to use or monitor the new system. I understand the intention behind amendment 120, which tries to protect pregnant and nursing females, but although its aim is entirely laudable, it could have important unforeseen consequences. It would seriously hinder the ability of the Scottish Government to meet its obligations to kill or take seals in an emergency—for example, to preserve public health or public safety, to prevent the spread of disease, to conserve natural habitats or  species, or for other imperative reasons of overriding public interest—for significant parts of the year. Amendment 120 would also hinder vital scientific research, including seal tagging and DNA sampling, during significant and particularly important parts of each year. Again, that could interfere with research that is vital to securing the future of Scotland's iconic seal populations. The amendment would significantly increase the bureaucracy and costs involved in any seal licence system by providing for the two parallel systems to which I have referred. That would be likely to result in either separate or more complex application forms, consultations, assessments, reports and monitoring. The new seal licence system will be complex enough without that extra layer of complexity. For those reasons, I urge members to resist amendment 120.  Amendment 122, in the name of Elaine Murray, seeks to provide an exemption to a seal licence condition under her amendment 77, which specifies periods during which seals may not be killed or taken—that is, close seasons. However, she fails to propose the necessary consequential amendments that would allow that exemption to offer a defence against the offence under section 95. For that reason, I ask her not to move amendment 122.

In our opinion, the amendments that Liam McArthur has lodged as a result of his philosophy of learning through doing are very useful. They amend section 91 so that reports must include information on any amendments to marine conservation orders, urgent continuation orders or marine management schemes, including those that are brought about as a result of monitoring. We are happy to support the amendments.  Amendment 70 agreed to.  Amendment 71 moved—[Liam McArthur]—and agreed to.

The bill provides an exemption from the offence of damaging an MPA where that happens as an unforeseen and incidental result of a lawful operation. In addition, there is a defence over and above that in respect of certain sea fisheries activities. The sea fishing defence has been thought necessary because of the requirements of the common fisheries policy. We do not wish to create an unequal playing field by creating offences that will apply to Scottish fishing boats but not to other European Union fishing boats. At stage 2, we lodged an amendment that would allow the defence of section 85(2) to be removed or restricted by order in future. Our intention is that the power will be used only where there is agreement at European level that would allow us to remove the fishermen's defence without discriminating against our fishermen as compared to those of other EU nations. The bill's provisions on fishermen's defence are consistent with the UK Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009. The UK act applies to the offshore waters adjacent to Scotland and the Scottish ministers have certain responsibilities for that area under the 2009 act. There is a strong argument for keeping the legislation covering MPAs in inshore and offshore waters around Scotland as consistent as possible, so I ask Kenneth Gibson to consider withdrawing amendment 118.

To give some comfort to Robin Harper, I say that he should bear it in mind that, with regard to the management schemes that are put in place following the conservation orders to help look after marine protected areas, there is always the option of using existing legislation, should certain activities need to be restricted in certain circumstances.

Government amendments 61 and 63 relate to an amendment that Elaine Murray lodged at stage 2. Elaine Murray's amendment would have required public authorities to exercise their functions in ways best calculated to further the contribution of a nature conservation MPA to the MPA network. I accepted the principle at stage 2 but indicated that we would improve the text at stage 3. Amendment 61 removes Elaine Murray's original amendment and amendment 63 inserts the duty in a more suitable place, in section 71. The problem with its current position is that it splits paragraphs (a) and (b) of section 71(2), which are closely linked to each other. Government amendments 62, 64 and 65 are minor drafting amendments that change incorrect references to "Scottish National Heritage" instead of Scottish Natural Heritage. I move amendment 61.

At stage 2, Liam McArthur lodged amendment 234, which required the Scottish ministers to provide a copy of the draft marine conservation order to the relevant planning authority if the order would apply to parts of land—for example, the intertidal area. That fine principle was agreed to by the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, but the phrase "relevant planning authority" is not the accepted term in planning legislation. Amendment 66 remedies the situation by replacing that term with the phrase: "planning authority in whose district the land is situated". Amendment 67 better defines the term "planning authority" in terms of the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997. I now speak to Karen Gillon's amendments 116 and 117. Marine conservation orders will be used only where necessary to support MPA objectives. They will be used mainly to manage otherwise uncontrolled activities that pose a threat to a protected feature or asset. The bill provides ministers with powers to give any person—I repeat, any person—the opportunity to make representations. In that context, amendments 116 and 117 are unnecessary—in fact, they amount to an extra step in the process and would probably add to costs. They would allow people to make further representations over and above those that had already been made, and there is no provision for ministers to judge whether the representations amount to a significant interest. The provision could be used vexatiously to prevent nationally important features from being protected on the grounds of minor impacts to existing activities.  We have tried to create a marine bill that balances economic, social and environmental interests for the purpose of sustainable economic growth. Amendments 116 and 117 affect that balance and go against those principles. The provision that they would insert could be used vexatiously, and the only thing that they add is an extra layer of bureaucracy with attendant costs. I therefore urge Parliament to resist them and ask the member not to move them.  We think that there are good intentions behind Liam McArthur's amendment 68, but we believe that it is unnecessary. It is very prescriptive and would be difficult to apply in practice. In practice, consideration would be given to the socioeconomic impacts arising from a marine conservation order, and I have already mentioned that those powers would be used only where necessary. We would also assess displacement effects, where possible, although in practice it can often be difficult to identify whether displacement is likely or where it is likely to take place. In our view, a requirement to do that in all instances before action is taken to protect the features of an MPA is not reasonable. Amendment 68 could have several unintended consequences. First, it would remove the flexibility that Marine Scotland has to tailor its approach—including the allocation of resources—to the consideration of each individual MPA. Secondly, it could open the marine conservation order process to vexatious disputes. MCOs could be held up for years because of claims that Marine Scotland had not explored every possible effect that an MCO could have. Let us not make the process unworkable before it has even got under way. Section 76 already includes a requirement on ministers to send a draft order to any persons who have an interest in, or who would be affected by, a marine conservation order. At that point, Marine Scotland, working with stakeholders, would assess the environmental, social and economic impacts and any displacement that could result. I provide a clear undertaking that those issues will be assessed where possible. For all those reasons, I urge Parliament to reject amendment 68. I move amendment 66.

As we have just heard and as we all know, where the responsibility for marine fish farms should lie is controversial. The amendments have just generated some angst in the chamber. The matter was well debated at stage 2 and the arguments remain the same. Amendment 22 would remove local authorities' controls over  marine fish farming under the Town and Country Planning (Scotland) Act 1997 and would place responsibility for consents with Marine Scotland under the marine licensing system. Amendment 41 would make special mention of marine fish farming licensing decisions among those that can be delegated to bodies such as local authorities. We acknowledge that requests have come from the aquaculture sector for greater streamlining of the consenting processes that apply to aquaculture and we are not unsympathetic to those pleas. Nonetheless, local authorities have a role in delivering local accountability, which cannot be dismissed lightly. The way through the problem is by involving local authorities in marine planning and by showing that local accountability can be safeguarded through the marine planning process. My response to Bill Wilson's intervention is that we would of course be willing to speak to local authorities when more than one local authority is involved in one marine region, which would create the possibility of more than one licensing regime for aquaculture operators. Only once we have convinced local authorities and their stakeholders that local accountability can be safeguarded will we seek to ask them to consider what streamlining for aquaculture consents can be achieved. The consenting regime for the aquaculture industry was significantly changed as recently as 2007 and further change now might not be a sensible way forward. We appreciate the many pressures behind the amendments, but the issue is far too complicated for us simply to remove existing functions from local authorities. On that basis, we resist the amendments.

No.  Amendment 45, by agreement, withdrawn.  Amendment 46 not moved.

I will speak to all 17 amendments in group 14, so I apologise in advance for the length of this speech. Amendment 20 would restrict the ability to include parts of small islands in MPAs. The amendment would replace the reference to "island" with the terms "reef, skerry, stack or sandbar". The existing drafting allows features that extend above high-water mark to be included in an MPA if they are connected to the features in the sea. Historic and marine biodiversity features are sometimes found above high water in places that would not be covered by the amendment. For example, historic artefacts above high water could be part of a submerged feature. The proposed provision would mean that unless the part above high water was on a reef or so on, we could not include it in an MPA even though it was very well connected. Therefore, two separate protected areas would need to be designated for a single feature. That would add to bureaucracy and cost  and, as most members will accept, would be rather confusing to the public. In our opinion, the bill is best served by the term "island", which covers reefs, skerries, stacks and sandbars but is not restricted to those categories. I repeat that our intention is not to use the MPA powers to designate large islands or inhabited areas. I will be happy to write to Liam McArthur and to Orkney Islands Council to confirm that point if Liam McArthur will withdraw amendment 20. Amendment 50 is a drafting amendment that will change the term "order" to "designation order" for the purpose of clarity in section 59. Amendment 51 is connected to amendment 53. Together, amendments 51 and 53 will move text that was inserted by an amendment in the name of Elaine Murray at stage 2 that linked the designation of MPAs to the network of conservation sites. The text is much better moved to a more suitable place in section 59. In so doing, the amendments will retain the substance of Elaine Murray's stage 2 amendment. Amendments 52 and 60, in the name of Liam McArthur, would introduce a new step in the MPA process by requiring SNH to maintain a register of candidate sites. Our intention has always been that Marine Scotland would lead on the identification of MPA proposals, with support from SNH. My aim has always been to move away from red tape and unnecessary bureaucracy where possible and, in doing so, to benefit the health of our seas and our marine industries. Amendments 52 and 60 risk creating confusion about, for example, what a candidate site is. Is a candidate site the same as an MPA, or is it a new category? Creating a new category of site would not be helpful to the process. We have to keep things simple if we can.  Amendments 52 and 60 would also add another layer of bureaucracy by in effect importing into the bill one of the more bureaucratic elements of the habitats directive. I wonder whether Liam McArthur really wishes us to go down that road. If greater transparency is the reason behind the amendments, I reassure him that we will work closely with stakeholders in identifying marine protected area proposals. For those reasons, and with the assurances that I have given, I urge Liam McArthur not to press amendment 52. Amendment 3, in the name of Peter Peacock, is well intentioned and we are happy to support it. Amendment 54, in the name of Robin Harper, seeks to reverse an amendment in the name of Karen Gillon that was agreed to at stage 2 that allowed for consideration of socioeconomics as part of the MPA designation process. We opposed  Karen Gillon's amendment at the time, but she pressed the amendment and it was agreed to by the committee. Karen Gillon has subsequently written to the Government to clarify the intention behind her stage 2 amendment. We now understand that the text was amended to introduce a degree of flexibility into the MPA designation process that could be used only in exceptional circumstances. We have accepted Karen Gillon's clarification and we placed a letter in the Scottish Parliament information centre earlier this week to outline our thinking on the issue. As a result, I do not think that there is anything to be gained from amendment 54. However, let me reaffirm that science should be the primary consideration, with provision to take account of socioeconomics in exceptional circumstances, for example when choosing between locations that make an equivalent contribution to the MPA network or when the network duty has already been met. Whether or not socioeconomic factors are considered for particular site proposals, the legal obligation will be to create a network of sites, as required by section 68A of the bill. We understand the good intentions behind amendment 54, but the committee has already voted on the issue at stage 2. For all the reasons that I have outlined, I ask Parliament to resist amendment 54 in the name of Robin Harper. Amendment 55, in the name of Elaine Murray, is a good amendment, which we support. At stage 2, Elaine Murray lodged a similar amendment that was not pressed. At the time, we were opposed to the amendment not on principle but because it would have conflicted with the six-yearly reporting and monitoring requirements that are set out in section 91 of the bill. However, the revised amendment that Elaine Murray has lodged—amendment 55—has solved that problem and would allow the reporting and monitoring of MPAs to fit into the six-yearly reporting cycle that is required by section 91. We congratulate Elaine Murray on her revised amendment, which we urge Parliament to support. Government amendment 56 is a consequential amendment to ensure consistency of drafting following acceptance at stage 2 of a Government amendment to tighten the test in section 61(1) for designating historic MPAs. Amendment 114, in the name of Karen Gillon, would allow Scottish ministers to have regard to any social and economic consequences in considering whether it is desirable to designate an area as an historic MPA. As discussed at stage 2, our approach to heritage protection, whether on land or at sea, has always been that cultural significance should be the sole criterion for decisions to designate our most important heritage  sites. We should take proper account of socioeconomics in how heritage sites are subsequently managed. We remain of that view on historic MPAs. The Parliament might be tempted by a drive for consistency with the position on nature conservation, but we should remember that each marine historic asset is a unique and finite resource that is non-renewable, vulnerable to man-made pressures and without capacity to recover if damaged. For example, there is only one HMS Campania in the Firth of Forth. We cannot choose between two locations to minimise social or economic consequences. If we do not designate a nationally important historic asset where it is found because of the pressure to have regard for social or economic consequences that would come with amendment 114, we run the risk that the asset will be lost without our even having the right to ensure that it is properly investigated or recorded. I am sure that no one wants to go down that road. There is also an issue that is specific to marine heritage. Some historic wrecks are directly targeted for commercial gain through the recovery and sale on the open market of valuable artefacts, which is a process that shows little regard for national heritage value. One of the unintended consequences of amendment 114 would be that treasure-hunting companies would argue that designations would have economic consequences on their pursuit of profit from Scotland's historic shipwrecks. We obviously want to avoid the risk of heritage value becoming sacrificed to narrow commercial interest. For those reasons, I ask Karen Gillon not to move amendment 114. The Government's amendment 57 is a technical drafting amendment. Peter Peacock's amendment 4 seems reasonable and would enhance the accountability and transparency of the MPA designation process for the general public, so we support it and urge Parliament to do likewise. Elaine Murray's amendment 21 seeks to shorten the period for which an urgent MPA designation may stay in place. Designation is based on marine research, which can take a significant amount of planning and resourcing, and is entirely dependent on the weather. A period of 12 months would be too short to guarantee that proper research into a potential MPA could be carried out. Urgent MPAs will be used only in exceptional cases, when there is a clear need to act fast. They will not be used as a matter of course. I hope that that gives Elaine Murray some comfort. Under the UK Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009, Scottish ministers have powers to designate MPAs in the Scottish offshore zone. The UK act powers are now fixed and include a two-year  period—the period that is currently set out in the Scottish bill. It is important that timescales inside and outside the 12 nautical mile zone are consistent, so that they can be understood by the marine industries and other stakeholders. We urge Parliament to resist amendment 21. Robin Harper's amendment 115 seeks to require Scottish ministers to review any urgent MPA designation that extends beyond six months. In practice, I am not sure that it is necessary. When Scottish ministers designate an MPA using the urgent process, they will seek to review the situation as soon as possible, and normally within the period that is mentioned in amendment 115. The review will determine the case for the designation to be made permanent. However, it could well be that the data that are needed to make a full assessment of the site are not available within the six-month period, which could restrict the case for making the designation permanent. Nonetheless, we are content to accept amendment 115 because we are relaxed about the impact that it will have in practice. Robin Harper's amendment 59 seeks to constrain use of the urgent MPA designation process for a second time in the same location. If an urgent designation order were made and Scottish ministers did not take steps to make the order final, any attempt to make a second urgent designation could, I believe, be challenged. I have said repeatedly that, if used at all, an urgent MPA would be used only in exceptional circumstances. For those reasons, we are doubtful that amendment 59 is necessary, but we are content to support it to make the position absolutely clear on the face of the bill. Liam McArthur's amendment 90 was debated and defeated at stage 2, and our position on it has not changed. We see no particular reason for designation orders to be statutory instruments, and the Subordinate Legislation Committee was content with that position. If Liam McArthur is still intent on moving the amendment, I urge Parliament to vote against it for the reasons that I have outlined. I am sorry for the length of my remarks, but there were 17 amendments to deal with.

Amendment 113 would place an absolute requirement to apply a modified version of paragraph 2 of schedule 8 to the Electricity Act 1989 in cases in which there is to be a single process for applications for a marine licence and consent under the 1989 act. However, we have not yet reached a final view on exactly which provisions of the 1989 act are to apply in the single process, nor how they should best be modified. Amendment 113 could restrict our ability to develop a sensible and flexible process under section 27. I ask Elaine Murray to seek leave to withdraw it, in light of my comments.

The bill contains a number of appeal rights. For example, an unsuccessful marine licence applicant can appeal against the decision to refuse the licence. However, the bill does not say with whom the appeal would lie; that is left to be established through secondary legislation. The Rural Affairs and Environment Committee and the Subordinate Legislation Committee both commented adversely on that approach, and I gave assurances to Karen Gillon and others during stage 2 that Government amendments would be lodged to specify in the bill what the appellate body should be. We think that appeals under the bill would best be dealt with in the sheriff court. This group of amendments provides for that and makes consequential changes to reflect the choice of the sheriff court as the appropriate body. I move amendment 36.

I am happy to accept amendment 13, as it is appropriate that the powers in section 23 should be exercisable only where inaccurate or incomplete information has been provided by the applicant. I am also happy to accept amendment 14, which provides that the failure to supply information should refer only to  information that the applicant might reasonably have been expected to supply in connection with the consideration of a licence. I cannot accept amendment 15, as it could seriously affect the ability of the Scottish ministers to act in unforeseen or unusual circumstances. An example of a situation in which the provision in section 23(3)(d) could be used is when a new dredging operation might disturb or recover something of great archaeological interest. In such instances, the provision could allow for appropriate mitigation to be put in place, and the significance of any discovery to be properly evaluated. I therefore ask Liam McArthur to consider not moving amendment 15. On amendment 111, there could be situations in which the licensee wishes to notify a change in the activity that would result in the licence requiring to be varied. An example might be a change to the name of the ship that is carrying out the activity listed in the licence. We are happy to accept that amendment. On amendment 34, section 23 contains crucial provisions for the marine licensing regime that repeat much of what is already applied under part II of the Food and Environment Protection Act 1985. As the decision to issue a marine licence will have been reached after a rigorous assessment, the circumstances in which Marine Scotland is required to vary, suspend or revoke a licence will be exceptional. Given that background, I am happy to accept amendment 34. Amendment 35 would require the Government to pay compensation to the licensee for any costs incurred due to the variation, suspension or revocation of a licence due to the circumstances that are detailed in section 23(3), for example "a change in circumstances relating to the environment or human health" or "increased scientific knowledge". It would not appear to be appropriate for the Government to have to pay compensation for bringing to a halt an activity that might be causing environmental damage. There are always risks in business, and the Government should not be expected to be liable for those. Despite the vagaries of minority government, I will resist amendment 35, no matter what happens. I ask Liam McArthur to consider not moving it.

Amendments 16 to 18 would require all regulations made under section 25(1) to deal with all the matters in section 25(2). However, until we have developed a registration scheme under section 25, we cannot be certain that it would be sensible to make an absolute requirement of the sort that Elaine Murray proposes. For example, there might be no need to elaborate on the meaning of "fall below", but if the amendments were agreed to, regulations that failed to do that would be incompetent. Moreover, the wording of the amendments is such that they would prevent amending regulations from being made after an initial set of regulations had dealt with the section 25(2) matters. Instead, the principal regulations would have to be remade on every occasion. I doubt that that is Elaine Murray's intention and I would be grateful if she would not press amendment 16 and not move amendments 17 and 18. At stage 2, we debated a similar amendment to amendment 19, and our view remains the same. Amendment 19 is unnecessary and unhelpful.  Section 25(4) already requires the Scottish ministers to consult "such persons as they consider appropriate" when they make regulations under section 25. I reassure Elaine Murray again that the groups that are mentioned in amendment 19 will be consulted. An absolute statutory requirement, worded in the way that she envisages, could give rise to disputes about whether the right people had been consulted and could make regulations challengeable by people who thought that they came into the stated categories.

I understand the motive behind amendment 109, in that it would give a power to exclude applications from the pre-application consultation provisions where the application relates to an activity that has been carried out and licensed previously. It seems to me that the regulations that prescribe the relevant classes or descriptions of licensable marine activities could be used to produce the desired result. However, I have no particular difficulty with the amendment being agreed to. Amendment 28 will remove from section 17A(3)(d) some wording that we think unnecessary and perhaps unhelpful. Amendments 29 and 30 simply reflect that there is no need for section 17B to provide a power to make different provision for different cases or classes of case. All orders and regulations under the bill may do that by virtue of section 145(1)(a). Amendment 31 is a minor technical amendment so that reference is made to a proposed "activity" rather than "development", since licensing is for marine activities rather than developments. Amendments 8 to 12 would require that investigations, examinations and tests would be carried out only should any information supplied or articles produced not be sufficient for Scottish ministers to determine a licence application. The amendments would also allow investigations to be carried out only where "necessary", thus removing current references to "expedient". Accepting those amendments is unlikely to lead to any substantial changes in practice, but we have no objections to their being incorporated in the bill.

At stage 2, Liam McArthur proposed that the publication of licence applications should be on a website, so that they could readily be viewed. Amendment 32 would allow publication to be on a website only, unless it was felt that further publication, such as in a newspaper, was necessary. I am happy to accept amendment 32. One of the purposes of the bill is to introduce a simplified and streamlined licensing regime. Amendment 110 would require the Scottish ministers to determine applications in consultation with statutory consultees. That would mean that consultees would be contributing to the decision making directly, rather than making their views known to ministers, as we would normally expect in any consultation process. I understand Karen Gillon's purpose and I am happy to reassure her that consultation is a fundamental part of the bill. I am fully committed to delivering the consultation processes that are outlined in the bill. That is why I accepted an amendment from Karen Gillon on pre-application consultation at stage 2. For the avoidance of doubt, I point out that the consultation processes are set out in section 20(4). I will consult in the summer on the list of potential consultees. I look forward to receiving and using the advice of the many relevant consultees, which will no doubt arise in the consultation process in due course and which will be of high value to this Government and future Governments. Karen Gillon asked me to clarify those points by writing to the committee. I give a commitment to do that. Before determining an application for a marine licence, the Scottish ministers are required or empowered to consult those referred to in section 20(4). Amendment 33 will simply extend the scope of who the Scottish ministers can consult, so as to cover any persons that they consider "appropriate". I consider that it would be useful to have that flexibility. I hope that that gives Liam McArthur the reassurance that he seeks.

Amendment 24 would remove the flexibility to delegate planning functions to a single public authority. I believe that none of us would wish the powers to delegate planning functions to be limited in such a way. It is not inconceivable that delegation of planning functions to a single public authority might be appropriate in some cases. For example, delegation to one of the islands councils in Scotland might be a possibility. Elaine Murray referred eloquently to existing legislation, but we  must address the wording of the amendment that is before us, so I ask her to consider seeking to withdraw amendment 24. Amendment 104 is similar to amendment 141, which was debated at stage 2. That amendment was defeated, as it was too prescriptive, but amendment 104 addresses the issue by including the phrase "any other persons that the Scottish Ministers consider appropriate". That drafting provides more flexibility to meet the wide range of circumstances around the Scottish coast, so we are happy to accept amendment 104. We want to resist amendment 25, which is consequential on amendment 24. Amendment 105, which sets out further details on what a direction to a public authority must include, would offer a safeguard to a number of stakeholders who are worried about the use of the Government's direction-giving powers, so we are happy to accept it. Amendment 106 would introduce another layer of decision making by requiring the Government to lay before the Parliament for consideration a copy of the draft directions that are given to marine planning partnerships. That process, which would take a minimum of 40 days, is not necessary and would add a further layer of bureaucracy. For those reasons, and given the movement that I have made on amendments 104 and 105, I ask Robin Harper to consider not moving amendment 106. The arguments on amendment 42 are similar to the ones that I have just laid out on amendment 24. Amendment 42 would remove the flexibility to delegate licensing functions to a single public authority. We would not wish to limit the powers to delegate licensing functions in such a way. I repeat that it is not inconceivable that delegation of licensing functions to a single public authority might be appropriate in some circumstances, perhaps to one of the islands councils. Therefore, I ask members to resist amendment 42 and the consequential amendment 43.

Amendment 26 is a consequential amendment arising from an amendment that was made at stage 2. The inclusion of section 28A, concerning submarine cables, means that section 16(2) should now refer to exemptions and special cases provided by sections 24 to 28A. Amendment 69 is simply a drafting amendment to correct the erroneous placing of a bracket. Amendment 84 is a technical drafting amendment to correct a reference relating to the production of evidence during an inspection. In section 125(3), the first reference to "section 124(3)" needs to be changed to "section 124(2)". Amendment 97 is a minor drafting amendment to insert missing words in paragraph 10(1) of schedule 2. Amendment 98 is also a minor drafting amendment. It is consequential on a stage 2 amendment, as a result of which what was section 40(5) is now section 40(4A). I move amendment 26.  Amendment 26 agreed to.

We debated the issue at stage 2 and my views remain the same. I appreciate that amendment 107 seeks to put beyond doubt whether fishing could be a licensable activity. I am on record as saying that it was not our intention to make fishing a licensable activity under the Marine (Scotland) Bill. If there is any doubt, I am happy to put the question beyond doubt by using the order-making power to create exemptions. On that basis, I ask Karen Gillon to withdraw her amendment. Amendment 27 is a minor technical amendment to ensure that any consequential amendments  arising from a change to section 17(1) can be addressed. I recall that we had various debates about the legitimate uses of the sea at stage 2. Amendments 108 and 112 would remove the duty on Scottish ministers to have regard to "the need to prevent interference with legitimate uses of the sea" when adding to or removing from the list of licensable activities or exempting activities. That would mean that, in making our decisions, we would not need to consider activities such as navigation, fishing, mineral extraction, amenity use and offshore renewable projects. I am not sure what my colleague Kenny Gibson is trying to achieve, but I think that it would be unwise for me to accept his amendments. I therefore ask him not to move amendments 108 and 112.

I am pleased to start on a positive note. In the spirit of Peter Peacock's contribution, I "enthusiastically and generously" say that I am content to accept amendment 101, which delivers the right message about the Government's approach to marine management and the need to balance the use and protection of Scotland's spectacular seas. We welcome the reference to the health of Scotland's seas. I turn to amendment 2. We discussed the issue in great detail at stage 2, when I said that there are already such general duties in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 and that I did not believe that it was necessary to replicate them in the bill. However, in order to reiterate our commitment to mitigation and adaptation to climate change, I am happy to accept the amendment. On amendment 5, again, we debated such an amendment at stage 2. However, my views remain the same. The long title is meant to be an accurate legal description of the content of the bill. I have to say to Peter Peacock that my legal advice is that the amendment would make the long title inaccurate, so on that basis we have no option but to oppose it. I ask Peter Peacock to consider not moving the amendment.

Amendment 102 is useful and reflects stakeholders' concerns. As it makes more explicit the link between the planning and conservation parts of the bill, we are happy to support it. As for amendment 6, a similar amendment was discussed in detail at stage 2. My views remain the same: the bill contains no powers to require anyone to implement policies and programmes such as are referred to in the amendment. The plans get their force from section 11, which requires certain decisions in a marine area to be made "in accordance with" a plan, and requires that regard be had to a plan when other decisions are made. Given that a marine plan is not a vehicle for delivering freestanding programmes or a series of actions, I oppose amendment 6. However, I am happy to accept amendment 103, which is similar to amendment 6 but has had removed from it the references to policies, programmes, responsible public authorities and persons. As the Presiding Officer has pointed out, the Parliament has to choose between the two amendments: we choose amendment 103, because it focuses on the objectives for marine plans, the condition of the marine area at the time of the plan's preparation and the pressures of human activities on the area. Although such things would appear in plans anyway, I am happy for the bill to refer specifically to them. Amendment 23 is a minor technical amendment that seeks to bring section 7(2)(b)(i) into line with section 7(2)(a)(i) with regard to the reference to "the living resources which the area supports". Amendment 91 is another minor technical amendment that seeks to correct a reference to the Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 following changes in the final numbering of that act, and amendment 92 seeks to make a minor grammatical correction in schedule 1 so that the sentence in question will read: "the Scottish marine region to which the plan is to apply".

Through the work of Scotland Food and Drink and our enterprise agencies, we actively support the marketing and development of Scottish food and drink at home and abroad. Only yesterday, I launched a campaign that has been designed to make the consumer think about the factors that affect their food choices. In particular, it highlights the importance of fresh and seasonal produce, which, of course, we excel in producing.

The Scottish Government is taking a range of measures to support the development of Scotland's food sector through our successful food policy, which is the first such policy for Scotland. I greatly enjoyed my visit to Malcolm Allan Ltd in Falkirk, at which Michael Matheson was present. It was a particular privilege to meet Mr Malcolm Allan, who I understand celebrates his 91 st birthday in a few days, and the rest of the family who run that highly successful business, which is indeed growing and becoming more successful. Malcolm Allan Ltd and other companies in Scotland can apply to the Scottish Government's successful food processing and marketing scheme, which helps such businesses to expand,  and can take advantage of the many other measures that the is taking.

Jamie Stone highlights the importance of our retail sector and our supermarket chains in supporting local produce by stocking more of it on their shelves. That is why we are delighted that there has been, since this Scottish Government took office, a 21 per cent increase in the sale of Scottish brands, not only in Scotland but in England and Wales. We hold regular dialogue with the supermarket chains in Scotland. Although they now stock record levels of Scottish local produce, they could do a lot more, and we will continue to work with them to ensure that that happens.

The Scottish Government believes that a supermarket ombudsman will deliver fair prices and a fair deal for all in the food supply chain, including farmers and consumers.

Maureen Watt has made a number of good points. I welcome the belated commitment that UK Government has made. It may have taken it 12 years, and it has announced it just a few months before a UK general election, but we have finally got there—it has agreed to the principle of establishing an ombudsman. I understand that there will be further consultation, and we are waiting to hear more details about the form that the body will take, but it will certainly play  a key role. Since it took office, the Scottish Government has made a number of strong representations to the UK Government on the matter; indeed, on Tuesday this week, I wrote to once again the responsible minister in the UK Government to press the case for action to be taken as soon as possible.

Rural priorities is a competitive grant scheme that is available to a wide range of different groups, including landscape partnerships. So far, more than a quarter of a billion pounds has been approved under rural priorities to support around 3,600 projects in rural Scotland. Detailed eligibility guidance is available to all rural priorities applicants, and all applicants will have the additional support of rural priorities case officers in their regions.

I have, of course, taken an interest in the proposals that have been made by the Ochils landscape partnership, which states that it  "aims to increase access to the hills and wooded glens of the Ochils, improve the quality of our rivers, restore significant buildings" and carry out a range of other projects. Because of the diversity of the projects that it has proposed, it is clear that a bit of work has to be done to ensure that it is tapping into the right schemes that are available. I would be pleased for my senior officials to meet the partnership to discuss how it can do that, and I understand that these conversations have already begun.

The Scottish Government recognises that local authorities have a key role to play in the delivery of the zero waste policy, and works closely with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Society of Local Authority Chief Executives and Senior Managers and local authorities—indeed, the zero waste fund is financing a post at COSLA. We also work with many other partners on a wide range of issues, including waste reduction and recycling initiatives. In addition, the Scottish Government funds delivery bodies to work with local authorities to communicate best practice and provide training, guidance and communications expertise. The Scottish Government is providing local authorities with more than £80 million from the zero waste fund for the period 2008 to 2011 to help them meet targets in 2010 and beyond.

It is indeed the case that we require Glasgow to play its part in the effort to meet our national targets. That is why, over the past two years or so, the Scottish Government has had many conversations with that local authority. We are working with it to give it appropriate advice and find ways of improving its performance. We commend Glasgow City Council on a number of plans that are now in place in the city. The council is confident that it can achieve a recycling rate of 23 per cent by the end of this year. More plans are in place to improve that rate in the next year or two beyond that. If we are to achieve our 2010 targets, we need the support of Glasgow City Council, which needs to follow the example of the local authorities, such as the one that was mentioned by Bob Doris, that have achieved a good rate so far in 2010.

As I explained, a great deal of support is being given to local authorities across Scotland. We must not lose sight of the fact that, at this early stage, a number of local authorities have already achieved their 2010 target of recycling more than 40 per cent of waste. Further, Scotland as a whole achieved its landfill target some 18 months early. Progress is being made, although a number of challenges remain, and we need all local authorities in Scotland to do what they can to contribute towards the national targets. That is why we are giving significant resources to those local authorities.

New entrants who meet the European Union definition of a new entrant to farming can apply for support under the setting up young farmers—interest rate relief measure within the Scotland rural development programme rural priorities scheme.  Since 2008, when the SRDP rural priorities scheme was first set up, 19 applications for support that included that measure have been approved throughout Scotland. Taking account of all the measures that were included in those applications, they amounted to support for those new entrants totalling about £4.5 million. Two of the applications, involving about £387,000, were from new entrants in Grampian and three of them, involving some £863,000, were from Tayside. The Scottish Government does not collect statistics on other new entrants or new entrants who do not apply for those specific measures. However, there is a wide range of support measures for which such new entrants can apply.

Measures are being taken to attract even more applicants for the existing schemes. The issue is complex. A lack of capital and access to land are some of the obstacles to new entrants to farming. We have announced plans to take advantage of new flexibility in the rural development regulation to increase the level of support from €40,000 to €70,000, and within that we are adding a provision for an establishment grant of up to €30,000. I welcome the UK Government's proposal for a supermarket ombudsman, but it is a great pity that, after 12 years in government, the UK Government has decided to support that only a few months before a UK election and after much pressure from the Scottish Government, the other devolved Administrations and primary producers and other parts of the supply chain. Ultimately, the member pinpoints an important issue, which is that a profitable and sustainable agriculture sector is the best way in which to attract new entrants to the industry.

The member is right that the tenant farming route is an extremely important one for new entrants. That is why, after coming to  office, we set up the tenant farming forum to consider some of the obstacles that are in the way of new entrants to the tenancy sector. Accessing a tenancy is very difficult and complex for many young farmers and new entrants. We hope that some of the measures that the forum has proposed will make a difference and will make it a lot easier for new entrants to get into the sector.

The member raises an important point about the inability of new entrants to access the single farm payment, which is of course crucial to making many farming operations in Scotland viable. As he rightly points out, the Pack review addresses that point. Basing single farm payment on historic activity from 2000 to 2002 is not very helpful for new entrants who were not farming back then, which is why it is helpful that the Pack review refers to the issue. On representation to the European Union, I mentioned in an answer to a previous question on the subject that we have secured changes that have allowed us to introduce more flexibility in the existing measures to help new entrants. We continue to make representations to the European Union on the future of the common agricultural policy. We will take guidance from the Pack review on that.

Two organisations have been supported by moneys from the zero waste fund under the investment in community recycling and social enterprise III—or INCREASE III—community grants programme. They are Grangemouth Enterprises Ltd near Falkirk, which manages a project that recycles office furniture, and Active4All in Bellshill, North Lanarkshire, which runs a building materials reuse project. An anaerobic digestion plant that is being built by Scottish Water in North Lanarkshire is also in receipt of finance from the zero waste fund. Other organisations might have been supported by zero waste fund moneys transferred from the  Scottish Government to local authorities, but that is a matter for the local authorities concerned.

There was a favoured bidder for the plastics recycling grant from the Scottish Government, but unfortunately the recession appears to have intervened in the process, which means that we will have to keep that fund open in the hope of attracting more applicants. I do not believe that such companies are based in the four council areas that were mentioned by the member, but I am happy to clarify that later. I can confirm that one of the preferred bidders was a UK-based company. It is important that we set up such facilities in Scotland if at all possible so that we can recycle our plastics here. That is why it is important to keep that fund open over the next year or so to try to attract new companies to base themselves in this country.

Substantial funding for flood prevention is already included within the local government financial settlement. Removing ring fencing has given councils greater flexibility in how they use their resources and has reduced bureaucracy. We currently have no plans to reverse that and, of course, any changes would have to be agreed by the Scottish Government in partnership with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities.

I know that the member takes a close interest in the issue on behalf of his constituents who are, of course, very concerned about the impact of flooding on their lives and properties. I fully understand that but—I am sure that he will forgive me for saying this—it is disingenuous of him to lay the blame at the door of the Scottish Government. Funding is made available through the spending reviews in relation to proposals that local authorities bring forward in the first place. On 13 August, the Minister for Environment wrote to the local council. She explained that we had taken into account the needs of Edinburgh schemes in distributing resources for 2008 to 2010 and she confirmed that, with the agreement of COSLA, we will continue to take into account the contractual  commitments for the Water of Leith in the decisions that will be taken later this year on resources for 2010-11 and, crucially, in next year's spending review for the years up to 2014. I hope that the member can take some comfort that the spending settlements continue to take into account the needs of his constituents and other people in Edinburgh. It is simply disingenuous of him to lay the blame for any delay at the door of the Scottish Government.

The Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Act 2009 provides the framework within which Inverclyde Council, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and Scottish Water, working together, will have duties to assess, map and act to reduce flood risk in Inverclyde. Most of the act came into effect on 26 November, and we are working to bring the remainder into effect as quickly as we can over the coming year.

I agree with the member when he says that as a nation we have to take seriously the threat of flooding in our coastal communities, in particular, and in all Scottish communities. I am pleased that he referred to the £42 million that the Scottish Government has made available to take account of flooding needs in local authority areas. Of course, the figure is many times the annual average spend of the previous Administration on flood schemes between 1999 and 2007. It is a recognition that the current Scottish Government is taking the issue a lot more seriously and that investment is taking place across Scotland to address the issues.  I know that the member takes seriously matters in his constituency. I join him in congratulating Inverclyde Council on the hard work that it has undertaken on some of the problems that we have seen again in those local communities. At the invitation of Stuart McMillan MSP, the Minister for Environment recently visited the area and met some local agencies and others to discuss the problems that have occurred in the area. I welcome the work that Inverclyde Council has undertaken. As a country and a Government, we must take seriously the implications of the proposals that come forward from our communities in the years ahead.

I thank the member for his comments. He is right to highlight the fact that the onus is on local authorities such as Inverclyde Council to put together proposals for flood alleviation schemes and other measures in their communities. The Scottish Government can react to demand for resources or other assistance only once it has received proposals from Inverclyde Council or other authorities in Scotland. It is welcome that, at long last, Inverclyde Council is putting together some recommendations that will help to protect the safety of local residents.

: As I mentioned in response to previous questions, we will bring part 4 of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Act 2009 into effect as quickly as we can over the coming years. That will allow a modernised, sustainable approach to flood management, with streamlined decision making for local authority schemes. Most of the 2009 act came into effect on 26 November. We will ensure that there is a portfolio of responses, including rural land management, to manage flood risk.

I echo the member's comments about the devastation in the South of Scotland that has been caused by recent flooding, in particular. He was right to highlight the need for all agencies in Scotland to work together efficiently to carry out some of the remedial work that is necessary to restore damaged land, especially farmers' fields, which have in many instances been flooded. It is necessary to inform the Scottish Environment Protection Agency of any intended works. If a situation is considered an emergency, licences can be applied for retrospectively, once the work has been undertaken. I am keen to hear about any issues that may be causing difficulties locally. I will be more than happy to meet local stakeholders, including the farmers and others involved, if the member thinks that that would be helpful.

I indicated to Jim Hume that, if the issue that he raises is persistent and continuing—Elaine Murray appears to talking about the same issue—we should meet SEPA and others with an interest to see what can be done. However, it is important to put on the record that I am assured that SEPA treats such issues with the utmost seriousness and works as closely as it can with local bodies to address them and to ensure that bureaucracy and licensing regimes do not get in the way of urgent action to protect property and the environment. I will look into the issue, as I  assured Jim Hume, and keep Elaine Murray up to date.

Farmers markets and producers from across the whole of Scotland will have the opportunity to take advantage of the additional support, guidance and advice that will be made available through this exciting collaborative initiative. The funding will go to the Scottish farmers markets development partnership, which will help local producers to develop markets for their products and will encourage growth of the farmers market sector throughout Scotland.

I should mention that the funding will go towards creating a number of posts that will help to further the cause of farmers markets, hopefully in all parts of Scotland. I recommend that the member contact the Scottish Association of Farmers Markets and discuss with its members their plans for his constituency.

We all recognise John Scott's long track record of supporting farmers markets, and he rightly highlights their benefits. Producers can deal directly with consumers, and farmers markets are great for the town and village centres where they take place. I see farmers markets as having a role in food policy, in promoting the wellbeing of primary producers and in giving local communities access to good-quality local food, as the member  suggests. He also suggests an innovative way forward for farmers markets. I am happy to leave that sort of decision in the hands of farmers and their representatives, but we would be very supportive of anything that expanded the farmers market movement in Scotland.

The Government's priority for the Crofters Commission, as set out in the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Bill, which was published this morning, is to regulate crofting and to contribute fully to sustaining crofting in our most remote and fragile areas. The Government listened carefully to all consultees on the draft bill. Priorities must include directly addressing absenteeism and the neglect of crofts, as well as ensuring that land is retained in crofting tenure so that economic, social and environmental benefits continue to be delivered.

I thank the member for his comments. Many stakeholders have issued positive statements today in response to the bill. The member has rightly alluded to the fact that we are a listening Government—we have listened to members from all parties represented in the chamber and, more importantly, to people in the crofting communities. A number of contentious issues were contained in the original proposals, and they have been removed. As the member said, they are those relating to area committees, standard securities and occupancy requirements. We will continue to listen to Scotland's crofting communities over the next few weeks and months as the bill moves through the parliamentary process. It is important to do that. The issues are sometimes challenging, because of the diverse nature of Scotland's crofting counties from Sutherland to the islands—including the Western Isles, the member's constituency. It is important that we continue to listen carefully to what our crofting communities say.

As I said in answer to the previous question, we will continue to listen closely to our crofting communities. In recent months, members on the Labour benches have said that some of the funding is under threat, but that has proved not to be the case and many of the schemes continue in place. The less scaremongering there is, the more rational a debate we can have in the coming weeks and months on the future of crofting in Scotland. We will continue to listen carefully to the views of our crofting communities.

Community buyouts of land have brought a number of benefits to communities in the Highlands and Islands. They include empowering people and communities in rural areas to take responsibility for their own future. Community empowerment promotes confidence, participation and cohesion, and has promoted the long-term sustainability of communities. New houses have been built and house improvements undertaken. There has been improved access to amenities and services, and the retention and enhancement of vital community assets such as filling stations, post offices and shops. Population decline has been stemmed and the average age of community members has been reduced—patterns that go against the demographic trends for other remote areas in Scotland.

I am pleased that the member agrees on the success of the community land buyouts, which received a lot of support, albeit not cross-party support, in the Parliament when the legislation was made a few years ago. The member mentioned funding and revising the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003. The act is relatively new in the scheme of things, and it is important that we give it time to bed in properly and reflect on its successes in the past few years. We will continue to do that. We have not had evidence of gross failure of any aspects of the act, although we monitor it closely and will take any required action in due course. The member is aware that the Scottish land fund was closed in 2006 and replaced by the growing community assets fund, which was run by the Big Lottery Fund. The Big Lottery Fund is now taking forward the investing in communities portfolio, which will contain a new fund in June 2010 to help deliver funds to communities for the purposes given. Things are moving forward. I am convinced that the success of past years will continue as time goes on. We are listening closely to the views of the member, of Highland Council and of others who are expressing their views on the whole agenda. We will respond positively.

An announcement of the successful applicants to round six of the climate challenge fund was made just a few days ago on 3 December 2009, with 41 communities receiving £3.6 million of funding support.

I join the member in paying tribute to the project in her constituency to which she referred. Given that, as we speak, the world leaders are meeting in Copenhagen to discuss the future of the planet and how we can tackle climate change, it is absolutely fantastic and very encouraging to see so many communities throughout Scotland coming forward at grass-roots level with their own projects, ideas and innovations to reduce their carbon footprint and show leadership to the rest of the world, just as this Parliament is doing through the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. The member referred to the need to advertise the scheme. Of course, £27 million was made available over three years. So far, £15.6 million of that has been awarded to 198 communities, and 700 organisations or communities have expressed interest in it. More and more communities throughout Scotland are being attracted to the scheme and are finding out about it. In Fife alone, more than £2 million has been allocated to 16 projects. The member is right that we have to keep broadcasting how successful and valuable the climate change fund is and how it will enable communities the length and breadth of Scotland, in our all constituencies, to reduce their carbon footprint and help to tackle climate change.

The consultation on the draft zero waste plan for Scotland ends tomorrow, 13 November. The Scottish Government will consider carefully the views expressed in all the responses to help us produce a final zero waste plan, which we intend to publish in spring next year. We continue to work closely throughout this process with local authorities, and they will be vital partners in delivering the plan's objectives.

I agree with the member's sentiments. There is, of course, nothing stopping what she described from happening now. We  certainly join the member in encouraging local authorities to work together as much as possible, particularly in the regional context. I pay tribute to West Lothian Council, because it is the fifth-best performing council in Scotland for household recycling, which is good news. It is well over the 40 per cent target, and it has achieved that early. Local authorities working together is certainly the way forward, and I am in no doubt that that will be a feature of the final zero waste plan for Scotland.

Again, I agree with the member's sentiments. Of course, the Scottish Government has been funding and running the love food, hate waste campaign to try to reduce the waste of good-quality food that costs each household several hundred pounds a year. We have also been working with a number of local authorities over the past year or two on food collection trials, so the issue is certainly high on our agenda. The member is right to highlight it as something that must be at the heart of our zero waste policy.

I chaired a meeting of all parts of the dairy supply chain in Edinburgh on 24 September 2009. More recently, on 29 October 2009, I met the president of NFU Scotland to discuss a range of issues, including the challenges facing our dairy sector.

The member raises a good point about the campaign to establish a supermarket ombudsman, which I believe has cross-party support. Of course, the ombudsman was a recommendation from the Competition Commission after its thorough investigation into the issue, which unveiled many horror stories about how some suppliers have been treated by some supermarkets and large retailers. I can also inform the member that I happen recently to have had a meeting with the chairman of the Competition Commission, who wanted to discuss that issue with me during his visit to Edinburgh last week. He paid tribute to the Scottish Government for our support for the idea, which I explained has cross-party support in the Parliament. We are concerned by the lack of a positive response from DEFRA. I assure the member that I have made numerous representations time and again to the United Kingdom ministers who have responsibility for the issue, and I will continue to do so in the weeks and months ahead.

The Marine (Scotland) Bill contains provisions to create Scottish marine regions through secondary legislation, which will be subject to an affirmative resolution of the Parliament. I am committed to consulting on the criteria for defining the boundaries of the Scottish marine regions.

There is a distinction between allowing organisations or local authorities around Scotland who want to do so to apply for their area to be part of a marine region, and placing a duty on the Scottish ministers to establish marine regions throughout Scotland. We  are reluctant to introduce too many duties into the bill because doing so would in effect make it a lawyer's charter and would lead to our being required to establish marine regions throughout Scotland, irrespective of whether there was a case—or, indeed, demand—for doing so. That is the root of our reluctance. For instance, if there were such a duty, we might be required to establish marine regions around St Kilda or Rockall, which could take us into a whole different debate. I have already given the commitment that we will carefully consult on what criteria should be used to determine whether a marine region should be established in any particular area of Scotland. I give the member that assurance.

I am aware of the issue, as a NATO training exercise took place just last month. My understanding is that the MOD works closely with Scottish Natural Heritage when planning such exercises. The MOD also undertakes appraisals showing the environmental impacts both at sea and onshore. However, the member raises an important dimension of the need to safeguard our marine environment from all harmful activities, including those of the MOD. As he will be aware, the MOD has certain rights under existing legislation to conduct such exercises, but we will continue to press the MOD and work closely with the ministry to ensure that safeguards are put in place to protect our environment.

The objectives of the marine reserve in Lamlash Bay are to protect and enhance biodiversity and to help to conserve and improve scallop stocks to support sustainable fishing. It is too early to say to what extent these objectives are being achieved. Work on possible management measures for the remainder of the bay is on-going. The Lamlash Bay working group is scheduled to meet again on 14 January 2010.

I will inquire whether my officials are aware of the points that the member raises. Progress has been made, and I want to pay tribute to the Community of Arran Seabed Trust and the residents of Arran who have campaigned for years for protection for the bay on their doorstep. Their work resulted in the Government implementing legislation. As the member says, there is more to do, and discussions are continuing between COAST and the fisheries interests in Lamlash Bay. I remind the member that existing legislation includes safeguards around dredging activity and the impact that that can have on the environment. The sector is, therefore, already regulated. I take on board the member's points. I hope that we can make progress, but we need discussion among the various interests in the bay. It is important that we try to iron out any conflicts and ensure that people are working together towards common aims. I am pleased that there are signs of progress in that regard.

The Scottish fly-tipping forum produces guidance on fly-tipping for local authorities. The forum is funded by the Scottish Government and brings together key bodies with an interest in fly-tipping, including the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, police, farmers and the Scottish Government.

I am sure that all members in the chamber join me in condemning anyone who fly-tips anywhere in Scotland, including in the member's constituency. The legislation gives the authorities powers to prosecute such people, and a great deal of effort is taking place through the fly-tipping forum to collect data on the number of people who are fly-tipping. It is—as the member might expect me to say—largely for local authorities to decide whether or not they charge for uplifts. They would have to take into account the scale of the charge and the impact that it would have on fly-tipping or on any other issue. Each council is in a different situation, and they must decide on the appropriate charges for particular items. I have no intention of intervening in the right of local authorities to impose a charge or not. It is important that all local authorities—and all authorities—identify the culprits in whichever way possible, and take the appropriate action. So far, up to September this year, the database—which I understand Aberdeen city is not part of—has identified that there have been 16,688 fly-tipping incidents throughout Scotland. That is an appalling figure, and I hope that we can continue the good work that is being carried out to reduce it.

Hot branding of ponies is a less effective method of identification than microchipping. It is a painful procedure, and we agree with the British Equine Veterinary Association that it should be phased out. Hot branding of equines is only permitted in exceptional cases in Scotland, and only where a specific authorisation has been issued.

I assure the member that the position in Scotland differs from that in other parts of the United Kingdom, where no authorisation is necessary to hot brand equines. Hot branding in Scotland is strictly controlled, and limited to a very few animals per year. An authorisation will only be issued in cases in which hot branding is necessary to create a visual identification mark, and where freeze branding is not considered a suitable alternative. Hot branding is only permitted where horses or ponies are living in a semi-feral state and are not used to being handled. Indeed, only nine authorisations have been issued this year, all for a semi-feral herd of Exmoor ponies that live on the Scoraig peninsula in a remote part of Wester Ross. A microchip cannot be read from a distance and, where horses and ponies are living wild and unused to being handled, it may not be possible to get close enough to them to read the microchip. The practice only happens under very strictly controlled circumstances in Scotland. I hope that that answer assures the member somewhat.

We have had a good debate with many thoughtful speeches: indeed, I thought that the consensus was building rather well until Karen Gillon stood up to speak, although I will respond to some of her points. I will say, however, that I thought her quotation from Bertie Ahern was very impressive. Other people were quoted in the debate, albeit with a number of contradictions. One particular Scottish fisherman, for example, was quoted regularly by John Scott; Dave Thompson quoted the same fisherman, and I have to say that I preferred his quotation, which I will repeat for the record. That famous fisherman said: "For the first time in many years I see a government actually fighting for the best interests of Scottish industry  and I see a government willing to work and listen to the people at the sharp end of the industry." That is probably why the same individual, who was talking about the Scottish Government and not the Westminster Government, is standing for the Westminster Parliament and would not dare stand for this one.

I do not recognise the figures that Robin Harper quoted. Scotland has had more than its fair share of capacity reductions from Europe, so perhaps it is the turn of the other nations that fish in Scottish waters. I will do my best to respond to some of the many issues that have been raised in the debate. First, we all agree that, because of the recession and certain restrictions, this is a tough year for the Scottish fishing industry. I do not agree with Sarah Boyack that every challenge that the industry faces this year is the fault of the devolved SNP Government in Edinburgh. She even appeared to imply that the global recession was our fault, but then went on to ask that we have a mature debate on this subject.

I am happy to describe some of the actions that we have taken and are going to take. As far as the immediate priorities are concerned, I agree with many members that we have to find alternative fishing opportunities for our fleet. Liam McArthur and others highlighted the need to secure additional quotas for monkfish and megrim. That would certainly help the west coast, Shetland and Orkney fleets and is, we believe, justified by the science. We are very hopeful that the proposal will be agreed to but, of course, that will be down to success in the negotiations. The west coast of Scotland has had a particularly challenging year, and we set up a west coast of Scotland task force to look at an alternative management regime for the area to replace the regime that was imposed on Scotland at last year's negotiations. However, I remind members that at last year's negotiations we faced  what was, in effect, the complete closure of the west of Scotland fishery. Although we are far from satisfied with the existing regime, which is causing huge difficulties for some vessels on the west coast of Scotland, it is far better than complete closure. We have to secure a good TAC for the main west coast of Scotland sector—in other words, the nephrops fleet to which Peter Peacock, Alasdair Allan and other members referred. In response to Peter Peacock, who I believe sought clarity on the matter, I point out that because of the initial scientific advice, which had been issued following what we thought was an unjustified change in methodology, we faced a 50 per cent cut. The Commission's latest proposal is for a 15 per cent cut. At the same time, we must recognise that it is likely that the west coast fleet will catch only 70 per cent of its quota, which is therefore a 15 per cent cut. We will of course consider that, but a 15 per cent cut has to be put into the perspective of the overall share of the quota that the fleet actually catches. We should remember that the nephrops stock is the most valuable stock in Scotland's fisheries and that the big issue that has faced the sector in 2009 has not been to do with effort or quotas, but to do with the global recession. Our most valuable fishery has been affected by the global recession through loss of overseas markets, although—thankfully—those markets seem to be picking up again. We cannot simply blame the quota or effort regime for some of the big problems that face Scotland's prawn fleets. On pelagic stocks, the mackerel stock is Scotland's second most valuable stock and it is being fished sustainably. The sector is thriving in Scotland. However, I agree with the members who flagged up some of the long-term issues that face the mackerel fishery. [ Interruption. ]

The mackerel fishery is important, but it faces long-term challenges. We are facing up to those challenges in negotiations with other coastal EU states and Norway. We cannot allow overfishing by other states to continue, because it will impact on the long-term future of the fishery in Scotland. There was not a lot of talk about science from some members of other parties, although questions were asked about the impact that our conservation measures are having on the cod stock. The cod science that the European Commission uses reiterates that the aim is a mortality rate of 0.4, but at present the spawning stock biomass is declining. The biomass is not  increasing fast enough and is far too low, and at the same time mortality is increasing. Although mortality is too high and spawning biomass is too low, the measures that the Scottish fleet is taking are working, as the figures are going in the right direction. However, the scientists' view is that the figures are not going far enough quickly enough. We all accept that we need measures to protect cod stocks.

We are well aware of the time lag in the scientific advice from ICES and in the science that the European Commission considers. We always take that issue into account in the negotiations. Much of the debate was about two points. The first was about the plan that we intend to produce to help the fleet and whether there is room to help the fleet in other ways. Much of the debate has, rightly, focused on TACs, quotas and the effort regime. However, ultimately, even if we get that right but the fishermen do not get a return from the market and a good price, they will not have a good bottom line and their businesses will not survive. The message that the industry is giving me is that it is time to address how we can market better the good-quality seafood that is landed at quaysides in Scotland. That will be a focal point of our action plan next year, because it is ridiculous that we cannot co-ordinate landings better for the market. The fleet this year has been unable to do that, so there must be massive room for improvement. The fleet agrees with us on that, as do the various organisations that are in charge of marketing Scottish seafood. Let us consider all parts of the jigsaw and not simply TACs, quotas and the effort regime. There is a massive opportunity to help our businesses make much bigger profits from 2010 onwards by addressing some of those issues.

I am sorry, but I have already taken interventions. Finally, many members mentioned the common fisheries policy. I met the Faroese fishing minister in Parliament today and he told me that the reason why the Faroes will not join the EU is the common fisheries policy. The Faroes have the benefits of operating outwith that policy. The minister told me that the Faroes have 10 reasons why they will not join the EU, and seven of them relate to fishing.  The common fisheries policy is broken and has been a disaster for Scotland. We are leading the fight and campaign for change to help our fishing communities for the future. The CFP is top-down micromanagement that is detached from the industry and stakeholders. It quashes innovation and is bad for conservation. It amounts to 27 member states, many of which are landlocked, sitting round a table in Brussels and having a lot more power over Scotland's fishing communities than we do. That is not right—it is wrong and it has to change. It is not a question of Scotland wanting to lead the negotiations on behalf of the UK every year in Brussels. We do not just want to lead the UK delegation; we want our own seat at the top table. At the talks, the UK has Malta on its left and Estonia on its right. Scotland deserves its own place at the top table in Europe. At the negotiations, we will fight tooth and nail for the best for Scottish fishing communities. We will fight as hard as we can to bring back a fair and just deal.

rose—

It is not an enforcement tool.

rose—

Has the member read the briefings from non-governmental organisations that say that Scotland is ahead of the game in fisheries management? Has she read some of the comment from around Europe that Scotland is ahead of the game in thinking about the common fisheries policy's future? Has she thought at all about the impact on Scotland's fisheries of the worst recession since the second world war? She has barely mentioned that. It appears that everything is the Scottish Government's fault, whereas in fact we have received a lot of credit for leading the debate on many matters. This is a tough year. We must reflect on what we have learned this year so that we can make a better job of it next year.

Fishing provides the life-blood for many of our communities, it provides wholesome food, and it plays an economic, social and cultural role in our nation. Of course, we cannot forget that we are debating one of the most dangerous occupations. In the past 12 months, many fishermen have paid the ultimate price to bring food to our tables. The motion and amendments that we are considering make it clear that we are entering a crucial phase for the future viability of our fishing industry. We are not just facing the important annual negotiations; we are also entering a defining period in the future of European fisheries as, at long last, discussions begin on the future of the common fisheries policy. I am proud to say that we in Scotland are leading that debate. Only this week, I addressed a major international conference in Edinburgh on the future of the CFP. That conference was also attended by several members and industry leaders, some of whom are with us in the public gallery today. Members are well aware that 2009 has been a tough year for the industry, which has faced many unprecedented challenges. Hard on the heels of the fuel crisis came the biggest global recession since world war two, and the fishing industry, like other industries, has felt the impact. Our lucrative nephrops market was depressed because of a collapse in demand on the continent, and the recession and related factors, such as the fact that Iceland flooded the UK with imports, undermined the price of cod and haddock. The industry tells me that low prices inevitably tempted some skippers to fish harder to pay the bills, which caused periods of oversupply and high quota uptake, to the detriment of all fishermen. It is clear, then, that the economic downturn has rocked the industry. As if that was not enough, fishermen have had to cope with often illogical and counterproductive restrictions from Brussels, which have brought particular pain to the west coast of Scotland. The impact of the recession and restrictions meant that, at the start of the year, many skippers told me that they would not have enough effort to catch their quotas, but in the final quarter of the year the opposite is the case, as quotas are being exhausted before effort.  The Parliament must not lose sight of the achievements of an industry that produces the world's best seafood. Scotland's valuable pelagic sector is thriving, and some firms are even recording record profits. Of Scotland's most important stocks, where the scientific status is known, nine out of 14 are fished sustainably, and more than half of Scottish fisheries by value are accredited by the Marine Stewardship Council. Our award-winning eat more fish campaign has already helped to deliver a 10 per cent increase in sales of Scottish seafood this year. As a Parliament, let us remember that the Scottish fishing industry has real resilience and a real future. Of course, between now and Christmas, we face a series of vital and difficult negotiations that will set the scene for 2010. To reflect the continuing improvement in cod stocks, the North Sea management plan will deliver a significant increase in total allowable catches for the third year in a row. There is good news on some of our herring stocks, with the decline in the North Sea stock appearing to have bottomed out and the west of Scotland quota increasing by 12 per cent. I will also be fighting hard to secure sustainable increases in the valuable monkfish and megrim quotas and sensible management measures for our west coast white-fish stocks. We also need to take strong action to safeguard the long-term sustainability of our lucrative nephrops stocks, which are, after all, our most valuable stocks. Due to a change in methodology, scientific advice had recommended significant cuts in TACs on the west coast, but we are pleased that the European Commission is backtracking and that more realistic proposals are now on the table. We are also working hard to ensure that Scotland gets a fair deal from and achieves a level playing field as a result of the coastal states negotiations and negotiations between the European Union and Norway—negotiations that are so important to our pelagic industry and where many whitefish quotas are set. The issue of overfishing by other pelagic fleets is high on our agenda, given its potentially severe impact on the future of our stocks, and securing a fair and long-term deal on mackerel is a hugely important priority this year. However, as the chamber will be aware, efforts to rebuild cod stocks continue to dominate European negotiations and impact on vessels that catch cod. I said earlier that the cod recovery plan has been challenging for Scotland, and there will be further cuts in effort this year and next. We continue to seek changes to the implementation of the plan in our waters and to ensure that our fleet can buy back days by adopting cod avoidance measures.

As the member will be aware, there has been a further 10-point reduction in effort in the cod recovery zone, with another 10-point reduction planned for next year, and we will ensure that we mitigate as much as possible the impact of those cuts on Scotland's affected fishing fleets. However, managing effort in the cod recovery zone is a tall order and will require the industry and Government to continue to work closely together. The science tells us that we need a recovery plan because of the fragility of cod stocks. We ignore that advice at our peril, but we must ensure that existing conservation measures, such as real-time closures and selective gear, are given the credit they deserve in terms of effort buy-back. Scottish fishermen must get the rewards that they rightly deserve. That said, we must not forget that we have already done much to mitigate the impact of effort cuts. Indeed, by adopting new conservation measures, the Scottish North Sea white-fish fleet was able to avoid more than half of the proposed 25 per cent cut. I hope that we can all agree that we need radical changes in fisheries policy to secure additional fishing opportunities and enhance fisheries conservation. Indeed, that is why we are making the phasing out of discards a priority. In the North Sea, for every 10 tonnes of cod landed there are 8 tonnes of discards, and for every 10 tonnes of whiting landed there are 15 tonnes of discards. Although we have to be clear that there is no golden bullet, some of the marketable discards should surely be made available to the market. That would be a fair reward for our fishermen who have made huge sacrifices to rebuild stock and to reduce overall fishing effort. If we reward our fishermen for reducing overall effort on stocks by allowing them to land more of what they catch, we can reduce discards, help our fleet and help fisheries conservation. Taking discards out of the equation allows the fleet to catch less but land more. As a result, we are urgently seeking changes to how we regulate Scotland's mixed fishery. We should not have laws that force fishermen to dump overboard and dead good-quality and valuable food resources because they only have quota for one of the species in the net. Sometimes fishermen cannot help but catch several species in  the same net at the same time, and regulations should take account of that fact of nature. We are also urgently seeking a move from regulating the time that vessels spend at sea to regulating time actually spent fishing. Under the current regime, targeting the appropriate species in the right areas becomes more difficult because the clock starts ticking when vessels leave port. Of course, we need a fully audited fishery to give confidence that, in return for landing more of what is currently wasted, we ensure that the same levels of discarding do not continue. The on-board cameras that are being piloted by some of our vessels, have been piloted in Denmark and are being considered by other nations might give us the confidence that we need in order to move from simply measuring what is landed ashore to a catch quota system. We need changes now. Scotland is not waiting until 2013 to draw up its blueprint for fisheries management in Europe. Our independent inquiry into the future of fisheries management has already delivered its interim report and has attracted much attention in Europe and beyond. We will use the report, together with what our fisheries stakeholders have told us, as the basis for our response to the European Commission's green paper on CFP reform. Our guiding principle at all times is that decision-making powers must be returned to Scotland, where they belong. The one-size-fits-all top-down CFP has been disastrous for Scotland. Returning power to Scotland would allow us to do what is right for our communities and would give us the option of working on a regional basis with neighbouring nations. We will fight tooth and nail for a good deal for Scotland at the negotiations but, no matter what the outcome is, the Scottish industry faces stormy waters ahead. We need to work with the industry to develop a sustainable future. We have already set in motion many initiatives, but the Scottish Government agrees with the industry that we need to do a lot more. That is why I am announcing today my intention to work with the industry in the coming weeks to develop an action plan that will set out a shared vision for the future of Scottish fisheries. The action plan will comprise four key elements, which will reflect our experiences this year. First, we have to improve the wider framework for fisheries management. Secondly, we must manage our current fishing quota and effort allocations in a way that promotes sustainability and profitability. Thirdly, we have to work with the industry to help it to maximise the value of the catch, because that is the bottom line and it is ultimately what matters the most for the sector's economic future. Finally, we need to ensure that  we have a resilient fleet that is crewed by a skilled workforce for generations to come. I have asked officials to work with the industry to develop that clear programme of action by early 2010. This year has been tough for our fishing industry and 2010 will also be tough for some sectors, but we in Scotland are rightly seen as leaders in fisheries management, despite the constraints that are imposed by the CFP and the nature of the devolution settlement. Now is the time to start rewarding our fleet for its massive efforts to conserve stocks. The Scottish Government will build on our successes and stand shoulder to shoulder with our industry and communities to address the many challenges in the tough times ahead. I commend the motion to Parliament. I move, That the Parliament notes the Scottish Government's commitment to secure a fair deal at the forthcoming EU fisheries negotiations and to continue seeking radical and urgent changes to EU regulations to help cut discards and improve fisheries conservation and the industry's profitability; calls for Scotland's fishermen's growing reputation for innovative fisheries conservation to be given due recognition, and notes the European Commission Green Paper on the Reform of the Common Fisheries Policy, which recognises the failures of the Common Fisheries Policy.

There has been a lot of unanimity in the debate, which I welcome. Only the Liberal Democrats reverted to type from time to time. They said that everything was a bit too late, that there is not enough money, and that all the Government's successes are down to historical figures and Liberal Democrats in the annals of history. However, there has been unanimity on important issues. We all agree that Scotland is a marine and maritime nation. Members have underlined the relationship between many of our communities and our seas. Sometimes it is good to take a step back and think for a moment about the importance of Scotland's seas to our people. It is estimated that we have the biggest share of Europe's coastline. We have 20 per cent—a fifth—of Europe's waters and some of the most important and biggest shares of Europe's seal populations. We have some of Europe's richest and most valuable fish stocks in our waters and a growing sea angling fraternity that has a big future—we are determined to develop sea angling with a new strategy, which we are discussing with that sector. We have the potential for the biggest offshore renewables industry in Europe. That will be extremely important in the 21 st century. There is the economic role that our ports and harbours and marine transport play, and we have, of course, the biggest oil and gas sector in Europe. Many of Europe's most rare and unique habitats and species lie beneath our waves, and we must protect them for future generations. We have more than 6,500 species of plants and animals in our waters, including 22 species of porpoises, whales and dolphins. We must protect precious species and habitats such as the tall sea pen, the flame shell, native oyster beds and the deep-sea sponge communities. Our scientists deem all of those to  be under threat. I hope that the bill will help us to protect them. There is also historical heritage beneath our waves. Members have spoken about Scapa Flow and the remaining wrecks of the German high seas fleet, which attract tourists and divers and are good for the local economy. I was impressed by recent images of HMS Campania, which was the first-ever aircraft carrier—it was converted from an 1892 Cunard liner. The first flight from it took place on 5 May 1915 and it was lost in November 1918. I hope that the bill will shine a light on the heritage that lies beneath our waves, which not many people know about. The people of Scotland are fascinated by Scotland's seas and what lies beneath the waves. Wildlife tourism is a growing sector of the economy. Spey Bay in my constituency is attracting tens of thousands of visitors every year to witness the local dolphin populations. We all recognise the importance of Scotland's seas to the people of Scotland. I wish that we had full control out to 200 nautical miles so that we could further streamline marine activities and the relevant regulations in Scotland. However, following negotiations with the UK Government, we have won executive devolution and we are now in the driving seat for marine planning and nature conservation out to 200 nautical miles. I take issue with those who think that, even with the powers that we will have under the bill, we are not doing enough streamlining. We are streamlining the arrangements for marine renewables, for instance, and there are numerous other examples of streamlining. Where possible, Marine Scotland will be the first point of contact for marine licensing issues. There is the food and environmental protection legislation, and coastal protection licences now form a new single licence. Section 36 consents for renewable marine energy projects are to be considered at the same time as marine licences. Once the bill is passed, activities with a low environmental risk can be registered rather than have to be licensed. Therefore, there will be streamlining for important marine sectors. In my opening remarks I mentioned that the committee did not take a unanimous view on aquaculture, but we believe that the position that is reflected in the bill is the best way forward. It will enable any local authority that wishes Marine Scotland to take responsibility for aquaculture licensing to do so. However, if local authorities wish to retain that power for reasons of local accountability, they can do that. I welcome the fact that many members support that position. Perhaps seals represent the best example of an area in which we have to strike a careful balance between conservation and allowing some economic activities to continue. I welcome the  many comments that members have made about our having struck a balance. I reassure members who think that we need to go further that the Government will have a general power through the bill to amend licensing conditions. That means that we can address issues that members have raised. There will also be a code of practice, to which those who are issued with licences will have to adhere. We will be able to debate the content of that code of practice in the future.

The bill mentions seal management plans, of course. We believe that they are a huge step forward in addressing issues relating to Scotland's seal populations. Many members have mentioned the debate about whether duties should be included in the bill, as against ministers simply taking powers in a number of areas. As I mentioned in my opening remarks, we have an open mind about where we should stipulate duties in the bill and where amendments might be possible in that regard. We will discuss that with the committee in the weeks ahead. I echo the comments of my UK counterpart at Westminster, made in the past couple of days, I think. The point was made that the more duties that are placed on ministers through legislation, the more effectively a lawyers charter will be created. I do not think that any member wants to go down that road. There may be a case for introducing duties for ministers in some areas, but we want to avoid that in other areas if possible. I remind members that by establishing marine protected areas we will acknowledge the value of those areas of the marine environment that we think are precious and need to be protected. If we wished to go a step further and to introduce restrictions, we would have to introduce a marine conservation order. Of course, the Parliament will have full opportunity to scrutinise such orders to ensure that factors that members have mentioned are taken into account. There will be a full process in the Parliament for such orders. I hope that that addresses concerns that members have expressed. Marine Scotland, which will be the champion of Scotland's seas, will play a leading role on some of those issues. Members have mentioned that. We set up Marine Scotland to avoid a further year's delay while we waited for the bill to go through Parliament. Most people acknowledge—the stakeholders groups do—that getting it up and running as soon as possible was a good idea.  Members have expressed concerns about the independence of the science that Marine Scotland will use. Only last week, Marine Scotland advertised for members of the science advisory board that is being established to ensure that independent scientific advice will be mainstreamed into the workings of Marine Scotland. I hope that that reassures members. I remind members that the marine strategy framework directive, which, as I mentioned earlier, will be transposed into Scottish law, will put an obligation on the Scottish Government and all UK Administrations to establish an ecologically coherent network of marine protected areas. The Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic—the OSPAR convention—which Scotland has already signed up to through the UK Government, also places such an obligation on the Scottish and UK Governments. I hope that I have addressed the key issues that members have raised. Again, I thank the committee for all its hard work, and I thank all our stakeholders and the general public, who have taken an intense interest in the bill. The bill has attracted comments from many members of the public in the past year or so. I have listened carefully to the points that members have made and we will take forward many of those ideas. We will reflect on the comments that have been made by members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee and by other members in the chamber. As I have said, the Scottish Government intends to lodge amendments at stage 2, and that dialogue will continue in the weeks ahead. Our seas are very special, as the chamber has acknowledged. Our seas will feed the nation in the decades ahead and they will power our nation, helping us to tackle climate change. We need our seas and our seas need us to protect them—that is what the bill is all about. I thank members for supporting it at stage 1.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I was not sure whether it was the convener of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee who was going to open the debate, but I am happy to follow your instructions. Today is a momentous day for the Scottish Parliament. We have the opportunity to support the Marine (Scotland) Bill, which will, for the first time, provide a framework to safeguard our marine environment and to manage our seas properly to ensure that they continue to deliver economic benefits for future generations, within environmental limits. I thank the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee for its diligent scrutiny of the bill, which is reflected in the detailed stage 1 report that Parliament will be discussing today, and for its support for the general principles of the bill. I am sure that everyone agrees that our seas help to define Scotland as a nation. They have been vital to our people since time immemorial. We have a long and proud history as a maritime nation. Throughout history, we have impacted on the marine environment, and not always with the sensitivity that that important resource demands. With that in mind, we must look to the challenges ahead, such as energy security, food security and climate change, and, when tackling those issues, to how we balance conservation with development and growth. We have a big task ahead, but it is a challenge that we can and must meet, because 21 st century Scotland still relies on its seas in many ways. Our seas are among the most biologically productive in the world and we must ensure that they remain that way. Every year, they generate billions of pounds for the Scottish economy. We must balance extracting opportunities for the more traditional sectors in our seas, such as sea fisheries, aquaculture, and oil and gas, with the demands of our new sectors, such as renewable energy and wildlife tourism. At the same time, though, we must safeguard our precious and world-famous marine habitats.  For the first time, we will have a marine planning system to help us to strike a balance between the competing demands for our valuable marine resources. The bill will simplify the current complicated licensing regime and allow us to make important changes to how we protect and conserve our marine habitats and species. For instance, the historic marine protected area provision will enable us to improve our management of our marine cultural heritage. That is an important new aspect of the debate. The bill will also put Scotland at the forefront of improving seal protection by creating a new offence of killing or injuring a seal at any time, unless under licence. The framework that we are outlining today has been developed over many years, through a series of reports and advisory groups. More than 8,000 stakeholders engaged in the consultation process last year, which perhaps speaks volumes about the level of public interest in the issue. Stakeholders' responses showed widespread support for more integrated, simpler and more effective and efficient marine management arrangements. That is one of the reasons why, from 1 April this year, we established Marine Scotland as part of the Scottish Government. Marine Scotland will champion Scotland's seas. I am grateful for the work that the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee has undertaken during the five months of scrutiny. It has worked hard to get to grips with the diversity of marine interests and the complicated management issues. Many of the committee's recommendations are in line with the Government's thinking. I will touch on key points in the committee's report. First, the committee is keen that a duty should be placed on Scottish ministers and all relevant public bodies to have regard to the need to maintain and improve the health of Scotland's marine area. I have some sympathy for the principle behind the committee's recommendation, although we need to think carefully about the precise language to avoid confusion about competing objectives. For instance, the committee refers specifically to the marine strategy framework directive. Under the directive, we will be required to work towards achieving good environmental status in all Scotland's waters by 2020. I believe that the commitment is already there. In the next few days, together with other United Kingdom Administrations, we will be launching a consultation on the transposition of the directive. Today, I announce to Parliament that Scotland will be the competent authority for all Scottish waters right out to 200 nautical miles, with allowances built in for reserved interests. We are agreeing a concordat with the UK Government on how those arrangements will work.  Marine planning will be an essential tool to deliver the marine strategy framework directive. Marine planning is intended to balance the competing uses of marine resources, reduce uncertainty about where activities can take place, and allow for decisions to be made in agreement with a variety of stakeholders working together. I am grateful for the committee's acceptance of the need for a flexible approach towards the drawing up of a national plan. The committee recommended the inclusion of climate change mitigation and adaptation in the list of objectives that a national marine plan may set out, and I would be pleased to consider an amendment on that. That is a sensible idea, given the challenges facing Scotland in that regard, and the recent passage of the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. Under the bill, the Scottish Parliament will be able to consider and have input to a draft national plan before it is formally adopted. I am happy to explore whether a minimum period for parliamentary consideration would be appropriate. That was another issue raised in the consultation. Marine planning partnerships are new, and I am pleased that the committee supports the Government's flexible approach to their membership and governance. In some cases, there will be more than one local authority within a marine region, so a partnership arrangement will be the most appropriate. Even where there is only one lead authority in the Scottish marine region, we would all still envisage a strong focus on partnership working in each area of Scotland. Marine Scotland is considering how the partnerships will work and will produce guidance in due course. There is further work to do to identify marine region boundaries and I am grateful for the work of the Scottish coastal forum in establishing the views of stakeholders on how Scottish marine region boundaries could be defined. I will send a copy of its report on marine regions to the committee. I appreciate that the Solway Firth is a rather sensitive issue and I have written to the UK Government to indicate that this Government would be pleased to work with our UK partners in treating the Solway as an integrated planning area. The UK Government has its own views on the issue, but we have agreed to work on a concordat, which will be drawn up to address arrangements for cross-border working. The key aspect of the planning sections of the bill is the requirement that licensing decisions be taken in accordance with the marine plan. I think that members will all agree that the current licensing system is more complicated than it needs to be. One of the most complicated areas is  aquaculture licences. I note that the committee was unable to reach a unanimous view on that issue. In my view, the bill provides the best practical solution to the situation that we find ourselves in regarding aquaculture consents. Overall, the bill will simplify the licensing regime. In its stage 1 report, the committee expressed concern that there are no substantial provisions in the bill to govern the mechanisms for appealing against licensing decisions and notices. That is important. I want to get the appeals process right. I assure Parliament that we will introduce proposals for an independent appeals process. Our preference is for appeals to go to the sheriff courts. We will make provision in secondary legislation to allow for full consultation with interested parties to ensure that that process is as effective as possible. On activities requiring a licence, as recommended by the committee I am happy to amend sections 17 and 24 to specify more clearly the criteria used to determine whether activities should be added or removed from the list, and to specify criteria for not requiring a licence. I also intend to introduce an amendment to section 35 to allow for the restoration of a damaged site. I can also provide reassurance that the licensing provisions are designed to avoid overlap with other legal processes and to work seamlessly with other aspects of the bill, including the powers to deliver marine protected areas. The committee would like the bill to impose a duty to create a network of marine protected areas. We are already committed to establishing an ecologically coherent network of well-managed marine protected areas and Marine Scotland is developing draft guidelines on how the proposed powers will be used to establish a network. Nonetheless, I am happy to consider further amendment in this area. Also, I welcome the committee's agreement that the designation of nature conservation marine protected areas be science driven. The bill does not exclude the consideration of social and economic factors and the desirability of mitigating climate change in the management of marine protected areas, which is an issue that the committee raised in its report. Another key aspect of the bill's conservation credentials is the proposals on seal conservation. I recognise the often polarised views of interested parties, but I remain confident that better protection for seals and the introduction of a new licensing system are the best means of managing those conflicts. Of course, a modern approach to seal management and protection must not be overly restrictive. I am therefore somewhat cautious about the suggestion that we should  include a harassment offence in the bill. I appreciate the intent behind the recommendation, but I ask the Parliament to recognise the difficulties of achieving that without many unintended consequences for very legitimate activities. It is helpful that the committee has referred to those challenges in its report. I assure Parliament that the development of policy on seals, the deployment of renewables and the development of non-lethal deterrents will depend on a lot of scientific monitoring and reporting. I have given a rapid account of the main features of the marine bill and the main changes that we intend to introduce at stage 2. We recognise that legislation alone will not achieve all the improvements. Effective implementation is essential. We are already developing policy on the orders and regulations that are needed under the bill. The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that our seas are protected and managed sustainably for future generations. We are working to deliver enhanced economic growth while ensuring that our seas are looked after in the decades and years ahead. Striking the right balance between the long-term viability and growth of our economy and the enhanced protection of our special marine environment is at the heart of the bill. There is huge interest in Scotland's marine environment. I know that the bill is welcomed as a significant improvement on the way in which we manage our seas. I commend the committee's report, the debate and our motion to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Marine (Scotland) Bill.

Individual companies can be supported to develop markets by Scottish Government grants, direct assistance from the enterprise agencies and the work of Scotland Food and Drink. Scottish Development International is active in supporting the promotion of companies outside Scotland. I will add my personal support for promoting Scottish companies and their excellent produce at the Anuga trade fair in Cologne in a couple of weeks.

Yes. Within our powers, we certainly will. We recognise the enormous contribution that Vion makes to the Scottish economy, particularly to the food sector in this country. Over the past few months, we have had many constructive meetings with the company—those discussions are on-going, and I know that James Kelly has also been involved in a number of discussions. It is certainly the case that we look favourably on working closely with the company so that it can continue to play a role in Scotland—we hope, an expanding role—in the future.

I feel that we are giving sufficient support to the meat sector at this time. Scottish meat exports have increased substantially over the past 12 months. Scottish Development International is, of course, involved in a lot of good work in that regard and is planning 12 events, in which 100 companies are involved, over the next 12 months. The events are expected to deliver an extra £60 million for the sector, which is an indication of how seriously SDI takes the export opportunities for the food and drink sector over the next year. SDI is already investing £1.6 million in such activities and plans to invest a further £250,000 over the course of the next year. This is a big opportunity; Scotland should take advantage of it.

Support is available through the Scotland rural development programme for the modernisation and diversification of farming, forestry and other rural businesses. Since last year, around £154 million of funding has been approved under the rural priorities delivery mechanism. At the last round in August, around £29 million of funding was approved for direct capital investment in a wide range of projects to support rural life in Scotland. That includes around £5 million of extra projects that are being supported through the reprofiling of the SRDP programme budget, which I announced in June to assist with the economic recovery.

I thank the member for referring to last week's very successful rural gathering at Perth racecourse, where about 300 stakeholders, including many grass-roots community activists from our rural communities, gathered to share best practice, discuss the future of rural Scotland, learn about the support that is available, and hear about case studies from various parts of rural Scotland that are proving to be successful in contributing to the rural economy. Representatives from Aileen Campbell's constituency attended the event.  I took the opportunity at the rural gathering to announce further support for rural communities, in that grants from the Scottish Government will increase to 90 per cent for some projects under the LEADER programme. At Europe level, we are discussing the possibility of delivering 90 per cent grants for, for example, renewable energy small businesses in rural Scotland. There exists in our rural communities the ingenuity and innovation to support the economy.

I would be delighted to meet Karen Gillon to discuss the concerns. I would be surprised if the farming community in Scotland thought that it was not getting a fair share of the SRDP. Of course, that funding is on top of the £430 million that farmers get from the single farm payment, which I understand is about to be boosted by the exchange rate and could deliver tens of millions of pounds extra for Scotland's farmers when it is paid in December. Of course, the rural development programme is not just for farmers; it is for rural communities. It is a rural development programme—not just a farming development programme.

As Peter Peacock knows, the activity of Highlands and Islands Enterprise has been refocused and many of the agency's former functions have been transferred to local authorities, including the Highland Council, in order to support rural businesses. If the member considers rural Scotland, I am sure that he will find that a number of businesses have started up during the past 12 months. In sectors including food and drink, many companies are going from strength to strength and are supporting the rural economy. That is not to mention that our farming communities in the Highlands—the member's region—and elsewhere are currently experiencing much better market conditions.

I hope that Alasdair Allan will forgive me if I reply in my native language. Negotiations are progressing well on the new fisheries control regulation, which is expected to be agreed at the October agriculture and fisheries council in Luxembourg. We expect the European Commission's proposals for total allowable catch and quotas for 2010 to be announced on 15 October, although outcomes for the North Sea quotas will depend largely on the on-going negotiations with Norway. We are working closely with the United Kingdom Government and other devolved Administrations, in consultation with the industry, to secure an outcome that best serves the interests of Scottish fishing communities and the long-term sustainability of our fish stocks.

Although the regulation that was imposed on the west coast of Scotland at last year's negotiations was better than the original proposal, which would have closed down the west of Scotland fisheries, it has led to particular difficulties for the sector. A west of Scotland task force is working to present a much more sensible alternative to the current restrictive regime. The member is right to say that we should ensure that our fishermen, who are pioneering many fisheries conservation measures in Europe, are rewarded for that effort and are given the opportunity to present their alternative plans for conserving stocks on the west coast of Scotland. We all accept the condition of west of Scotland stocks; in particular, we accept that white fish stocks are in very poor condition. We must regenerate stocks, and fishermen on the west coast are better placed to come up with solutions than are some people in Brussels who are coming up with ideas.

I thank Jamie McGrigor for mentioning that important sector. As he may be aware, there is a proposed cut to the west of Scotland prawn TAC. However, as the current quota is underfished, a cushion is available to the fleet, irrespective of the proposal from Brussels to cut the quota. We continue to press the point that the west of Scotland nephrops fleet does not catch a lot of cod quota, but is caught up in the cod recovery plan regulations. That has made life for the prawn fleet a bit more difficult than it needed to be this year. We are trying to ensure proper exemptions from some of the restrictions for the fleet.

If we had allowed the west of Scotland's fishing grounds to be closed down completely last year, Liam McArthur would be complaining that we had not stopped the closure. The situation at the negotiations last year was not ideal and I fully accept that the restrictions on the west of Scotland were particularly difficult to put in place and for the industry to live with, but they were better than complete closure of the fisheries. I agree that continued restrictions of a similar nature to those that are in place now will mean that 2010 is equally difficult to 2009, but Liam McArthur must bear in mind the fact that 2009 has also been an extremely difficult year for the west of Scotland fisheries because of the economic downturn. The combination of draconian restrictions and the economic downturn has compounded an already challenging situation and has made life particularly difficult for the west of Scotland fishermen this year.

I most recently met Stuart Earley, the chief executive of the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, on 16 September, when we jointly launched specially selected pork approved by the Scottish SPCA.

I assure Irene Oldfather that the proposed new arrangements for seals under the Marine (Scotland) Bill are much more stringent than the current arrangements. Under all circumstances, anyone who wishes to shoot seals will have to apply for a licence: there will be no exemptions. The new proposal is a lot stricter because we want to protect the seal populations in Scottish waters, which are unique in Europe. On amendments, the bill will make its way through Parliament and I am sure that members from all the parties will pay close attention to that, as will members of the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee. They will have the opportunity to pursue the issue at stage 2.

Policy on meat inspection is devolved to the Scottish ministers, who are advised on it by the Food Standards Agency. There are frequent and continuing discussions at ministerial and official level. Meat inspection was one of the subjects that I discussed when I met the director of FSA in Scotland on 21 September.

That is a fair question. It was on my agenda when I met Charles Milne, the new director of FSA Scotland a week or so ago. I am sure that Derek Brownlee accepts that it is essential that public confidence and trust in the meat supply be maintained, and that any future changes to the official controls on meat inspection must not undermine public health protection or animal health and welfare. That said, the industry is critical of the pace of regulatory reform on meat inspection and the FSA agrees that there is scope to build a case for a much more risk-based approach. I have given my commitment to the meat sector, and I will, in conjunction with the FSA, pursue the issues that have been raised. As Derek Brownlee no doubt appreciates, many of the decisions that are taken flow from European regulation, and we must maintain the trust not only of our consumers but of our fellow European states, so that they believe that we have a good case for some regulations being relaxed, should such a decision be taken in the near future. I assure the member that the issue is high up our agenda.

As Elaine Murray will be aware, there are already exemptions from some of the regulations—at least, lower costs apply to some of the more rural abattoirs under the current regime. We welcomed that when it was announced by the FSA. It was confirmed by the agency in the past few months. As for establishing a network of local abattoirs, that is subject to commercial decisions. If people wish to put together a business case for a local abattoir they may do so—such decisions are taken very much on a commercial basis.

The requirement to vaccinate cattle and sheep will remain in place until it is suspended on 25 October. After that, there is a lower risk of bluetongue infection because lower air temperatures mean that we will be in a transmission-free period. The Scottish Government and stakeholders will meet towards the end of 2009 to discuss vaccination arrangements for 2010.

The current arrangements were drawn up after full consultation with all stakeholders, including the sheep sector. We will continue, as I said in my previous answer, to discuss the arrangements for 2010. If the sector wants to propose any changes to the arrangements, we will listen closely.

Although excess packaging is dealt with by the Packaging (Essential Requirements) Regulations 2003, which are a reserved matter, there is provision in the 2009 act that relates to targets for overall packaging reduction. I launched the consultation on Scotland's zero waste plan on 20 August. The consultation refers to the draft strategy, "Making the most of packaging: a strategy for a low-carbon economy", which was agreed among the four United Kingdom Administrations and contains suggested actions to improve how packaging is dealt with. The consultation invites views.

I agree, as I am sure all members do, that we have to tackle excess packaging. The retail sector in Scotland is largely responsible for the amount of excess retail packaging that there is. Retailers have signed up to the Courtauld commitment, which is a voluntary commitment that applies throughout the UK. The 2008 target on halting growth in excess waste in the sector has already been met, and it appears that we are on target to achieve a reduction in excess waste packaging in Scotland by 2010. I will listen carefully to the views of Patrick Harvie and others who contribute to the consultation on the draft zero waste plan. The member's argument is reasonable. We might want to have an idea of the level that we want to achieve in Scotland. However, whether there should be a statutory basis for the approach will depend on the outcome of the consultation.

The member makes a good point. The Scottish retailers forum, which we set up with Scotland's leading retailers, is delivering dividends on waste issues as well as on many other issues of importance to Scotland, such as the buying of Scottish produce. For example, Marks and Spencer recently replaced the plastic tray that protected its beef with a thin skin pack, which is wrapped tightly around the product. The approach cut packaging by 69 per cent while extending the product's shelf life by four days, thereby helping to reduce food waste. Retailers in Scotland are taking action and a number of their actions have resulted from discussions with the Scottish Government during the past two years.

The consultation still has a few weeks to go and, as I said before, we will listen carefully to the views that we hear during it. Under the 2009 act, we are able to introduce a number of regulations to help tackle Scotland's waste problems. The extent to which we introduce them and the order in which we do so will depend  on the outcome of the consultation, and we will listen carefully to the Parliament's views.

The Scottish Government has held regular meetings with the farming industry to discuss electronic identification for sheep. The most recent joint Scottish Government-industry working group met on Friday 21 August 2009. Prior to that, officials met formally with industry representatives on 19 August, 16 July and 23 June. In addition, I am in frequent contact with industry representatives, as are my officials, on this important issue.

I think that the member said that we do not have to tag politicians until they leave their place of birth. I am not sure whether that was the point that the member made. The current situation is challenging for the sheep sector in Scotland. It has been an uphill struggle within Europe for Scotland to try to inject some common sense into the proposed regulations, given the substantial impact that they will have, particularly on sheep farms on Scotland's hills, and given that the principle of electronic identification and the current regulations were signed up to by the United Kingdom Government in 2003, with the support of the previous Scottish Administration. We therefore very much face an uphill struggle. We are taking action to work with the sector to plot the best way forward to ensure that, if we have to implement the regulations, we can do so in a way that places the least burden possible on Scotland's sheep sector. We are actively discussing with the industry how we can do that, and we will launch our formal consultation on implementation of the regulations in the very near future. In the meantime, the UK Government offered at a recent European meeting not to seek any further concessions to the regulations for the rest of this year, which again leaves Scotland in a rather difficult position, given that it is the UK that holds a seat at the top table in the negotiations.

The electronic identification research pilot, funded to the tune of £3 million by the Scottish Government, has made significant progress and has helped the industry greatly in recognising some of the difficulties and potential solutions for dealing with this challenging regulation. The pilot will continue to be useful for the rest of this year, as we look at a number of new dimensions of the regulation.  Alyn Smith has achieved a lot for Scotland in Europe in fighting for Scotland's farmers; I was delighted to see that being recognised a few months ago with a particular award from one of the organisations. We will continue to work in Scotland with our MEPs to try to inject some common sense into the regulations, whether that be in the run-up to the end of this year or beyond, once the regulations are implemented. However, the SNP Government has achieved four significant concessions for Scotland's farmers that will ease a lot of the pain and cut much of the potential cost. We accept that that does not remove the problem, but it achieves a big step forward for Scotland's sheep farmers.

The member might be aware that one of the other challenges is that many of the other member states have been pressing ahead with the regulation over recent years, so they are not that keen for any further derogations to be given to Scotland. That does not remove the case for fighting for further derogation at an appropriate opportunity, but it puts the negotiations in Europe into context. We have had many discussions with representatives from other member states. There are concerns in a range of such states over particular aspects of the regulations. We will continue with those discussions in the coming months.

I can announce today that the Scottish Government will retain the Scottish Agricultural Wages Board. We believe that the board continues to carry out an important role in chairing discussions between employers and employees in agriculture. Over 80 per cent of agriculture workers are actually paid at above the minimum rates. The market is therefore clearly playing a decisive role in setting wage levels for the vast majority of workers. However, some can be vulnerable to low pay and poor conditions, particularly migrant workers. The board can provide a safety net for such workers. The Government's consultation exercise showed that the main complaint from those who criticised the board was that it did not help employers to  take on young workers. Therefore, I was pleased when the Scottish Agricultural Wages Board announced new apprenticeship wage rates last week that I hope will address that issue. With increased Government funding creating additional apprenticeships across the economy in 2009-10, it should now be much easier for young workers to gain a foothold in the farming sector. Over the next two years, the Scottish Government will monitor that new development closely prior to a further review in 2011.

I thank the member for those comments. Clearly, the issue was difficult and some valid arguments were made by various sectors that contributed to the consultation. However, the matter was rather inconclusive so I hope that we have the best way forward for Scotland's agricultural workers, who play a vital role in supplying food to the nation and protecting our precious environment.

Clearly, those decisions lie in the hands of the Scottish Agricultural Wages Board, whose members are appointed to fulfil that duty. Of course, we monitor what the board does and the statements that it makes. I have every confidence that we will have a positive way forward for Scotland's agricultural workers.

On 26 June this year, we published "Recipe for Success", which sets out the next steps to take forward our  policy for food and drink. Although the Scottish Government has an important role to play in the policy's development, delivery requires action by all those who have an interest in food and drink to make Scotland a healthier, wealthier and more environmentally sustainable place in which to live. Tomorrow, I will launch the Scottish food and drink fortnight—I hope that all members will support it—which will showcase many of the initiatives that will help us to deliver our vision for food and drink policy in Scotland.

It is important that we have the cross-cutting approach that will be delivered through our national food and drink policy. Of course the health dimension is important, too. I know that we will all be pleased that Scotland's berry sector—a very healthy food—has just come through another successful year, with a number of companies expanding in Scotland. We must continue to support such companies, which can contribute to our economy and our health record at the same time. The member will be interested to know that Scotland's grocery stores—not just the big retailers but our hundreds if not thousands of grocery stores—are participating in the Scottish Government's aim of bringing healthy food to shelves the length and breadth of Scotland.

I visited Stornoway in April and heard at first hand about the challenging economic circumstances that face those who are involved in prawn fishing. Despite the difficult market conditions at the present time, prawns remain the most valuable species that is caught and landed by the Scottish fishing fleet. In April I celebrated the Marine Stewardship Council's certification of Stornoway prawns—strong evidence of the fishery's environmental credentials. I am determined that, through co-management, we will secure an equally strong profitable future for prawn fishing.

The research that we have conducted so far suggests that low fish prices—which, in turn, relate to the global economic downturn—are the key factor that is impacting on the profitability of Scotland's nephrops fleet and the prawn sector. That is the number 1 issue, but the member is quite right to highlight the recent scientific advice on the future of nephrops quotas. The optimistic view is that the quota for prawns that will be made available to the west coast of Scotland will exceed this year's catch by the fleet. I hope that that will give some comfort to the sector. We are quite confident that if any reductions in quotas are required, we can secure much lower ones for the west coast, given that this year's catch is nowhere near the existing quota. The industry will take that on board when it discusses with the Scottish Government the level of quota that we should seek at this year's vital negotiations.

I, too, agree that the debate has been constructive and that some helpful speeches have been made, with not too many recycled or reused ones, at least not from my party's members. As I outlined in an intervention during the opening speech from the Labour Party, the reason for having the debate was to listen to the Parliament. In a few weeks, we will publish the consultation on the next national waste plan. Before we do so, we will genuinely take on board many of the comments that we have heard today. I give an assurance to Parliament that, when the consultation closes, we will bring the issue back to the Parliament for debate before we publish the final plan. One question that has been asked is why now. Labour members have talked about a delay in producing the plan. The Labour amendment, which we will support, refers to the European waste framework directive, which came into force only in December 2008. We had to wait to find out what that was about before we could produce our consultation document, to ensure that it takes into account the EU perspective. We should congratulate the Parliament on the fact that, since its establishment in 1999, it has taken recycling in Scotland from about 5 per cent to about 33.5 per cent today. That is a massive increase and a vindication of the setting up of the Scottish Parliament, which has allowed us to look after our environment. The EU has also played a role. It is not good at everything, but it is good at working with member states and with Scotland on environmental policy. We hope that it will work with us to take Scotland down the road towards being a zero waste society. Most members have acknowledged that we have made good progress. We have reached the 2010 landfill target 18 months early and waste growth in Scotland is now stabilising, which is a massive step forward, given that we all believe that the key is prevention and not producing waste in the first place. We are making progress on recycling, too. [ Interruption. ]

I agree, Presiding Officer. There have been many firsts in the past two years. The capital grants scheme for recycling plastics in Scotland is under way. None of us wants our plastics to go to recycling centres and then to be shipped to China; we want to keep it in Scotland and deal with it on our doorstep. We have made progress on carrier bags. More people in Scotland are using bags for life than ever before and we have engaged retailers on that, too. Many members have referred to the waste provisions in the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill and the relationship between waste in Scotland and reducing Scotland's emissions. Liam McArthur and others referred to the need for better data. One provision in that bill will ensure that we get better data from the commercial sector. In the past few months, the first reverse vending machines have been put in place in supermarkets in Scotland. We also have the love food, hate waste campaign, which reminds us that 17 per cent of the average household bin is made up of food waste. About 0.5 million tonnes of food goes in the bin each year, which costs each household on average £400. We also have the food grants, which help companies, particularly in the food and drink sector, to reduce food waste. There are a range of other activities. We agree with Lewis Macdonald that we must build our zero waste concept into all our policies. We are doing that across the board, from our policies on climate change to those on energy and food. [ Interruption. ]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. All members agree that the only way in which we will make progress is through partnership between the Scottish Government, local government, individual households, the private and public sectors and others. The Scottish Government is showing leadership. The consultation on "Making the most of packaging: A strategy for a low-carbon economy", which was launched this week, is not only the responsibility of Hilary Benn, as it is a joint consultation by the Scottish and UK Governments. We recognise that 800,000 tonnes of waste in the waste stream in Scotland comes from packaging. This week, the Scottish Government has signed a commitment to halve the amount of construction waste that goes to landfill from Scottish Government projects by 2012.  We need the public's support, and they are showing an appetite for making progress on the agenda. There is a range of evidence of that, including the figures on participation by households in recycling. As many members have said, community organisations are important, too. I tell Jamie Stone that I have visited GREAN in Golspie and that I was impressed by its good work. The community sector in Scotland has a big role. The Scottish Government has a funding stream to support community organisations. There is increased funding of £7.5 million, over £5 million of which has already been committed to community organisations the length and breadth of Scotland. Rob Gibson, too, highlighted the importance of the community sector. On the private sector, Scotland's retailers are on board through their waste policies. That is important, particularly in relation to issues such as packaging. Last week, I visited the Coca-Cola Enterprises factory in East Kilbride for the launch of its new waste strategy, through which it aims to stop sending waste to landfill by the end of 2011. A recycling rate for factory waste of 93 per cent has already been achieved. On the same day, I attended the launch at Our Dynamic Earth of the Scotch whisky industry's environmental strategy. As one of Scotland's biggest economic sectors, the industry has agreed to match the Scottish Government's climate change target of reducing its emissions by 80 per cent by 2050. In addition, the industry aims significantly to reduce the average weight of packaging and to eliminate the sending of waste from packaging operations to landfill sites.

The private sector, like the household sector, now recognises that tackling waste is a good way of cutting costs. It makes good business sense as well as environmental sense. Of course, we need the support of our local authorities, which many members congratulated on making so much progress. Eight local authorities in Scotland have already broken the 40 per cent target for recycling. Those authorities are leading the way and are showing the rest of our councils that headway can be made. Local authorities are engaged in many new initiatives, including all sorts of kerbside trials and fortnightly collections. Some authorities are talking about moving to monthly collections and some, such as Glasgow City Council, are setting up recycling zones in our high streets. Of course, the Government is committed to ensuring that recycling zones are available for the public when  they are out and about. The provision of such zones in every high street in every town and city in Scotland is an issue that we are about to start discussing with local authorities and private sector companies. Just last week, I met council leaders in Glasgow to press home the message that we need to move forward to a zero waste society. We need everyone in Scotland to work together towards that aim. However, as many have mentioned, some significant challenges lie ahead. For instance, we need to turn more attention to commercial and industrial waste. In the past, a lot of emphasis has been put on household waste, on which we are making good progress. The consultation will put a lot more emphasis on commercial and industrial waste, which, after all, makes up 70 to 80 per cent of the waste stream in Scotland. The debate on energy from waste will no doubt continue to be contentious in the Parliament and elsewhere. We welcome Robin Harper's amendment. We might differ on the definition of "large-scale" in terms of the size of energy-from-waste facilities, but we certainly agree that we need to look at the waste hierarchy. Energy from waste might have a role to play, but we must not take our eye off the other ways in which we deal with waste reduction. Finally, funding was highlighted by many members, particularly those on the Labour benches. I find it bizarre that, on the one hand, Labour members support massive funding cuts for the Scottish block from Westminster while, on the other, they keep calling on us to give more and more money to many causes in Scotland. They cannot have it both ways. They should stand up with the Scottish Government so that we can keep the funding here to help us to achieve our environmental and other aims in Scotland. Funding will continue to be an issue, but it is not right to say, as the Lib Dem amendment claims, that funding has been cut. Funding has not been cut, although it might now be delivered to local authorities in a different way. Through the zero waste fund—which is worth £154 million over three years—and the block grant, local authorities are receiving record funding. We all need to work together to ensure that local authorities treat waste as a priority. Let me conclude. Jamie Stone mentioned the enthusiastic way in which our schoolchildren back recycling and other environmental initiatives. That reminds us that this is all about culture change. Moving towards a zero waste society is about recognising that waste is not simply waste but a valuable resource that we need to protect for future generations. The debate is about saving our planet, saving costs and creating new jobs. It is about creating a greener Scotland as we move  towards a zero waste society and make Scotland a greener nation. I ask Parliament to support the motion as well as all the amendments, apart from the Liberal Democrat one.

Does the member at least recognise that the formula for funding through the local government block grant and the zero waste fund that is allocated to local authorities was agreed with local authorities? Surely those authorities that felt that it was a huge problem would not have agreed to that method of allocation.

I thank the member for the opportunity to clarify the point in an intervention. We consulted the Sustainable Development Commission and SEPA, and we held a waste summit involving Scotland's local authorities and other agencies. It was felt that the target for energy from waste was at an appropriate level. Otherwise, there is a danger that everyone in Scotland will take their eye off the ball as regards the waste hierarchy, which Elaine Murray referred to.

The member might recall that the previous Administration also took a few years to get its first national waste plan into place. It is quite a task and a lot of partnership working throughout Scotland is required to get the consultation document in place.

I give an assurance to the chamber that we will bring the debate back to Parliament after the consultation has closed. However, the purpose of today's debate is to hear views from across Parliament as to what should be in the consultation document.

Our countryside is special, as are the farmers and crofters who care for it and work the land to produce a range of public benefits. In the past few months alone, I have spoken to hill farmers on Mull and in Speyside, crofters on Lewis, and farmers in Fife and the Borders, to give just a few examples. Those people are the lifeblood of our nation. The Government's purpose of sustainable economic growth is vital to our rural areas, especially in these difficult economic times. Today, I am announcing the Government's position on three interrelated agriculture policy issues. First, the less favoured area support scheme aims to deliver economic, social and environmental benefits that depend on active land management in the hills. LFASS expires in December, so we have to decide on successor arrangements. Secondly, we now have the report on the independent review of the Scotland rural development programme by Peter Cook. The SRDP delivers support for a range of activities, from capital investment for businesses to environmental and community projects. Today, the Government is publishing Peter Cook's report and our position on his recommendations. I thank him for doing a tremendous job in a short timescale. Finally, there is the recent common agricultural policy health check. Some parts of the health check are closely linked to LFASS and the SRDP, and we agreed with stakeholders that we would consider those issues at the same time. The Government's vision for agriculture is based on optimising the use of Scotland's natural assets to produce food, other goods and services, and public benefits for which it is right that society should pay. Those assets include not just the land, but our world-renowned landscape, our rich biodiversity and our wealth in soil carbon and renewable energy sources. Therefore, the principles on which the package is based are optimisation of use of natural resources in  Scotland; provision of public support for public goods, particularly social and environmental public goods; use of public money as effectively as possible to deliver the desired outcomes for our nation, while relying on farmers and crofters to produce for the market; and preparation of Scotland for the longer term. Most observers agree that, in all likelihood, the common agricultural policy will, after 2013, look very different from today's CAP. The first part of the package concerns the future of livestock farming on the hills. Many people have highlighted the serious situation that is faced by beef and sheep farming on our hills. Livestock numbers are falling, and land abandonment is a reality in some areas. There is, of course, a complex set of issues. For instance, Peter Cook has said that hill farming matters more for community and environmental reasons than it does for food production, and that the fall in lamb production in the north and west since 2004 could be replaced by an increase of only 3 per cent in production elsewhere in Scotland. Moreover, farmers have told me that a reduction in flock size is not necessarily always a bad thing if performance improves. However, it is recognised throughout Parliament that hill farming faces unique challenges. A Mull farmer told me how he expresses his stocking rate not in sheep per hectare, but in hectares per sheep. The costs of transport to and from islands and remote communities cannot be ignored. We need to strike a balance in addressing that difficult issue: we need to help businesses through the short term and offer investment support for the longer term. Both elements are vital to our getting farm businesses on to a solid footing for the future. As we are all aware, there has been lively debate among stakeholders on support for the hills and how it should be funded. In our consultation on the health check, we received 50 responses and dozens of different suggestions. Perhaps the only consensus among stakeholders is that there is no easy answer to the difficult challenge that exists. In taking our decision, the Government has paid attention to two key factors: our ability to target the different measures and the speed with which they can make a difference. Some people suggested new support for the hills through the land managers options part of the SRDP, but because of European rules, new LMOs cannot benefit farmers' bank accounts until mid-2011 at the earliest. The Government and, I am sure, Parliament wish to see action sooner. Therefore, we have decided on a staged approach, subject to approval from Europe. First, we will make an immediate increase in LFASS payments for 2009 for the fragile and very  fragile land categories. That increase of 19 per cent will mean, for example, an extra £1,300 for the average sheep producer in the Highlands, or an extra £1,600 for a beef producer in Orkney. From next year onwards, the current LFASS will be replaced by a revised version—LFASS 2010. There will be three main changes. The first will be a further increase in payment rates in the fragile and very fragile areas, giving a total of a 38 per cent increase compared with 2008. The main beneficiaries will be sheep producers in the most vulnerable areas. We will also strengthen the link between payment levels and hill farming activity by updating the statistics on which payments are based. Finally, there will be reinforced rules to determine active farming, so that payments are focused on those who are genuinely active. We will consult stakeholders on precisely how to do that; it could, for example, include rules on stocking density and lambing rates. Together, those steps should deliver £15 million of extra support over the next two years to active farmers in the fragile and very fragile regions. We will fund that partly from unspent money in LFASS, which has been caused by the decline in applications, and partly by linking payments to active farming. The remainder will be funded from increased European funding, which has been brought about by the weaker pound. We intend to deliver the extra support without reducing the budget elsewhere in the SRDP. To be clear: from now on, payments will be linked more closely to active farming. All those who are involved, including members, have told me that that is the right thing to do. In addition, we will maintain the £20 million Scottish beef calf scheme, which is funded through the current top-slicing of single farm payments. However, after much consideration, I have for several reasons decided against any further top-slicing of SFPs under article 68. First, support can be delivered more quickly in the way that I have described. Furthermore, European Union rules limit how we can spend article 68 money, which makes it a bit more difficult to target. Ultimately, the most we can do via article 68 is redistribute 10 per cent of the single farm payment. However, the single farm payment needs to be reconsidered. That is an issue to which I will return. The first steps that I have described will deliver short-term assistance to hill farming faster than any other tool, but I am also announcing two further stages. First, we will review the role of the land managers options in the SRDP. LMOs provide easy-to-access support for small-scale activities, such as small environmental schemes and minor investments. Peter Cook says that  although the overall balance of the SRDP is right, there is, nonetheless, a gap—the absence of an entry-level agri-environment measure through which farmers who have not previously participated in environmental schemes can test the water. The Government accepts that recommendation, so we will, with stakeholders, consider the agri-environment measures in the SRDP—specifically, the role that LMOs can play in supporting grazing in the hills. I am also open to the possibility of there being differential limits for LMOs on hill farms. European Union rules give the European Commission up to six months to approve any changes. We will therefore submit changes to the Commission in time for implementation in 2011. Following the abolition of set aside, we will also examine the role of LMOs in preserving any environmental benefits that might be lost as a result of that change. Those short and medium-term changes will deliver substantial extra support for our most vulnerable producers, and supplement the many other ways in which Government supports the sector. For instance, for the sheep sector alone, we fund monitor farms and we support Quality Meat Scotland and its sheep strategy. We have also funded bluetongue vaccinations and a £3 million pilot project on electronic identification for sheep. Furthermore, we are working hard to resist the current sheep EID proposals. However, there is a longer-term issue, which forms the final part of the livestock package. Farmers in Scotland receive more than £430 million each year through the single farm payment. The payments are based on support that was received in a reference period, which means that any link between the size of the payment and the farmer's economic need or the public benefits that he delivers is at best accidental and at worst non-existent. A quick analysis illustrates the case for change. At parish level, the highest payments in Scotland average £650 per hectare, and the lowest payment is £3 per hectare. At individual field level, the highest payment in Scotland is £3,950 per hectare, whereas the lowest is 6p—not £6, but 6p—per hectare. That situation is clearly unsustainable. Stakeholders agree and EU Commissioner Mariann Fischer Boel signalled only last week that she thinks the same. Until the health check, we had no choice but to keep our current system until 2013. The health check has provided the chance to revisit our system and to make changes voluntarily, if we wish, before they are forced on us later. We must seize the opportunity, and give serious scrutiny to how we use public money to support farming in Scotland, including distribution among sectors and regions. I have therefore asked a leading figure in Scotland's rural sector to chair an immediate  inquiry reviewing farm support in Scotland. That review will examine how the public money that we spend—more than £0.5 billion a year—contributes to the national outcomes that we have set for Scotland, and how it supports the Scottish Government's vision for a new contract between society and our farmers and crofters to support natural resource productivity with maximum impact and minimum bureaucracy. The inquiry will look especially at the single farm payment and make recommendations on whether we should use the option to revise our system. It will report by next spring, with an interim report in December. I am delighted to announce that Brian Pack, who is the former chief executive of ANM Group Ltd and is present in the gallery today, has agreed to carry out that vital task on behalf of the people of Scotland and this vital industry. I have said many times that there is no magic bullet for solving the problems of hill farming in Scotland. There are complex issues involved. In helping a sector that is in genuine need, we must beware of inadvertently damaging other parts of the industry. Farming has its own side of the bargain to keep—it is not the Government's job to tell farmers how many sheep and cattle to keep or how to produce for the market. Against that difficult background, the package that I have described combines the quickest short-term benefit for hill farms with the most effective approach to support in the longer term. We will discuss these issues urgently with stakeholders. Aside from the issue of hill farming, Peter Cook concluded that the overall balance of the SRDP is correct, but he made recommendations to refocus the programme in order to make it more effective. I can therefore announce further changes. First, to help attract new blood into the industry, we will introduce extra support for new entrants. We were the first Administration to introduce new-entrant support but—as Peter Cook acknowledges—European rules and the economic climate have limited that support's impact, which we accept. We will therefore use new flexibility to introduce an establishment grant of up to 75 per cent of the existing support for interest payments, bringing the maximum support for any new entrant up to €70,000. We will increase support for slurry-handling projects from 40 per cent to 50 per cent or more for young farmers. That support will be of benefit to the pig and dairy sectors, and to farmers in nitrate-vulnerable zones in particular, and will be worth £5,000 on a £50,000 slurry-handling project. Subject to the necessary approvals, we will increase the limit on renewable energy diversification projects from €200,000 to €500,000. Along with higher support rates for forestry, which we have already submitted for approval, that will  help towards meeting our ambitious climate change targets. Of course, the SRDP is not just for land managers but all our rural communities. We will increase support for community projects from 50 per cent grant aid to 90 per cent grant aid, so that more communities throughout Scotland will benefit. Many of the changes are subject to approval from Europe, but they show that the Government is listening to stakeholders and to Peter Cook. They will help the SRDP to meet the needs of rural Scotland even more effectively in the future. As well as refocusing the content of the SRDP, we have taken a serious look at how it operates. Understandably, Peter Cook's review has concentrated on the rural priorities scheme. He acknowledges that uptake of rural priorities money has been very high in its first year, compared with previous schemes. In the four rounds, we have approved nearly £125 million for 1,800 projects throughout rural Scotland. In the same timescale, the previous rural stewardship scheme approved only £18 million for fewer than 500 cases. As Peter Cook says: "... the potential level of funding for individual projects greatly exceeds anything under previous schemes." This week, David Green of Cairngorm national park said in the press that the SRDP "has made a real difference to the national park including the viability of those businesses". However, there have been problems. Because of delays in Europe, implementation of this complex and ambitious programme was rushed. Some things should have been done differently and mistakes were made, which I acknowledge, but the crucial question is about how we move forward. Many of the people who were interviewed by Peter Cook see the benefits of the computerised approach and are impressed by the breadth and range of available options. We agree with him that the existing system should be improved rather than replaced. We will reduce bureaucracy and streamline the system by making the first stage of the two-stage process optional. The first stage—the so-called statement of intent—was introduced because stakeholders asked for early feedback on their application, but the strong message now is that that should be optional, which we accept. We will make it easier for smaller applications—under £10,000—by ensuring that applicants need only provide essential data, rather than the detailed outcome plan that is currently asked for. As recommended by the earlier McRobbie report on the forestry sector, we will approve non-contentious forestry projects on an on-going basis.  There will also be better support for applicants for whom the approval process's being online is a problem. We will provide access to broadband through our regional offices and, where possible, more locally. Help will be available in completing applications not just through better introductory guidance, but through the support of a member of the Scottish Government's staff or its partners. The customer service desk will be strengthened and other measures will be taken. Support through LEADER will be made available for businesses to establish a broadband connection. On the scale of grants, we will ensure that any grants of more than £250,000 are approved only if they meet the strictest criteria and our national outcomes. The uptake of rural priorities shows that a massive amount has been achieved in a short time, to rural Scotland's benefit. However, improvements are needed, and the changes that I have announced will deliver them. The Government has announced today a substantial package that will shape farm support in the years ahead in order to deliver food production and food security, a healthy environment, landscape and biodiversity, and flourishing rural communities throughout our nation. I commend my statement to Parliament.

I scanned the media from the past few months for coverage of the debate, in which many people in rural Scotland have engaged, but I found it difficult to locate any Labour Party comment. I concluded that Labour was reserving its position so that it could oppose anything that the Government said. I will address Sarah Boyack's points. The SRDP is a success. I know that she meant rural priorities and not the whole SRDP, but even rural priorities has funded 1,800 projects throughout Scotland and has offered funding of up to £125 million in its first few months of operation. Peter Cook acknowledged that in his report. The evidence from many people who spoke to him was that much of the rural priorities scheme is working well. However, we acknowledge that mistakes were made. The previous Administration designed the SRDP and left it in the current Administration's in-tray. No one had tested how the previous scheme could be put into practice, so we had to make decisions. I accept that perhaps some wrong and rushed decisions were taken, but the alternative was to delay the SRDP's implementation for another six months to a year. If that had happened, Sarah Boyack would have criticised me in the chamber for delaying the programme for a second year. Nothing that the Government could have done would have kept the Labour Party happy. Sarah Boyack suggested dumping the online system. I have announced significant measures to improve accessibility for a number of people who feel that they cannot access rural priorities adequately because of the online process. Peter Cook did not recommend dumping the online system. He said that a dumping of the online system was the last thing that the people to whom he spoke wanted, because they had just got used to it and learned how to make it work. They did not want to have another steep learning curve.  The programme is big, ambitious and innovative. The previous Administration designed it and we have put huge effort and resource into making it work. If mistakes have been made, they will be rectified and we will improve the system. Sarah Boyack referred to the funding situation. The funding is available. She asked who the losers are. She and other members have asked the Government to ensure that the losers are the inactive people who have destocked their operations in recent years. Under the LFASS proposals that we have announced today, the losers will be people who have become inactive and who have destocked. Their portion of the resource will go to people who are active and who are committed to the industry's future. Therefore, I can assure the member both that the funding will be available and that the only losers will be those who have chosen to destock and reduce their commitment to the future of the livestock sector in Scotland.

I thank John Scott for his constructive comments. I agree with him that one of the biggest issues is the future of single farm payments. We all agree that the fact that such payments are currently based on 2002-03 activity levels is unsustainable, which is why we have asked Brian Pack to consider that issue.  On the question about which areas will benefit from the new LFASS scheme, clearly those will be the existing fragile and very fragile areas as defined under the current LFASS scheme. We received a variety of submissions from stakeholders, and John Scott will be aware that there is no magic bullet and no easy answer for such an extremely complex issue. Therefore, we have taken the best route available to us—which will also deliver the quickest benefit—by sticking with the fragile and very fragile categories that exist under LFASS, which will target resources at the north-west of Scotland and the islands, where much of the concern about the future of livestock has been expressed. On the question of new entrants resource, I remind members that the Scotland rural development programme already has a £10 million budget line for new entrants. As I have explained, there are reasons why the number of applicants to that scheme was a lot smaller than might have been hoped for, but that resource is available for the new new entrants scheme that I have announced today, which we hope will attract more applicants. As we have said all along about all budget headings under the SRDP, we need continually to reprofile spending because the programme is largely demand-led. We will keep a close eye on that resource. On John Scott's final point about food security, clearly the thrust of today's announcement is aimed at ensuring that we have a sustainable livestock and agriculture sector in Scotland. I believe that that is the key to ensuring Scotland's food security and to maintaining our nation's capacity to produce food.

I thank Liam McArthur for his constructive questions and response to the statement. I look forward to the many parliamentary questions that he will no doubt lodge in due course, once he has read Peter Cook's report. I have every reason to be confident that funding will be available until we have the outcome of the single farm payments review. A new less favoured area support scheme will be introduced at the same time. The whole Parliament will accept that it makes sense for us to examine in the round the future of agricultural support, either in 2013 or before then. As long as LFASS 2010 is in place, funding will be made available for that. I cannot predict exchange rates—all that I know is that, at the moment, thanks to the weak pound and the strong euro, funds are available for us to call down for the measures that I have announced today for the coming years. I made the point that the implementation of article 68 could have caused inadvertent damage to other parts of the farming sector in Scotland. I did so because, over the past year or two, there has been much volatility in the sector. If we decided to implement top-slicing, we could not be certain about the impact that that would have on sectors that would have to give up a slice of the single farm payment. Liam McArthur raised the issue of online access. I have outlined a number of measures that are aimed at the constituents to whom Liam McArthur referred. There will be dedicated Scottish Government staff to help applicants through the process. Staff cannot make applications on applicants' behalf—the audit process would not  allow that—but the more help we can give, the more accessible the process will be to those who do not find online access easy. Dedicated terminals will be made available in regional offices and other measures will be taken to make the process easier for smaller applications, especially those for less than £10,000, which will not have to go through the whole process, as they do currently.

I hope that Brian Pack will look at the wider issues to which the member refers, as they are directly related to how we will use farming support in Scotland in the years ahead. We must make efforts to attract new blood into the sector. Interestingly, in his report Peter Cook was sceptical about whether any measures under the SRDP could help new entrants. He believes that tackling bigger issues, such as tenancy issues, may be the way in which to attract new entrants or to give people the opportunity to enter the industry. Clearly, being able to access a farm and land is pivotal to the opportunities that are available to new entrants. I agree that the issue is central to the work that must be done in the future on how we use agricultural support in Scotland.

I thank Karen Gillon for her usual negative contribution to the debate. However, she asked a couple of genuine questions that I will address. If the issues relating to public procurement were so easy to resolve, I am sure that the Administration that Karen Gillon supported would have found a magic solution during its eight years in power. The Government is taking action. We have a Scottish Government catering contract, which will be an exemplar for other public sector contracts in Scotland. As the member well knows, we are developing our food and drink policy and Robin Gourlay of East Ayrshire Council has undertaken good work on recommendations about how we can take forward public procurement. I see that Labour members are shaking their heads and I remind them that they had eight years in power, when they could have addressed public procurement but failed to do so—

At last, we have a Government in Scotland that is addressing issues that are important to the future of the food and drink sector in Scotland. LFASS payments will not be funded just as a result of the exchange rate. We are rebaselining the figures that determine to what extent LFASS recipients are active, to bring the figures up to date. Stocking levels will be used. If people fall out of the system because they have destocked, the contributions that they used to receive will be available for recipients who stay in the scheme. We have an underspend of £2 million in LFASS, irrespective of the exchange rate, which will be part of the extra money that we will pay in 2009—an increase of 19 per cent in the first year. There is also money that we can call down, due to the changed exchange rate. We cannot put an exact figure in the public domain, because we do not know what the exact figure will be in the course of the programme, given that it will depend on future exchange rates. However, funds are currently available.

It will vary from farm to farm. Two factors will influence the LFASS payments that producers in the Highlands and Islands receive: first, the impact of the rebaselining  of activity to bring it up to date in 2009; and secondly, the extent to which producers will qualify for the new rates. In my statement I talked about an extra £1,300 for the average sheep producer in the Highlands and Islands and up to £1,600 for the average beef producer. Those are average figures; the circumstances of each farm will determine the extent to which the farm is a winner or a loser.

Many members have called on the Government to tighten the criteria that define activity on farms and crofts throughout Scotland, which determines the level of public support that they receive. That is why we have introduced a measure to consider activity on a field-by-field basis. We must be as accurate as possible. The measures that I announced today should have a positive impact on any crofter who has not destocked, because rates will increase dramatically—by 19 per cent in the first year and a lot more thereafter. I cannot understand why any active crofter should suffer as a result of today's announcement, but I will investigate the matter that the member raised, to ensure that there is no technical reason why that might happen. We have no evidence to suggest that a crofter who continues to be active will not enjoy the substantial benefit of increased LFASS payments.

A working group with stakeholders is considering the impact of the loss of set-aside, which has been abolished. That is  just one example of work that is taking place. The group is also considering how new LMOs could reintroduce benefits that might be lost. Much analysis is taking place to ensure that we do not lose the agri-environment benefits that schemes have brought in the past.

Jim Hume refers to LFASS recipients in the standard areas. Those who have not destocked should have nothing to fear. The basis of the new arrangements is ensuring as strong a link as possible between the level of payment and the level of activity. That will apply to all LFASS recipients in Scotland. I agree that apprenticeships are a fantastic way to encourage new skills for the future in the agricultural sector. As Jim Hume may be aware, some good discussion about the potential for new apprenticeships on Scotland's farms is taking place in the sector. The Scottish Government is supporting that discussion. Such apprenticeships would be an exciting development that I am sure would attract cross-party support in the Parliament.

I thank Kenneth Gibson for that challenging question. I would not dare to put a figure on the number of potential applicants to the new scheme for new entrants in the SRDP, as we have learned our lesson from the initial scheme. We are making every effort possible under the existing regulations to introduce new levels of support, and the new scheme will offer support of up to €70,000 for a new entrant. We are reducing the level of farm activity that any individual must have to qualify for some of the new entrant measures in the SRDP. That means that a part-time farmer who needs to get a foothold  into agriculture will be able to qualify for some of the new entrant measures, albeit at a reduced rate. One of the issues that Peter Cook raised with us was the fact that people sometimes find it difficult to get a foothold in agriculture. Therefore, someone who is only 25 per cent full-time equivalent will be able to qualify for some of the new entrant measures. I draw Kenneth Gibson's attention to the fact that we need to address the tenancy issue if we are to attract new entrants into agriculture. Capital cost is one thing but, if there are simply no parcels of land being let in any parts of Scotland or if there is an inadequate supply for people who want to start farming, the issue will not move forward. It is in the hands of the various stakeholders—the landowners and tenants—to come up with as much of a consensus as possible to break the logjam and give people who want to enter the industry the best opportunity to do so.

I can give Elaine Murray some positive responses on that. We are already increasing the rates of forestry grants. As she may be aware, that is in the pipeline. As I mentioned briefly in my statement, we are also introducing measures that will allow the forestry sector to bypass the full application route—basically, to bypass the RPACs as she suggests. We are considering how to implement that, but it is one of the announcements that we are making today.

I fear that Government announcements always fall short of what stakeholders demand. However, I am sure that the  farming sector stakeholders in Scotland will welcome today's announcement as an effective contribution to the future of agriculture in Scotland. One measure that we are taking to help the sheep sector in Scotland is to resist the European proposal, as it stands, for sheep EID. We hope to get some new concessions and are pursuing, as we speak, the maximum number of concessions that we can get under the current regulation. I cannot predict what the outcome will be, but we know that, if the regulation goes ahead as it stands, it will have a serious impact on the viability of many sheep farms in Scotland; we want to avoid that.

The member is being a bit pessimistic. We hope that the euro will not implode in the next few weeks. However, even as things stand, with the SRDP funding expressed in pounds, funding is available for the Government to reprofile in terms of our new priorities. Therefore, I do not think that what the member implied will come to pass. Clearly, we must adapt to changing circumstances but, as I have said, only one element of the increased support for LFASS is dependent on the exchange rate. However, as I have also said, the money is sitting waiting for the Government to call down.

Regulations were made on 31 March requiring those who deal in puppies and kittens to be licensed and imposing a number of conditions to secure those animals' welfare. Secondary legislation will be introduced under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 to regulate further the use of snares. Primary legislation will be introduced that will make it an offence to tamper with a lawfully set snare and give legal status to a new land management industry accreditation scheme. Guidance on snaring will be issued to ensure that all operators are aware of the legislative changes. A code of practice on the welfare of horses has been issued and similar codes for cats and dogs are being prepared. A consultation on a requirement for animal sanctuaries to be licensed will be issued later in the year.

The member did not actually mention which piece of legislation she was referring to. However, from her other comments, I take it that it was that on snaring. As the member will be aware, a sub-group is in place that has members from various organisations, including many of those to which the member alluded and others such as Grampian Police. The sub-group is considering a specification for the design of snares, where snares may be set, how snares will be identifiable and how we can ensure that other practices are prohibited in relation to snaring. Action is therefore being taken, but the issues are complex. The Government took its decision and laid out the reasons for the decision. We had to strike a balance between land management and animal welfare. We firmly believe that we have struck that balance.

The Scottish Government is aware of the concerns of the livestock sector over the loss of cattle and sheep numbers from the hills. As the member will be aware, we are considering the scope to refine the support made available to the livestock sector through the Scotland rural development programme, including the less favoured area support scheme. In addition, we are considering the use of the new options provided by article 68 of the common agricultural policy health check. I intend to make an announcement to Parliament on 10 June on future support arrangements.

I will not pre-empt next Wednesday's ministerial statement, despite the temptation following that question. Clearly, a number of complex factors need to be taken into account. One such factor is the decline of livestock in many areas of Scotland, particularly in the hills and more remote areas. As the member will be aware, part of that complexity is that any decision affecting one sector can have knock-on impacts on other sectors, so a fine balance needs to be struck. Given the variety of views that have been expressed to the Scottish Government from different parts of Scotland, I am convinced that we will not be able to keep everyone happy. I can also be certain that Jim Hume will not be happy with whatever we say, no matter what decision we take, but I hope that we take the right decisions for the future of agriculture in Scotland.

John Scott raises some important issues about the future of agriculture in Scotland. Clearly, the existing new entrants scheme within the SRDP is not attracting as many applicants as we would like because interest payments, which are subsidised under the scheme, have fallen so much over the past few months. That issue needs to be reviewed. Given that new entrants face other wider issues, such as access to tenancies, there is no magic bullet to attract people into the industry. However, to answer the member's question directly, yes, we are considering a number of ways—whether within the SRDP or not—in which we can take action to attract new entrants to secure the future skills base in Scotland.

The Scottish Government has a voluntary agreement with retailers to reduce the use of carrier bags by  50 per cent. To support that approach, we ran a campaign in partnership with retailers that was designed to encourage people to reuse bags. We continue to work with smaller shops on a commitment that will help them also to reduce unnecessary use of carrier bags.

Yes, I generally agree with the member's comments. I think that all members will welcome the action that has been taken—not just by the big retailers but by smaller retailers throughout Scotland—to reduce carrier bag use and to encourage the reuse of bags for life. As we will all have noticed when visiting our local shops and supermarkets in our communities, the public are on board and are changing their behaviour, with more and more taking bags for life with them to the supermarket. Our recent campaign was aimed at ensuring that people remember to bring their bag for life, because many people own such bags but forget to take them with them to the shops. We hope that the statistics on the recent successful campaign will show that further improvement has been made.

Through our marketing grant schemes, the establishment of Scotland Food and Drink, and the work of the enterprise agencies and Scottish Development International, the Scottish Government provides active support to businesses in identifying and exploiting market opportunities. I have also been able to lend my personal support through attendance at a number of international trade events.

Yes, I can certainly respond positively to the member's points. I am aware that the meeting that took place was productive. I welcome that and have asked to be kept up to date with the various discussions that are taking place, not just among those who attended the tripartite meeting but between Government officials and Vion. Regular meetings take place between Vion and the Scottish Government and its agencies. We are committed to working with Vion to develop its facilities in Scotland, which we believe will benefit the wider livestock sector. The current focus is to work with Vion to consider the issues that directly affect the Cambuslang plant and the Hall's facility in Broxburn. We recognise the importance of the Vion plant to the member's constituency and are determined to work with the company to ensure that we have a good relationship in the future.

I welcome the publication to which the member referred. It is great to hear about all the good work that is taking place in various parts of Scotland, including the member's region. There is a growing demand for local food in Scotland, and there is a growing appetite for local businesses and public agencies to work together to ensure that there is joined-up thinking on food and drink in our local communities. As well as mentioning the initiative in the Clyde valley, which I warmly welcome, the member alluded to the fact that the food and drink sector can help Scotland come out of the economic recession in much better shape. There are some statistics that show that the food and drink industry in Scotland is bucking the trend as far as the current economic backdrop is concerned. We will  launch the next stage of our developing national food and drink policy at the Royal Highland Show, which I am sure will contain many initiatives that the member will welcome.

The Scottish Government recognises that to achieve a zero waste Scotland it is essential that sustainable markets for recycled products be developed and supported, in tandem with the drive for increased collection, reuse and recycling of materials. That is why the Scottish Government funds programmes that are designed to exploit the commercial potential of recycled materials and products in Scotland. A recent example is the £5 million plastics capital grant scheme that I announced earlier this year.

I welcomed the invitation that I received to visit Billy Bowie Tankers in the member's constituency. It is a first-class company with an outstanding track record that has grown substantially in recent years and which is certainly in the vanguard of waste management in Scotland. I enjoyed my visit to a company that is making a significant contribution to the meeting of our environmental targets. I would be interested to find out more about the concerns that the member raised—perhaps he could drop me a note or meet me to discuss them. We hold regular discussions with retailers in Scotland, who tell us that they are on board with many of the aims in our national food and drink policy. If any centralisation of contracts is hampering the achievement of some of those objectives, I would like to hear more about that.

I am sure that ministers will respond to the amendment in due course. We will have a debate in Parliament next week on the national waste plan, because we will shortly be going to consultation. It will be a good opportunity to hear Parliament's views before we launch the consultation document so that we can be sure to incorporate some of Parliament's concerns. The debate that will kick off with the national waste plan consultation will address issues such as the one that the member has raised. That might be a more appropriate time to discuss such measures, although I am sure that ministers are considering the member's amendments.

I am delighted to announce that the latest figures confirm that we achieved Scotland's share of the United Kingdom 2009-10 landfill directive target 18 months early, at the end of December 2008, and that local authorities recycled and composted a record level of 33.5 per cent of municipal waste. I offer my congratulations to local authorities and the public for that performance, as we continue to work together to deliver the 2013 targets.

Given the record levels of funding that have been given to local authorities, I am disappointed to hear that some local authorities feel that the reason why they cannot meet the national targets is a lack of funding. I remind the member that eight local authorities have so far broken or achieved the 40 per cent target for recycling in Scotland. I am not sure whether the member is suggesting that they have had greater funding towards that objective than other councils. Each local authority must prioritise what it sees as the most important issues facing its communities. I believe that genuine progress towards the targets is being made throughout Scotland's local authorities. It is really up to each local authority to determine its priorities, but I hope  that all of them make Scotland's environment a priority.

I am aware that a number of challenges face some of Scotland's cities, including Aberdeen, which is starting from a low level. I am also aware, from our regular discussions with those local authorities, that they are considering new initiatives to improve their recycling rates and meet other environment targets. It is important that we continue to have that close dialogue. Over and above the strategic waste fund, which was part of the local government settlement, we have allocated a zero waste fund to all local authorities in Scotland. We are in discussions about future allocations of the remaining balance of that fund. The resources have been allocated to local authorities in Scotland to meet the targets, and I urge all local authorities, particularly our cities—which, for understandable reasons in certain cases, are some way behind—to make achieving those targets more of a priority.

I am absolutely delighted to open the debate on the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill, which I believe is a timely and crucial piece of legislation for Scotland. We even had our moments of excitement this afternoon with two casting votes and a number of narrow votes, too. I hope that the people of Scotland and members of the Parliament, particularly those who represent communities that are under threat from flooding or which have experienced damage as a result of flooding events in past years, will recognise that the bill will improve substantially Scotland's approach to tackling flooding and its impacts. It will equip Scotland with a modern and sustainable approach to managing all forms of flooding. In doing so, it will promote a safer, stronger and more secure environment for Scotland's citizens and businesses. For the purposes of rule 9.11 of the standing orders, I advise the Parliament that, having been informed of the purport of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill, Her Majesty has consented to place her prerogative and interests in so far as they are affected by the bill at the disposal of the Parliament for the purposes of the bill. Before outlining key elements of the bill, I will take a moment to thank all those who contributed much to its development. Our consultation exercises allowed us to listen to and learn from the experiences of people who have been affected by flooding, alongside people with experience of tackling flooding problems throughout Scotland. That input was greatly appreciated and helped the process considerably. I thank the members of the Finance Committee, the Subordinate Legislation Committee and particularly the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, whose diligent scrutiny of the bill helped shape the bill's final form, as it should. I also thank the committee clerks, who worked hard to support the committees' work. I put on record my sincere thanks to our officials in the bill team and to the Government and parliamentary legal teams. They worked extremely hard on what has  been at times a demanding bill, with a challenging timetable. I am confident that all those who worked on the bill will agree that collaboration across party lines and with stakeholders was central to the bill's successful development. I also say a word of thanks to the former Minister for Environment, Michael Russell, who began to pilot the bill through the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee at stage 1 and to his successor, Roseanna Cunningham, who steered the bill through stage 3 today and who made a seamless transition from chairing the committee at stage 1 to steering the bill through stage 3 on the Government's behalf. The bill's aim is simply to equip Scotland with 21 st century legislation for 21 st century flood risk management. Research into climate change tells us that flooding could become more frequent and more severe. We must act now to minimise the impact of future flooding on Scotland's people, services, environment and economy. Historical records show an upward trend in average rainfall for each year. For instance, Scotland became 20 per cent wetter between 1961 and 2004. That change included an increase of almost 70 per cent in winter rainfall in northern Scotland. The summer of 2008 was one of the wettest on record—August was 50 per cent wetter than normal and the ensuing floods disrupted people's lives and damaged their livelihoods. The unavoidable conclusion from climate change predictions is that flooding is likely to become an increasingly regular threat to our communities, our lives and the economy. The unavoidable message is that we must act now to minimise the impact of future flooding on Scotland's people. Blaming climate change entirely for recent flooding would be convenient, but there are other factors to consider, which include how we have managed our land and our waterways to suit our society's needs, which has compounded the effects of flooding in some areas. We recognise that flooding cannot be eliminated. However, experience tells us that well co-ordinated action can significantly reduce the likelihood of flooding and its harmful impacts. Scotland's current flooding legislation—the Flood Prevention (Scotland) Act 1961—has been criticised for restricting the range of flood management measures that can be adopted; for lacking a clear framework to co-ordinate measures across catchments; and for delaying the implementation of measures to manage flooding. As I am sure everyone agrees, much of that act is outdated and no longer reflects how Government services and local services are delivered in Scotland.  The bill will address those problems directly and will give Scotland the modern and sustainable approach to managing flooding that it deserves, while also transposing the European Union floods directive. It will remove unnecessary burdens and obstacles to developing flood protection measures and it will clarify roles in and responsibilities for flood risk management by, for example, placing local authorities, Scottish Environment Protection Agency, Scottish Water and the Scottish ministers under new and clear duties. It will also provide Scotland with an improved reservoir safety regime. It is important that the bill will establish a framework for collaboration between the bodies that are tasked with managing flooding and protecting Scotland's people, environment and economy. The bill will create a flexible approach to managing flooding, which can be adapted to different circumstances—including many local issues—throughout the nation. Furthermore, the intent behind creating a flexible approach is to produce legislation that will work for current and future generations. The bill will deliver flood management at a catchment scale, which will allow local authorities and others to take the best possible approach to managing flooding in their areas. Options will range from traditional defences to improved flood warning and natural flood management measures wherever appropriate.

Okay. The member raises a fair point. The issue featured throughout the debate in committee, as it did in the chamber and in discussions with stakeholders. I am sure that it will be reflected. The new national flood risk assessments and flood maps will improve our understanding of the likelihood and consequences of flooding from rivers, the sea, extreme rainfall events and groundwater. Those new assessments will be complemented by flood risk management plans that will ensure that the most sustainable and cost-effective measures are put in place to manage flooding. The implementation of the bill over the next few years will make vital improvements to how we manage flooding and make a real and long-term difference to the lives of people in Scotland.  I believe, as does the Scottish Government—indeed, I am sure that we all believe—that the bill will position Scotland at the forefront of modern flood risk management. More important, it will make a significant and lasting difference to those who are at risk of flooding. I believe that the bill deserves the support of every member of the Parliament. I am delighted to move, That the Parliament agrees that the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I will speak to amendments 31 and 32, in the name of Roseanna Cunningham. During stage 2, Liam McArthur lodged an amendment with the intention of ensuring that flood risk maps included details of potential damage to protected sites that do not depend on water, including a number of terrestrial sites and woodlands. We agreed that flooding could place non-water-dependent sites at risk and said that we would consider amending the bill to address the point. Amendments 31 and 32 will ensure that such areas are considered when flood risk maps are being prepared. I trust that the amendments in the group address Liam McArthur's concerns, and I hope that the chamber will support them. I move amendment 31.

The amendments in the group are all largely drafting amendments. At stage 2, Bill Wilson lodged an amendment to introduce a requirement on SEPA, when setting objectives and measures in flood risk management plans, to take account of the social, environmental and economic costs of implementing those measures. Amendment 34 is  a minor consequential amendment: it changes the word "cost" to "costs", to reflect the new wording. Section 80 already provides that the consent of the appropriate authority is needed before any of the powers of entry that are conferred by section 68 can be exercised on Crown land. Amendment 56 clarifies that the requirement applies to the powers that are listed in sections 68 or 70. Amendment 58 provides that the references in the bill to European directives include references to the amended versions of the relevant directives. Amendment 62 is consequential on amendment 58. I hope that the chamber will support the amendments in the group. I move amendment 34.  Amendment 34 agreed to.

Amendment 35 clarifies that non-structural measures may include "the carrying out of research, monitoring and other methods of gathering information relevant to managing flood risk". Clearly, we need good information if we are to get the right measures in the right places, whether they are natural flood management measures or flood warning systems. Amendment 35 will ensure that those data-gathering exercises are targeted appropriately. I move amendment 35.  Amendment 35 agreed to.  Amendment 65 moved—[Peter Peacock]—and agreed to.

I am intrigued by amendment 4. I appreciate that Peter Peacock has a point to make, but is it the policy of his party to lodge such amendments for every bill that comes before the Parliament from now on? Clearly, ministers give all such issues equal priority. I ask him to clarify the point for the record.

The Government supports the use of fresh, seasonal food throughout the public sector and is setting an example. The Scottish Government's own catering contract sources 75 per cent of all perishable goods locally.

I assure the member that we have made more progress on the promotion of Scottish and local food and drink produce over the past two years than his Administration did over eight years. Indeed, we are developing Scotland's first national food and drink policy, at the heart of which will be public procurement policies to help to promote the fantastic food and drink that are produced on our doorstep and to ensure that the public sector plays a role in that. We have taken a number of measures. Robin Gourlay of East Ayrshire Council, who is respected across the chamber for his local authority work, is leading one work stream under the development of the food policy. Given that the work streams are reaching a conclusion, he is about to report to Government. I am sure that the report will contain a number of worthwhile recommendations; I have not seen it, but I am assured that it contains a number of good ideas. I hope that those ideas will attract support from across the chamber in taking forward this important debate.

A number of measures have already been taken, over and above the recommendations that we await from Robin Gourlay. For instance, under the food processing, marketing and co-operation grants scheme, the Soil Association was awarded funds to build on the food for life programme to which the member refers. The programme seeks to ensure that the content of more meals that are served in schools and hospitals have ingredients that are 75 per cent unprocessed, 50 per cent local and 30 per cent organic. In addition, the Scottish Agricultural Organisation Society has developed a road map for supplying local authorities, the aim of which is to help producers and producer groups to bid for upcoming tenders. Those are examples of measures that we have taken over the past year or two. The member is aware of the complexities of the issue. She knows that they led to the previous Administration being unable to make more progress over eight years of attempting to address the situation. I am confident that we will make good progress and that we will support our primary producers as the member wishes.

We have made considerable progress in a number of important areas. For example, in taking advantage of Scotland's renewable energy resources, we have 5.5GW installed and consented capacity. We are working with the renewable energy skills group, in which key stakeholders are involved, to ensure that Scotland has the necessary skills to deliver its potential in the renewables sector; making homes warmer and more energy efficient; bringing forward landmark legislation—indeed, we are debating the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill today; and further improving Scotland's recycling rate, which now stands at 32.9 per cent.

The member raises a number of good points. The Government has been encouraging the public sector across Scotland to indulge in more sustainable procurement. The sector should give more consideration to the examples that the member cites. The Scottish Government's policy on vehicle procurement takes account of our carbon footprint. We are making inroads to improving that. The public sector in Scotland must take account of such issues in procurement policies. I refer not only to sustainable and local food, but to the other goods and services that the public sector puts out to tender. I agree wholly with the sentiment that the member expresses.

Yes. I agree with the member. I offer my congratulations to local initiatives such as the one to which he refers. The climate challenge fund has supported 120 communities throughout Scotland in undertaking grass-roots action. It has helped them to come up with their own ideas and to use their ingenuity to reduce their carbon footprint. Examples such as the one that the member gave—which are celebrated across the chamber—show the way forward for Scotland.

An independent review of the SRDP is being carried out by Peter Cook, the former head of the rural business unit for the Scottish Agricultural College. The review includes a re-examination of the application process for the rural priorities element of the programme. Peter Cook is finalising his advice and recommendations, and I hope that they will be submitted to me shortly. Once I have received them, I will be able to make decisions on the  SRDP and associated application processes. In the meantime, we are pressing ahead with implementing a number of measures to improve the application process for rural priorities, including: providing additional training for case officers; improving guidance and communication with applicants; removing area limits on payment of the farmland premium for forestry projects; enabling applicants to mandate more than one agent to work on complex cases; and making arrangements to allow successful applicants to start work on their projects as soon as possible.

Yes. We are keen to speed up the application process. We have tried to accelerate a number of applications and have been victims of our own success to some extent, because we had a huge number of applications in the February round. To date, we have given awards to more than 1,800 cases, which represents a significant number of rural businesses. More than 1,000 of those were given awards in the February round. That is why we wanted to take stock before we gave the deadline for the next round of applications, but I am delighted to tell Richard Baker and other members that we are announcing today the date for the next round of applications. It will be late June for the August round. There will also be one further application round this year. I will ensure that all members are sent details of those rounds this afternoon, but I have already written to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee with them today.

One reason why we have to review the forestry schemes in the SRDP is that they have been underspent because the economics of the forestry sector in Scotland have made some of the current options unattractive. As the programme progresses, we will have to adapt it to current economic conditions, particularly in the  forestry sector. There are budgets available for that sector, and I hope that we can come up with amendments to the schemes to make them more attractive to it, as well as tackle concerns that people have expressed about complexities and bureaucracy, which we must accept. The SRDP was designed by the previous Administration, which could have given more thought to how it would be implemented once it was up and running. However, we are where we are and we must ensure that the forestry schemes become more attractive to the forestry sector in Scotland. I take the opportunity to correct misleading information from Jim Hume. He started off by saying that we had a proposal to sell off the forestry and then corrected himself a few seconds later by saying that it was a proposal to lease some forest rights.

The Scottish Government has set a limit of no more than 25 per cent of municipal solid waste to be used for energy generation. The zero-waste policy for Scotland prioritises waste reduction, reuse, recycling and composting over other forms of waste treatment, including energy from waste.

Yes. I will consider what more the Scottish Government can do to encourage district heating systems to form part of any proposals for energy-from-waste plants. Indeed, one of the reasons why we gave such detailed consideration to the role of energy from waste was that we wanted to ensure that any projects that were proposed were efficient and incorporated the kind of benefit to which the member refers. I am aware that the Scottish Environment Protection Agency withdrew its opposition to some proposals once more evidence was given of the benefits of district heating and of other by-products from energy from waste. I agree  with what the member said and I will be happy to look into the issue for him.

The member raises the important issue of the effort that is required by Glasgow City Council to improve its recycling rate. It is certainly the case that if we, as a nation, are to achieve our national targets, we need Glasgow City Council to make progress with its efforts. However, I am pleased that efforts are being made to improve the recycling rate in Glasgow. I understand that a number of proposals are being worked up. The member asked what contact there has been between the Scottish Government and Glasgow City Council. I visited the council a few months ago and met officials and elected representatives to discuss the future of their waste strategy. In addition, Scottish Government officials are in regular contact with the council to offer it support, given the disproportionate influence that it will have over our success or otherwise in achieving the national targets.

Scottish seafood has an excellent reputation for quality, which is recognised in both domestic and export markets. Roseanna Cunningham and I supported Scottish companies in promoting that at last week's European seafood exposition in Brussels.

I am pleased that the member has raised that issue at question time. During our productive visit last week to Brussels, where I was proud to see the number of saltires that were flying at the world's biggest seafood exposition, the most common issue that was raised with me by the companies from Scotland that were represented there was their current inability to get adequate trade credit insurance. That is hampering the massive opportunity that seafood companies have to increase the number of exports from Scotland. In March, I wrote to Peter Mandelson, the Secretary of State for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform in the United Kingdom Government, asking him to ensure that the UK Government addressed the issue of trade credit insurance for the Scottish seafood industry. I was therefore disappointed, as I am sure that members and the industry were, that no adequate measures were included in the recent budget. I wrote again this week to the secretary of state, asking him to reply to my previous letter on this very important issue for Scotland's economy and our seafood sector and to address our companies' specific concerns. A massive economic opportunity is open to our seafood companies. Despite some of the  challenges that the seafood sector faces, many of the people to whom I spoke at last week's exhibition—they were mainly from companies in the pelagic sector—said that the show was their busiest for some years. We need to grasp that opportunity as a nation. As long as companies are unable to get trade credit insurance because of the current economic backdrop, that task will be all the more difficult.

The Scottish Government has a zero-waste policy that prioritises waste reduction, reuse, recycling and composting over other forms of waste treatment such as incineration. There is a role for energy-from-waste plants. The Scottish Government has set a 25 per cent cap on the amount of waste that goes to energy-from-waste schemes. That cap has been included in the proposed national planning framework.

The member has eloquently highlighted the concerns of her constituents but, as she is aware, the application will need to go through the planning process. Let me make just a couple of quick points. First, any proposal will need the relevant permit from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency before it can proceed. Therefore, as well as going through the planning process, the application will need to follow that procedure. Secondly, the environmental footprint of energy-from-waste technology has improved dramatically in recent decades. Although I cannot comment on the particulars of the proposal in the member's constituency, that is a general observation.

Our concordat with local authorities leaves them free to make their own decisions on spending priorities in the context of their single outcome agreements with the Scottish Government. In addition, the Scottish rural development programme can support community halls through rural development contracts and through the LEADER programme.

I agree with the member's comments. Our rural community facilities, especially halls, play a role as the hub of many of our communities and should be supported where that is possible. In this case, the decision is for South Lanarkshire Council, which I hope is taking into account the factors that the member raises. As I said in my original answer, support is available to communities who want to refurbish or improve their community facilities. I do not know whether community ownership is an option in this case; the community may wish to discuss that with South Lanarkshire Council.

I can tell the member that £4 million this year and a further £2 million next year has been allocated to community facilities. Examples of community facilities that have benefited include Newlands primary school in Romanno Bridge, near Peebles, and the Garelochhead youth and community centre in Argyll. Those are just a couple of examples—many other worthwhile projects are receiving funding and we would welcome many more from the member's constituency or any other constituency in Scotland.

The member makes several important points. In recent years, we have seen the development of new community schools providing access to local communities for a variety of purposes. That is welcomed and is enhancing the quality of life in many communities, both urban and rural, in Scotland.

The statistics illustrate a long-term global trend and put into perspective the challenges that face one of Scotland's most important industries. The Scottish Government provides agriculture with more than £500 million annually in direct support. In response to suggestions from stakeholders, we are considering other ways of helping, such as seeking to identify ways of strengthening the link between those payments and active farming.

The member makes an important point. Part of the debate is about critical mass. The jobs concerned are those not just of farmers in fields and livestock farmers, but of many others in related sectors, such as haulage and abattoirs. It is important to bear that in mind when we discuss the future of those sectors. My message to livestock farmers in Scotland is that they must take decisions in line with the commercial environment in which they operate, first and foremost. We as a Government—and, I am sure, the member, his party and other members—believe that the livestock sector in Scotland needs a vibrant long-term future, especially given the need for food security, which is an issue not just for this country, but globally. Our farmers are of course at the heart of food  production in Scotland. We will continue to look for ways to address a trend that is global but which has an impact on Scotland. We will consider what we in Scotland can do at least—I hope—to stabilise livestock numbers. As the trend has been long term in recent years, there is no overnight solution. We want to work with other parties, our stakeholders and wider rural communities to ensure the best possible future for the livestock sector.

I read in today's press that some lambs are fetching up to £100, so—thankfully—prices in the sheep sector seem to have improved in recent months because of increased exports and other factors. That is some good news for the livestock sector. The member raises a potential threat to sheep production in Scotland—the regulations that propose to introduce individual tagging of sheep and electronic identification as part of that. Only this week, I met in Brussels the commissioner who has responsibility for those regulations to discuss the severe impact that they will have on Scotland's sheep sector. It is clear that the management challenges for sheep farmers and the costs will far outweigh any potential benefit of traceability, which is the supposed aim. I am pleased that in her meeting with me and at the subsequent council of ministers meeting, the commissioner said that she recognises Scotland's problems—other countries also have such problems—and that she is willing to look for flexibility, which we hope to obtain. In the meantime, we must keep up the argument and the fight against the regulations.

Rhoda Grant highlights an important issue. I met the NFU Scotland in January to discuss it. Last year, we also  negotiated some transitional funding to help with the impact that the changes that have taken place within the National Fallen Stock Company will have on livestock keepers in Scotland. She is right that the end of free collection is a potential extra burden for many producers in Scotland. I am in dialogue with various representative groups about how we could assist, but we do not have a solution yet. Our farming communities make many demands on the SRDP and other funding mechanisms, but we are keen to continue the dialogue with them to understand as much as possible the potential impact on producers and determine what we can do to help.

The Scottish Government provides annual core funding to Keep Scotland Beautiful—KSB. In the year of homecoming, we aim to make the national spring clean the most successful yet and have provided an additional £115,000 to KSB.

I am delighted to hear that Gil Paterson and people in his communities will be participating in the national spring clean. During the previous question other members also  indicated that they are enthusiastically behind the campaign. More than 28,000 people have already signed up to take part in the campaign, and I urge MSPs across the chamber to broadcast the fact that, simply by going to the Keep Scotland Beautiful website, people can sign up to become volunteers and can get more information on how to take part. The campaign is becoming very successful; it is clear that people are volunteering the length and breadth of Scotland. A lot of effort has been put in by Keep Scotland Beautiful and by MSPs to broadcast the fact that even more volunteers are needed.

For 2007, the latest year for which full figures are available, the Scottish Government paid out £60,759,000 across all farm support schemes in the Borders, for 1,824 claimants. That is an average of £33,310 per claimant. Under the rural priorities scheme, in 2008 we approved more than £5 million of support for projects in the Borders.

I would be happy to look into the specific issue of apprenticeships in the Scottish Borders, because I do not have any statistics to hand. We are very keen to encourage apprenticeships. I recently spoke at the annual dinner of Lantra, which is involved in rolling out all kinds of programmes and training opportunities for young people in land-based sectors throughout Scotland. I was absolutely delighted to meet some really enthusiastic and impressive young people who have chosen to get into careers in land-based industries. I was taken aback by how impressive and enthusiastic they were. A lot of good work is going on. I will certainly look into the situation in the Borders to ensure that the area is getting its fair share. The industry needs lifeblood for its future, so we need to look for new ways of encouraging young people to come into agriculture and other land-based sectors.

I recognise the phrase "consultants charter"; I recall that it was applied to the previous rural development programme as well. However, we have taken some steps to address that. I acknowledge the importance of this issue. We are taking the points that the member raises into account as part of our short review of the SRDP. We should not forget that a bigger review will take place next year, as is required under the legislation. I will be happy to send details to the member, but I think that I am correct in saying that, in many cases, fewer consultants are being used for applications than were used in the previous scheme. I will send a note to the member about that. When people are applying for £10,000 or £50,000, or even several hundred thousand pounds, of public money for their business, it is only right that the Government and the application bodies should ask them to put together a business plan to justify receiving such an amount of public money. In many cases, it is perfectly appropriate that people should hire consultants as part of that work. We should not get into the game of making criticisms any time that consultants are required to put together complicated applications for large sums of public money. After all, such applications have to be justified.

I regularly meet NFUS national representatives, most recently at this week's European Union agriculture council in Brussels. Moreover, on 20 February, I attended and spoke to the NFUS council meeting in Aviemore, and I meet NFUS local representatives throughout Scotland in the course of my duties.

The Government certainly shares Mary Mulligan's concerns about the important issue of the future of Scotland's dairy sector, which is under severe pressure at the moment. The issues that affect that important sector are often discussed with the NFUS and other agricultural organisations; indeed, over the past few weeks and months, I have met representatives from many sectors that play a specific role in the dairy sector to discuss its future. As for the dairy summit that I undertook to pursue in response to suggestions from Sarah Boyack and other members, we are still working on it. Unfortunately, I cannot snap my fingers and demand that representatives from every part of the retail chain get round the table when I want them to. However, I assure Mary Mulligan that we are pursuing the proposal and that we will keep her, Sarah Boyack and other members with an interest in the issue up to date with developments. I point out that, in the meantime, my colleague Roseanna Cunningham has chaired a meeting of the retailers forum, which, as members will recall, is an innovation of this Government. Ms Cunningham used that opportunity to raise directly with retailers the concerns of the industry, the Government and the Parliament about the future of Scotland's dairy sector. We will continue to look for other such opportunities, including having some form of summit as soon as possible.

Since 2007, 47 Scottish statutory instruments have been revoked and replaced by 26 new instruments in order to reflect the updating and consolidation of existing legislation to ensure compliance with European legislation. Other Government initiatives have helped to reduce the burden of regulation on farmers. For example, by October 2009 we will have cut the number of farm inspections by 2,000. We have  also reduced the number of questions on the June annual census form by 70.

I assure Gavin Brown that we are discussing that with partners in SEARS. Some of the agencies that he mentioned are not formally members of SEARS, but I assure him that we are certainly discussing how we can take that general theme forward. Given that SEARS has been very successful, we want to take the partnership to another level. We believe that there is widespread support for that, as is evident from the member's question.

Our proposals have been warmly welcomed by the fishing industry, and are designed to modernise fishing vessel licensing and quota management to help safeguard the future of our fishing communities. Of course, we firmly believe that our proposals are within the competence of this Parliament. We have worked very closely with the fishing industry to shape our proposals. The final round of consultation is under way. We will continue to work with the industry and, indeed, the UK Government to take forward our policies. We will continue to discuss with them any concerns that they may have. I have no doubt that the people of Scotland wish our fishing communities to benefit from the rich fishing grounds that are on our own doorstep and future generations of active fishermen to have similar opportunities to those that are available to the current generation. That is one of the aims of our proposals.

Mr Finnie brings a great deal of knowledge and experience to the issue. I understand that discussions on the subject began when he was in office—indeed, they began as far back as 2004. That illustrates why the time has come for the Scottish Government to act within our powers to address this important issue. We have to do that, given the lack of progress under previous joint agreements. I reiterate what I said at the outset: we will continue to engage with the Scottish Fishermen's Federation and other organisations in Scotland, most of which widely support the vast majority of our proposals. Indeed, given that the proposals are about protecting the viability of our fishing communities, they have been warmly welcomed by those communities in particular. In the absence of a UK policy on licensing and quota management, we have taken the view that we need to modernise the current arrangements, under our own powers. We firmly believe that the actions that we are taking are within the competence of the Scottish Parliament. We will continue to engage with fishing organisations to make that point clear.

As the member will be aware, when her party was in government, it never published its legal advice on such issues. Of course, in keeping with convention, that will always be the case with any Scottish Government. Given that the member represents fishing communities, I will be very surprised if she does not support the proposals that have been put forward, which are within the powers of the Parliament, to protect the long-term future of our fishing communities in Scotland. Many people believe that we need to modernise the licensing arrangements for fishing vessels and quota management in Scotland so that we can put in place safeguards. Many people believe that it is not right that the current generation of fishermen can sell their quota to the highest bidder—should they choose to do so—and that no safeguard is in place to ensure that the benefit is retained in Scotland. As part of the current consultation process, the industry has given a warm welcome to the wide range of proposals.

I am perplexed by the UK Government's stance on what we consider to be a very worthwhile policy intention. I am even more perplexed by the fact that Labour members, who at times come across as DEFRA's spokespeople, tend to oppose everything that the Scottish National Party Government does on fishing policy. That is unfortunate. The member may be aware of the UK Government's unilateral action on under-10 licences south of the border, as a result of which the fleet south of the border is re-registering its licences in Wales. Is any further evidence needed that the current regime is not working for Scotland or for England? The example shows why the Scottish Government is right to modernise the policy and to make progress.

I am keen to lift any uncertainty and to work with the UK Government towards that end, but there is only so much that the Scottish Government can do when the UK Government will not engage with our policy intentions for north of the border. As I indicated to the member's party colleague in my earlier answer, the discussions have been going on since 2004. It is now 2009. The UK Government's latest position is that it will sit down and talk to us—but over the next few years. How long does it take to reach a sensible policy conclusion? We have voluntary joint arrangements among the devolved Administrations and the UK Government; we believe that the time has come to move forward to safeguard the future of Scotland's fishing communities. I hope that the member, as a representative of a fishing community, will support the SNP Government's policy intentions and that we can get some cross-party support for them, rather than having party-political point scoring, which would be to the detriment of fishing communities.

Will the member take an intervention?

I welcome that final sentence of the member's comments, but let me pick up on what he said about the timescale for the bill. Does he not recall that his party was in power for eight years? To expect us to publish the final bill within 18 months is asking quite a lot, given the complexity of the legislation.

I was intrigued by the Scottish Fishermen's Federation's submission. I assure the member that I spoke to the organisation yesterday to clarify its position. It told me that it is comfortable with marine Scotland as we announced it. The proposal covers all the SFF's concerns and the organisation is quite happy with it.

I simply ask the member to note the quote from RSPB Scotland that I read out in my opening speech. It is a major player in Scottish Environment LINK.

Will the member give way?

Scotland has a world-class marine environment and an enviable maritime heritage. We have 10 per cent of Europe's coastline, 20 per cent of Europe's seas and well over half of Great Britain's coast. Our seas are among the most biologically productive in the world. They contain more than 40,000 species and internationally important populations of marine mammals and seabirds. Some of the finest marine habitats in Europe can be found in Scottish waters. Our seas are therefore a major asset. They are essential to the economic wellbeing of Scotland and our coastal communities. We are proud of our unique coastal and marine environment and of the many communities, jobs and industries that it sustains, but I wonder whether we are always aware of just how special it is. David Attenborough has said that the Bass Rock, with its extraordinary gannet population, which is on our doorstep, is one of the 12 wildlife wonders of the world. Some 20 per cent of the world's gannets are in Scotland. Yesterday, the Parliament debated the challenges that seabirds face. Scotland's seas face a range of growing and competing demands from the energy, shipping, fisheries, tourism and conservation sectors. The Government is committed to resource use and resource protection. We are committed to delivering enhanced economic growth while ensuring that an iconic asset is looked after for future generations. We cannot forget that our activities on shore impact on our seas and oceans. That underlines the need for ambition in the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill if we are to tackle global warming. The Scottish Government gave a commitment to introduce dedicated legislation on Scotland's seas. This debate provides an opportunity to seek and discuss the Parliament's views on our legislative proposals before a bill is introduced. The marine bill will be a special bill for Scotland that will create a framework for sustainable growth. Stakeholder involvement has been at the heart of the process from the beginning. After our most recent debate on marine issues, which took place on 20 March last year, the Parliament supported our bid to gain additional responsibilities for the waters around Scotland, to  ensure that there was better integration and a coherent framework for planning and nature conservation. I am sure that the Parliament will be pleased to record that the Scottish Government secured additional responsibilities for Scotland. The cross-party support that we received in the Parliament was invaluable in achieving that. After the First Minister successfully pressed for the resurrection of the joint ministerial committee, we were delighted to announce on 27 November that agreement had been reached on a framework to devolve executive responsibility for marine planning and nature conservation to Scotland. The agreement is complex and we admit that it does not go as far as we wanted it to go. We would have liked the Scottish Parliament to be able to legislate fully for the area out to 200 nautical miles. However, we have taken a significant step forward. In future, we will be able to integrate fishing policies with nature conservation and planning, which is a considerable advance. However, we must operate within two sets of laws from two Parliaments, which will be challenging. The agreement provides a framework for the Scottish ministers to work co-operatively with the United Kingdom Government on marine management, and it provides a mechanism to meet our European and international obligations. I know that many members who take an interest in the sea support a clear framework that covers the seas that are administered by all parts of the UK. The deal that we arrived at reflects the complex sets of interests that we and the other Administrations have in the seas around us. It is a reasonable compromise that works for all sides. Above all, the deal allows us to join up with other parts of the UK to manage the seas. We have strong support for that way forward from environmental organisations and industry interests. We hope shortly to bring forward our legislative proposals. We may soon be in a position in which two marine bills have been introduced in two Parliaments, north and south of the border—that illustrates how the marine environment has risen up the agenda on both sides of the border. Responses to the consultation showed widespread support for more integrated, simpler, more effective and more efficient marine management arrangements. Ninety-one per cent of respondents agreed on the need for a new integrated structure to deliver sustainable seas for all. On 9 February, I announced the creation of marine Scotland, which will begin operating on 1 April. It represents a groundbreaking approach to the integrated management of Scotland's seas that will combine core marine functions and  integrate science, policy and delivery. Marine Scotland will play a leadership role; it will combine and co-ordinate the efforts of existing bodies and will have the essential role of joining up with marine management organisations in the rest of the UK. It will be the champion of our marine environment. It will also be part of the Scottish Government, which will provide transparency and direct accountability to the Scottish Parliament on devolved Scottish marine matters through the Scottish ministers. Kara Brydson, marine policy officer with RSPB Scotland, welcomed our announcement on 9 February, when she said: "It's great news for Scotland's delicate marine wildlife" and that RSPB Scotland looks forward "to working with the new organisation to ensure that the environment is at the heart of Scottish marine management." Our consultation on the Scottish marine bill proposed a new legislative and management framework for sustainable development in the marine environment. It contained proposals on a new system of marine planning, reducing the regulatory burden, enhanced nature conservation and improving our understanding of the seas. Since the consultation was launched last July, we have been extremely busy. Approximately 750 people attended the 21 consultation events that took place around Scotland's coasts and islands—from Orkney and Shetland to Dumfries, and from Eyemouth to Stornoway. We also held meetings with representatives of specific sectors, such as aquaculture, renewables, fisheries and leisure. We received 280 consultation responses from individuals and organisations. Most of the respondents agreed that we should put in place a new legislative and management framework to deliver a new planning system for the sustainable use of Scotland's seas; improvements to marine nature conservation to safeguard and protect Scotland's marine assets; a streamlined and modernised marine licensing and consents system; and better stewardship, which should be backed up by robust science and data. Those responses are broadly in line with the outcome of the work of the advisory group on marine and coastal strategy—AGMACS—which advised the previous Administration, and the Environment and Rural Development Committee's report on the marine environment in the previous parliamentary session. "Sustainable Seas for All: a consultation on Scotland's first marine bill" proposed a new power on marine protected areas that would be used for the purposes of conservation and to complement existing powers. I propose that it should also be available to demonstrate and research new  methods of managing our marine environment and, in certain circumstances, to protect areas that communities propose. As stakeholders have made clear, designation based on science must be an important underpinning principle of the new conservation powers. I am sure that all members agree that science—rather than crude targets, for instance—must guide designations. There were also more than 8,000 responses from three principle campaigns. Nearly 5,000 people took part in the Scottish Environment LINK campaign that called for greater environmental protection, a system of marine planning and a marine management organisation, which is in line with our proposals. Although the overall response was positive, it is clear that there is also a need for simplification and reduced bureaucracy. We envisage that our bill will ensure that that is delivered for our marine industries. There is still some work to be done before we can introduce the bill to the Parliament, but we will introduce it shortly. The scale of the response to the consultation clearly illustrates that there is keen interest in our unique coastal and marine environment. Stakeholders expressed views on a number of issues. Advocates for Animals and the Save Our Seals Fund called for a ban on killing seals, whereas our proposals were for increased protection for seals. Other responses contrasted with that call. However, we want to achieve an improved balance between seal conservation and sustainable fisheries and aquaculture. We are minded to tighten up on seals legislation but we do not believe that an outright ban is the best way forward. Nonetheless, we are keen to hear the Parliament's views on the subject if any member wants to raise it. Scottish marine regions will provide a way for local interests in Scotland to have a say over their local seas. It is clear from the consultation that there is strong support for that proposal but, in delivering marine regions, we must ensure that we do not create an additional layer of bureaucracy. We are committed to consulting on the characteristics that should be used to construct the regions. I want to think about that carefully so that we can build consensus. Simplifying rather than complicating the delivery landscape for Scotland's seas is the first key step towards developing an integrated package that joins together the environment, fishing, leisure and recreation, and other interests at the local level. That will clearly take some time, and the time taken is likely to vary around Scotland. Nonetheless, I would rather take time to implement robust arrangements and ensure that they are effective over the longer term than rush to deliver them and potentially create more problems.  l look forward to hearing members' views on Scottish marine regions. A sustainable approach to marine management that balances improvements to marine conservation with the growth of marine industries will be at the heart of the bill. Along with the UK Marine and Coastal Access Bill, the Scottish bill will provide the basis for a coherent system of marine management for the seas around Scotland and provide an integrated framework to achieve a good outcome for Scotland's seas. That is good news for our marine industries, our communities and our precious marine environment. In the times ahead, we must ensure that our seas continue to sustain species and habitats that make Scotland special and our planet richer, and that they sustain thousands of jobs in Scotland. In the future, our seas will continue to power our nation through wind and wave and to oil our economy. They must also continue to put food on our tables. In short, our seas help to make Scotland, and we need good, clean and productive seas to sustain us all. The challenge for all who care about the sea is to work with us to deliver the best system that we can to make that happen. I ask Parliament to support the Government motion. I move, That the Parliament notes the Scottish Government's commitment to deliver a Scottish Marine Bill to drive sustainable economic growth and improve the stewardship of the seas around Scotland; acknowledges the positive response to the consultation, Sustainable Seas for All , and the widespread support for the proposals, and further notes the recent agreement with the UK Government to secure executive responsibility for marine nature conservation and planning in the offshore zone.

Livestock farming in the hills is supported by single farm payments worth over £200 million annually, by less favoured area payments worth £61 million annually, and by other measures, such as the Scottish beef calf scheme, which is worth £18 million annually. We do, of course, recognise the challenges presented by the current decline in livestock recorded on Scotland's hills and in remote areas.

I largely agree with the member's analysis of the situation on Scotland's hills. The best way to attract new people into agriculture is to ensure that we have a sustainable and profitable industry in Scotland. I hope that the vision for agriculture outlined by the Scottish Government will help to deliver that in the years ahead. As regards the immediate action that we are taking on this serious issue, 2009 is an important year for reviewing some of the support mechanisms for agriculture in Scotland, particularly direct support, large chunks of which come from Europe. We will be reviewing less favoured area payments, how we implement the common agricultural policy health check in Scotland and how we use the flexibility within it. I assure the member and Parliament that the future of our hills will be central to those reviews as well as to the on-going review of the Scottish rural development programme.

I hope that 2009 will offer an opportunity to stabilise livestock numbers on our hills. We have seen a steady decline over the previous 10 years, as I think Mary Scanlon said, and even beyond that. That decline was accelerated when direct support was decoupled from production in 2003. I refer the member to my previous answer, in which I mentioned reviews of some of the schemes and how we can use them to look at how we make hill farming more sustainable. The member makes a very important point about the wider infrastructure that depends on livestock farming on hills and in our more remote areas. It is not just about the farmers rearing livestock; it is about the hauliers, the abattoirs and the wider infrastructure. I am confident that we can put in place measures to begin to stabilise the situation this year and beyond. It might not be easy, but it must be our aim.

The First Minister and I hosted a summit with supermarket leaders last autumn, when we encouraged urgent action to reduce unnecessary packaging. That work is being carried forward by the zero waste retailers group, with my officials in attendance. The group last met on 27 January and will meet again at least twice in 2009. At its next meeting, I expect it to focus on carrier bag use—where we are looking for a 50 per cent reduction by next year—and on reducing the amount of unrecycled packaging.

The Scottish Government funds the delivery body Waste Aware Scotland, which has various campaigns to engage the public on that issue. Engaging the retailers is an important dimension of the debate, and the zero waste retailers group is now up and running. We are developing a new relationship with retailers in Scotland to try to ensure that such issues are at the top of their agenda. One of the provisions on waste in the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill is the proposal to set targets for reducing and addressing packaging in Scotland. I know that there is widespread desire both in the Parliament and outwith it to put the issue of packaging much higher up the recycling and  environmental agenda. We are determined to do that and we will ensure that the resources are made available for the relevant campaigns.

Yes, we certainly shall bear those points in mind when we are considering whether to use that provision, should Parliament endorse it. One of the key reasons why the provision was included in the bill is because a similar provision was included in the UK Climate Change Bill. I am sure that members would agree that it is much more appropriate for the Scottish Government to decide when, if at all, such a provision should be exercised. As we have said time and again, our preference is to go down the voluntary route. The initial indication is that the retailers are achieving some of the targets that have been agreed with Government. For instance, members may be aware that retailers achieved the 2008 target of stopping the overall growth in packaging. They have also achieved the target of reducing the use of carrier bags. Voluntary action is our preferred route, and we will see how it goes.

The Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill will comprehensively modernise flood risk management in Scotland for the first time in over four decades. I thank the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee for its diligent scrutiny of the bill, which is reflected in the detailed stage 1 report that we are discussing today, and for its support for the general principles of the bill. The first recommendation in the committee's report rightly highlights the advantages of pre-legislative scrutiny. The committee's inquiry on flooding and flood management played an important part in the development of the bill. Although the scope of the inquiry was wider than the remit of the bill, I hope that a number of its recommendations are reflected in the bill. The thoroughness with which the committee has examined the bill and reflected on the views of a wide range of stakeholders will be extremely helpful as we move towards stage 2. Many of the committee's recommendations are in line with the Government's thinking on areas where the bill needs to be strengthened. I am confident that our proposed stage 2 amendments will go a long way to meeting the majority of the committee's remaining concerns. Research on climate change tells us that flooding could become more frequent and more severe. We must act now to minimise the impact of future flooding on Scotland's people, services, environment and economy. Before Christmas, we saw yet again the problems that heavy rainfall can cause in many parts of Scotland. Four people were rescued from vehicles in flood water in Greenock and, just over a week ago, Jedburgh was on high alert and householders were putting sandbags in place when the Jed Water rose to peak levels. Thankfully, no one was seriously injured as a result of those events, but they remind us of the risks that flooding can pose to both people and property. Even today, the weather is fitting for the theme of the debate, as a flood warning has been in force in the Dumfries area and several flood  watches have been issued in other areas of Scotland. Historical records show an upward trend in average rainfall for each year. Scotland became 20 per cent wetter between 1961 and 2004, and the figures show an increase of almost 70 per cent in winter rainfall in northern Scotland. We recognise that flooding cannot be eliminated, but experience tells us that well co-ordinated actions can significantly reduce the likelihood of flooding and its harmful impacts. We have introduced the bill to make a series of important changes to how flood risk will be managed in Scotland. Our aim is to ensure that the people of Scotland benefit from a modern, sustainable approach to flood risk management. The bill will deliver flood management at a catchment scale, which will allow local authorities and others to take the best possible approach to managing flooding in their area. Options will range from traditional defences to improved flood warning and natural flood management measures where appropriate. The preparation of new national flood risk assessments and flood maps will improve our understanding of the likelihood and consequences of flooding from rivers, the sea, extreme rainfall events and, of course, groundwater. The new assessments will be complemented by flood risk management plans, which will ensure that the most sustainable and cost-effective measures to manage flooding are planned for and delivered. It would be difficult for me to describe in detail all the provisions in the bill, but I will mention some highlights. For the first time in Scotland, the bill will place a duty on specific public bodies—including local authorities, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and Scottish Water—to act with a view to reducing overall flood risk. The bill will transpose the European directive on the assessment and management of flood risks in a way that suits Scotland's flood risk management needs. SEPA will be responsible for the directive and for preparing national assessment maps and plans to manage flooding. That work will be undertaken in close collaboration with local authorities, Scottish Water and other stakeholders. Local authorities will also be responsible for preparing local flood risk management plans to accompany the national plans. To ensure that schemes that are identified in plans are implemented as promptly as possible, the bill repeals the Flood Prevention (Scotland) Act 1961. In its place, the bill creates a new streamlined process for approving flood protection schemes.  Dam failures are extremely infrequent, but they can have major consequences, including loss of life. The bill will transfer enforcement responsibilities under the Reservoirs Act 1975 from local authorities to SEPA. That will ensure that reservoir operators and the public benefit from a new and more consistent approach to reservoir safety enforcement. Reservoir safety will also be strengthened by the introduction of a compulsory post-incident reporting system. As I am sure we all agree, flood warning is crucial to keeping the public informed of flooding events. The bill updates SEPA's responsibilities for flood warning and places a duty on SEPA to make flood warning information available to all Scotland's citizens. During the bill's development, we have taken a series of steps to engage actively with the public, key stakeholders and experts in flood risk management, as has the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee. In addition to the formal public consultation process that was undertaken in spring 2008, we established consultative groups to advise us on the bill's development and implementation. Those groups involved representatives from a wide variety of organisations and stakeholders, including local authorities, conservation groups and NFU Scotland. We held additional stakeholder workshops and a series of public meetings across Scotland to gather information that allowed us to refine our initial proposals and to obtain information from people who have felt the impact of flooding in their communities. At those meetings, we heard at first hand the views of individuals who have been affected by flooding and the problems that they have had to overcome. We have listened to and learned from their experiences of the physical and emotional impacts of flooding. I will touch on key points in the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee's stage 1 report and discuss the main amendments that the Government intends to lodge at stage 2. The bill provides a framework for delivering sustainable flood risk management, so I announce that we intend to amend the long title to include the word "sustainable". That amendment will ensure that the long title fully reflects the provisions and I am sure that it will attract cross-party support. The committee expressed concern that the flood risk management planning process could be delayed by a shortage of experienced staff. We, too, would be concerned if such a shortage hindered improvements to flood risk management. However, many experienced flood risk management practitioners already operate in local  authorities, SEPA and the private sector, and we must build on that strong foundation. Together with SEPA, we are engaging with further education institutions on the issue. The Minister for Environment and I will work with our opposite numbers in the education portfolio to consider how we can best fill the potential skills gaps. The committee repeated its flooding inquiry recommendation that targeted funding be provided to local authorities for flood protection schemes. We appreciate the committee's concern, but I am afraid that we do not agree that the current funding arrangements for local government could compromise the bill's implementation. As we have said, the total package of funding for local government was worked out and agreed with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. It provides investment of £22.8 billion from 2008 to 2010, which is an increase of 9.9 per cent on 2007-08 figures. However, we will continue to discuss local authority funding with COSLA and we will carefully consider any requests to change the funding arrangements to support the bill's implementation.

We will listen to Scottish Water's views on the issue that the member raises, as Scottish Water has an important role to play in making the bill a success. The Rural Affairs and Environment Committee recommended that we strengthen the link between the duty to reduce flood risk and the implementation of flood risk management plans; we will lodge an amendment that does just that. We have also taken on board the committee's concern that the bill needs to be clearer about who is responsible for assessing and managing drainage infrastructure. We intend to lodge amendments to add more explicit responsibilities for assessing drainage features, including sustainable urban drainage systems, and to give Scottish Water specific responsibility for assessing sewage flooding. We are considering how to accommodate the committee's recommendation that responsible authorities be required to consider what contribution natural flood management approaches could make to reducing flood risk. Although we believe that the bill already ensures that natural flood management measures will be considered fully, we will look to develop an  amendment that ensures that the most sustainable approach is always the one taken. In addition to the amendments that I have mentioned, we intend to lodge an amendment that will add an enabling power to the bill that could be used to require reservoir undertakers to produce reservoir plans. Those plans would set out the on-site steps that operators would take to mitigate any harmful impact from an uncontrolled release of water. I have given a rapid account of the bill's main features and the key changes that we expect to introduce at stage 2. We have, of course, been considering the whole range of the committee's recommendations and the points raised in evidence. In light of those, we will seek to amend the bill in other, more minor ways. We recognise that legislation on its own will not achieve all the improvements in flood risk management that we seek. Effective implementation of the legislation is essential, and we are already working with local authorities, SEPA, Scottish Water and others to put in place the appropriate regulations, guidance and resourcing to take that forward. We will write to the committee shortly to provide more detail on our response to its recommendations Through the bill, Scotland is leading the way in introducing a modern, first-class system of flood risk management. The bill will deliver vital improvements to how we manage flooding and make a real and long-term difference to the lives of people in Scotland. It will also ensure that Scotland is well placed to adapt to the challenges that the years and decades ahead will bring. We must protect families and businesses from threats that we believe may be round the corner. The bill is about making Scotland a safer place and protecting our environment at the same time. I know that it will be welcomed by the whole of Scotland, especially those communities that have felt the devastating impact of flooding in recent years. I commend the committee's report, this debate and our motion to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill.

The Scottish Government has provided local authorities with record levels of funding over the period 2008-10. In line with the concordat, the majority of the funding, including the former strategic waste fund, is now provided by means of a block grant. In December 2008, the Scottish Government announced a further £17.9 million of zero waste fund money, as part of a three-year funding programme, for local authorities to invest in infrastructure to divert more waste from landfill.

I would not wish any obstacles to be placed in the way of enthusiasm for recycling among schools and other public organisations. I will be happy to investigate that concern further and to seek clarification on it. If we have to take action, we will consider that. I thank Margaret Smith for bringing the matter to my attention. I am happy to congratulate the City of Edinburgh Council for its progress in its recycling statistics, and I pay tribute to those involved in all the hard work that was, no doubt, behind that progress. I hope that the council continues it in the years ahead.

Yes—I believe that the targets can be achieved. There is huge enthusiasm throughout Scotland to achieve such ambitious targets for the sake of the environment. Elaine Murray suggests that they are "challenging" targets: they certainly are, but I believe that Scotland is ready to meet them. As I said in my previous answer to Margaret Smith, we are making resources available. There are exciting and ambitious plans to increase rates of recycling in many local authority areas—we have already heard about the action that the City of Edinburgh Council has been taking.

The climate challenge fund has received 225 formal expressions of interest. So far, 82 of those have been developed into full applications and considered by the independent grants panel, and 56 have been successful in receiving funding.

I answer yes to all Malcolm Chisholm's questions. I very much welcome his warm response to the impact that the climate challenge fund, which has attracted cross-party support, is having and I join him in congratulating the active Leith project which is, as he said, being funded by the challenge fund. I agree that grass-roots action to tackle climate change and global warming is an important way forward, which is one of the reasons why the fund is proving to be successful. We will make every effort to make it even more successful and to ensure that the resources end up in the hands of grass-roots organisations the length and breadth of Scotland.

There is guidance in place for projects. One of the criteria that are taken into account is the need to ensure that projects will reduce the carbon footprints of their communities. The Government and the whole country are paying a lot of attention to the question of how we can best measure reductions in carbon footprints in the years ahead. The funding scheme is successful, and the independent grants panel is persuaded that the projects that are coming forward are ambitious and will reduce the carbon footprints of many of our communities.

We welcome the support of the Greens for this initiative. A lot of effort is being made across the country to make communities aware of the kind of funding streams that are available to reduce Scotland's carbon footprint. Of course, the climate challenge fund is aimed at grass-roots activity, as we have just been discussing. At the beginning of the week, in my role as cabinet secretary, I attended a rural development funding seminar in Elgin along with around 100 or 150 people from rural communities. I can tell Mr Harvie that the climate challenge fund was also on their agendas. A number of similar events are taking place across Scotland, many of which are led by local authorities. Of course, the support of local authorities is necessary if we are to get the message out about exactly what is available. I  commend Moray Council and every other council that is engaged in similar work.

I have approved the award of £3.36 million to the rural Aberdeenshire local action group from the LEADER fund. The group bid for £3.46 million. The total of the bids that was received was far in excess of the funding that was available, but the Aberdeenshire bid was commendably strong.

As Alison McInnes said, the Scottish Enterprise matched funding is about that amount. Of course, if good projects are forthcoming from our rural local authorities, they can bid for cash to be made available to them from Scottish Enterprise.

As Ken Macintosh will know, the eco-schools programme in Scotland is one of the most successful in the world, and the Scottish Government continues to develop it. Since May 2007, 353 schools have been awarded green flags, which brings the total number of Scottish schools with green flag status to 744. On current trends, we expect to see Scotland's 1000 th green flag school by 2010. We are continuing to broaden the reach of the programme by funding a secondary schools development officer from the education and rural budgets.

Consultation responses on the review of the Scottish Agricultural Wages Board were published on Tuesday 20 January 2009.

We received 44 responses to the consultation and opinion was divided among them, so it was not easy to get a clear message from the exercise. Many of the issues that Dr Simpson raises were included in the responses that we received, and we treat those points seriously. We are reviewing the Scottish Agricultural Wages Board because it dates back to 1949. Members will agree that, in this day and age, it makes sense to review a body that was set up so long ago. Since then, we have had the advent of the minimum wage and the working time directive. I assure the member that we will be conscious of the impact on workers' conditions as we reach a decision, but we must take into account a range of factors and we will do so.

Although we have not reached a decision, we are taking into account the fact that the agriculture sector is the only sector that has a body for wages regulation. We are also considering its impact on attracting young people into the industry. Several farmers and others in the agriculture sector have made that point to us. Young people have expressed the view that the lack of wage bands means that it is not easy for them to get a first job on a farm. We have not reached a decision, but we are taking into account all those factors. I am sure that members will agree that, given the division of opinion, we should ensure that we take the right decision.

The debate has been a good one. I am sure that our farmers and crofting communities will take great heart from the fact that more seems to unite us than divide us on the future of Scottish agriculture—it has been a very good debate in that context. Rightly, the debate has largely been about the future of Scottish agriculture. First and foremost, it has been about the future of our rural communities, of our farmers and crofters, of food production in Scotland, of the environment and of our rural economy. I will start with the SRDP, because many members spoke about its future. I was intrigued that, as ever, a lot of criticism came from the Liberal Democrats and Labour members, who appear to have forgotten that, in large part, they designed the programme that they now criticise. I will make a couple of key points about the SRDP before I talk about the review. First, much of the criticism was about one of the eight mechanisms within the SRDP. It is important that across the chamber we recognise and send out to Scotland the message that the SRDP, at £1.6 billion, is a big programme. It has eight delivery mechanisms and does not consist of only the rural priorities mechanism. That has led to some issues, which I will talk about shortly. One of the eight mechanisms is the LFASS, which has been a success. Our money is out in record time—£60 million has gone out the door. Within the rural priorities mechanism, to which many members referred, £57.2 million has been committed in the nine months since it opened. The third mechanism, land manager options, has provided £19 million for legacy schemes and there has been £4.5 million of new commitments. So far, £12 million has been committed to food businesses throughout Scotland through the food processing, marketing and co-operation grant scheme, which is another mechanism that I am sure we all welcome at this point in the economic downturn. In this financial year, £2.5 million has been spent through the crofting counties  agricultural grant scheme; £700,000 has been committed through the skills development scheme; and £2 million has already been paid through the LEADER programme, and a further £4 million committed. The first forestry challenge funds projects are up for approval in February, although there have been some obstacles due to European regulations. I am trying to convey to the other parties that the SRDP is a major programme and that, given that many of the mechanisms are working fine, we should not put people from across Scotland off applying.

I have said all along that I take seriously the concerns expressed by the small minority of farmers and crofters who have difficulty due to the online application process for the rural priorities mechanism. I take slight issue with the Liberal Democrat amendment, because it is perhaps just a wee bit over the top and sends out the wrong message about the whole programme. Even within the rural priorities element, substantial funds are going out the door. We have taken some steps over the past few months to try to make it easier for people to apply under the rural priorities mechanism. Case officers have been instructed to find solutions for the small number of applicants who have difficulty with the online process. We are actively looking at how we can streamline the process even more, and a user group of stakeholders has been set up to help us do that. We are a year into the programme, and we acknowledge that it is time for a review, for three reasons. First, we should learn lessons from the first year. Secondly, we must ensure that this massive programme, which addresses the future of rural Scotland, reflects our priorities in 2009 and beyond, given the changing global agenda. Thirdly, at a time of economic downturn in Scotland, we want to ensure that the resource is leading to economic activity in our rural communities. The future of the crofting communities has been discussed, and the bull hire scheme has, of course, featured in many members' speeches, including those of Jamie Stone, Rob Gibson, Jamie McGrigor and Sarah Boyack. We must accept that the current bull hire scheme does not give value for money. We must also take into account the fact that only a few hundred crofters,  out of around 13,000, have received any advantage from it. However, I can give a commitment that the Scottish Government—

I would like to finish my point. I can give a commitment that the Scottish Government is willing to meet all parties in the very near future to consider the success of our arrangements. We recognise that concerns exist and we want to deliver a good deal for Scotland's crofting communities. The current set-up, which does not give value for money, must change. We want to put in place better arrangements, and we will speak to members about that.

I would like to move on to the next subject, if the member does not mind. I have only four or five minutes left. We have discussed future food security and climate change. A key message that the Scottish Government wants to convey is that food production should remain the primary purpose of Scottish agriculture—although not its only purpose. Members of the public expect farming and agriculture in Scotland to deliver food for their tables, so that should be the primary purpose of those sectors. However, it is important that we say that that is not their only purpose, as sustaining our rural communities and safeguarding and enhancing our environment are other public benefits that they produce. We must ensure that we get a range of benefits from agricultural activity in Scotland that is in line with the outcomes that the nation wants. It is important to farmers to have a clear message about what is expected of them. This debate has also been largely about the CAP health check. During the debates in Europe, each country fought for its own interests, as one would expect, but I was disappointed that that did not happen in any policy context. The issues were not food security or climate change; rather, each country was out to get what it could from the health check. We must send a clear message to the agricultural sector in Scotland about what we expect from it, and all the debates—in Europe and in Scotland—should take place in that context. I was interested in what Dave Thompson said. He highlighted how agriculture in Scotland underpins other sectors. Our food and drink sector, including the whisky industry, depends on raw materials, of course. Whisky is the UK's biggest food and drink export, and farming activity in Scotland underpins that important industry. We all agree that we have tough decisions to take in 2009 not only on the future of the SRDP, but on the LFASS and single farm payments.  Several members said, rightly, that such direct support should go only to active farmers. The Scottish Government totally agrees with them and with the industry. We should not give single farm payments to armchair farmers; we should give them only to active farmers who are delivering benefits to the people of Scotland. That said, we should keep the matter in perspective. Only a tiny minority of the recipients of single farm payments are not active farmers. The message that we want to send out to Scotland is that the majority of crofters and farmers in Scotland deliver public benefits, although we must tackle the minority who are not active but who receive money. Labour's amendment calls on the Scottish Government "to work constructively with UK ministers" on behalf of Scotland. We have been doing that with a great deal of success and we will continue to do so. When I attended the Oxford farming conference at the beginning of the year, I got a fantastic reception not only from the small Scottish delegation, but from the delegation from south of the border, because our agricultural policy is closer to what many farmers south of the border want. We must recognise that Scotland has distinctive needs and characteristics that deserve distinctive agricultural policies. Sarah Boyack is right. Hilary Benn and the UK Government are talking up food production—but they are also talking down direct support for it. We cannot have it both ways: if we want food production to continue in Scotland, direct support must continue.

Of course that is a key issue. It was a key issue during the CAP health check discussions, and it should always be a key issue when we consider the common agricultural policy. Of course we want tobacco subsidies to end. That is an important issue—I think that Elaine Murray mentioned it—and there are other issues on which Scotland makes its voice heard. However, we believe that there is a case for direct support in Scotland, to try to stem the decline in Scotland's hill and more remote communities in particular. The UK policy position is different from Scotland's policy position and, I think, from that of most parties that are represented in the chamber. There are many key challenges ahead. We must tackle the decline in the number of livestock in  Scotland's hills and remote communities. That decline is not new—it continued throughout most of the eight years during which the Labour and Lib Dem Administration was in power. One headline in today's press is "Farming far from gloomy". The article refers to a survey by Lloyds TSB, in which "83% of respondents said that their farm businesses were profitable and 62% said that their pre-tax profit exceeded their private drawings." Scottish farming has a bright outlook. We have huge grounds for optimism. In taking the decisions that lie ahead, we must ensure that Scottish agriculture continues to deliver huge benefits for Scotland and to put food on our tables and on tables elsewhere in the world, as well as safeguarding and enhancing Scotland's precious environment and sustaining our rural economy. In short, we must ensure that Scottish agriculture helps to make Scotland a great place in which to live. I commend the Government's motion to the Parliament.

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

I am delighted to open the debate on the common agricultural policy health check. When Parliament last discussed the CAP, few of us would have realised that the next time we would discuss the issue, we would do so against a backdrop of such economic uncertainty. Agriculture and the food industry in Scotland are by no means immune from the effects of that uncertainty—just yesterday we heard of more job losses in our food sector. Despite these turbulent times, some current market trends are good for farming and, as one paper put it just a couple of weeks ago, this is the "Best Opportunity for Farming in a Decade". After all, we will always need food. Livestock farming remains our dominant form of agriculture, accounting for almost a quarter of agricultural production. Scottish beef and sheep producers are benefiting from a combination of a favourable exchange rate, high prices and falling input costs. Prime cattle prices are about 23 per cent better than they were last year and prices for young sheep are almost 40 per cent higher than they were at this time last year. That general price trend seems to be holding up right across Scotland. Even with last summer's weather, the final estimate for the 2008 cereal harvest shows a 12.4 per cent increase in prices on 2007. That alone means an extra £34 million for wheat producers and an extra £20 million for barley producers. The state of the exchange rate resulted in a windfall of an extra £50 million in Scottish single farm payments. We have also helped to ease producers' cash flows in the current challenging times by issuing this year's single farm payments and less favoured area support scheme payments in record time: 96 per cent of single farm payments have been made to around 19,000 producers, which means that about £430 million  has already been deposited in farm business accounts, while LFASS payments started to appear in bank accounts on 16 January—more than three weeks earlier than was the case last year. We support farming because the sector benefits Scotland enormously by shaping our environment and attracting tourists to our landscapes. Livestock farming is particularly important to food production, but we need critical mass if we are to maintain the wider infrastructure in our rural areas.

We will respond further on that. I assure Alasdair Allan and other members who represent constituencies in the Highlands and Islands that we are committed to supporting our crofting communities and that we are working hard to replace the current bull hire scheme—which does not provide value for money—with successor arrangements. I would be delighted to have my colleague Michael Russell, who is taking a close interest in the issue, contact interested members with more details over the next few days. Quality food that is produced in Scotland often commands a market premium. Producers need to continue to deliver products that fit niche markets, as we simply do not have the capacity to compete in major commodity markets. Scottish production benefits from an emphasis on quality rather than just quantity. It is that quality that has earned Scotland a reputation throughout the world for food and drink that bring economic benefits to the tune of £410 million for Scottish food exports and £3.3 billion for Scottish spirits exports. The spirits industry is, of course, underpinned by raw materials that are produced by agriculture in Scotland. Over the festive period, Scots certainly enjoyed local produce. The Scotch Butchers Club reported increased meat sales, which in one case went up by more than 20 per cent. However, producers must not take their eye off the ball. There is a constant need to monitor the market and to adjust production to meet consumer needs. That is why the Scotland rural development programme funds schemes such as the skills development scheme and whole-farm reviews, which help farmers to develop their businesses and make the most of their assets. In addition, there are monitor farms, which are a great example of the industry helping itself through group discussions and sharing of information. Recent analysis shows that every £1 that was spent in a monitor farm resulted in a  return of £6.50 in increased productivity and improved efficiency. Just like many other sectors, farming needs to adapt and evolve to respond to the market. Farmers continue to face significant challenges, which some people say are all the greater because the CAP has failed to modernise quickly enough by moving from production-based to market-oriented support. Although the decline in livestock production on our hills is perhaps an inevitable result of the decoupling of support from production, it is nevertheless a cause for concern among all members. 2009 will be an extremely important year. There are major policy decisions to make on the key resources that can help agriculture to meet the challenges ahead: the CAP, the LFASS and the SRDP. When times are hard and resources tight, it becomes even more important to be absolutely certain that we use the considerable sums that are already available to achieve the best possible outcomes for rural Scotland. As far as the CAP is concerned, even though the health check was not a major reform, it represented a good deal for Scotland—we achieved our key objectives and did not cross any of our red lines. In particular, we secured flexibility over the Scottish beef calf scheme and secured the right to continue the scheme; we made the playing field more level right across Europe and we ensured that any changes from the health check did not disrupt our options here in Scotland. As NFU Scotland said, the health check agreement is "a positive way forward for Scotland's farming industry". The primary legislation has been finalised, but we need to wait for the European Commission to publish detailed implementation rules. However, we must start to consider how to use our hard-won flexibilities. We will need to make several key decisions in partnership with the industry. In each case, the conflicting priorities will need to be weighed up to ensure that a solution is found that meets Scottish needs. The decision on article 68, which funds the Scottish beef calf scheme, will be crucial as it could offer a means to maintain livestock numbers. Any form of top-slicing creates losers as well as winners—it would be foolish for any of us in the chamber to ignore that. I hope that our debate today will help to inform the debate about the balance of advantages. With stakeholders, we will consider whether the scheme should continue and, if so, in what form. We must be clear about the outputs that we want to achieve, and we must ensure that the industry can deliver what the people of Scotland want.  The SRDP is providing social, economic and environmental benefits across Scotland. However, given the current economic climate, I have said that I am committed to a swift but thorough review of the SRDP to consider whether changes are needed so that we can be certain that the programme's priorities are fit for purpose in 2009 and beyond. I will be discussing the details of the review when I meet the programme's monitoring committee next week. We will learn the lessons that have to be learned from the first year of operation of the SRDP. Let us not forget that the SRDP is hugely valuable for Scotland—the rural priorities scheme alone has approved nearly £60 million-worth of projects before the first full year of the programme is complete. Looking to the future, it is imperative that we give our farmers clarity on the direction of travel and on the timing of any changes. Any changes that we make now must be in tune with our longer-term vision for agriculture in Scotland. At the recent Oxford farming conference, I set out my vision for Scottish agriculture. The Scottish Government is developing a clear vision for Scottish agriculture that reflects Scotland's distinctive characteristics and needs. We want a vision that involves on-going direct support for farming. It is sometimes hard for people who are not linked with farming to understand why Government support is still necessary. However, the Scottish Government simply does not buy into the United Kingdom policy of removing direct CAP support for farming and food production in Scotland. Removing direct support would halt farming in many parts of Scotland. We believe that food production and the capacity to produce food are in the national interest and should be supported as long as that is necessary. The vision of the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs seems a long way from the multifunctional type of agriculture that is described in the European model for agriculture, which has the support of much of Europe. Scotland can be proud to count itself in with the majority view rather than the minority UK view. My firm view is that what we need is, in effect, a new updated contract between farmers and society, through which our Scottish vision can be delivered. The contract should be clear about the outcomes that are expected in return for direct financial support. It should recognise the importance of food production but it should also require delivery of other public goods. The contract should deliver a Scottish agricultural industry that produces for the market, whether that means the food or energy markets or other markets such as tourism—an industry that gains recognition for the public goods that it provides,  whether economic, social or environmental, and that is appropriately regulated, rather than overregulated. We could call that a vision based on natural resource productivity that ensures that Scotland makes the best use of a very valuable resource—our land. We must also consider the basis of future single farm payments. It is clear to me that the historical model for the SFP is increasingly untenable, especially given the understandable calls for greater linkage with activity. I believe that stakeholders agree with me, and I want to address these difficult choices sooner rather than later. Some people argue for support to be focused on the most productive farming, but others suggest that those areas already get too much support and that future support should be targeted at remote and fragile areas where the challenges and the need are greatest. The health check broadened out the options for starting to move towards a flatter rate for single farm payments. Industry's input will be crucial as we consider what approach will be best for Scotland as we face up to challenges and try to avoid unintended consequences. The health check focused on the CAP from now until 2013. There will be discussion in the European Union budget review on the post-2013 direction of the CAP. However, some things are fairly predictable: for example, there is unlikely to be more money for the CAP in the future. In fact, there may be less. We need to start firming up our options for 2010 onwards. We will need to make tough decisions with stakeholders on how we should use the flexibilities to deliver the farming that Scotland needs. We will also need to think ahead to the post-2013 period. Scottish farming is distinctive because of its land, climate and population, including its remote and fragile areas. Those are things to consider as the Government delivers its vision. In conclusion, 2009 is a pivotal year for Scottish agriculture. I am very keen to hear Parliament's views on some of the key decisions that we, as a nation, must take. I hope that we can all agree that we must support active farming—farming that produces food for our tables, that safeguards and enhances our spectacular landscapes and natural environment and which continues to sustain our rural economy. I move, That the Parliament, noting the recent agreement in the Council of Ministers on the European Commission's legislative proposals for the Health Check of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), acknowledges the Scottish Government's commitment to work with stakeholders on how key aspects of the proposals should be implemented in Scotland and on the longer-term implementation of CAP  in Scotland and believes that future decisions must reflect the distinctiveness of agriculture in Scotland and support a dynamic and competitive industry with farmers playing their full part in achieving the Scottish Government's purpose of sustainable economic growth through food production and the environmental management of our agricultural land, combined with the delivery of other economic and social public goods.

I often meet representatives of NFUS, including here in the Scottish Parliament, on farms throughout Scotland and at European Union councils. Most recently, I attended the NFUS less favoured area committee on 1 December, reflecting my concern for the challenges that the livestock sector is currently experiencing; and on 17 December I met the NFUS to discuss fallen stock, among other issues.

I do not accept the premise of the member's question—we are making LFASS payments that will begin to arrive in accounts at the beginning of next week, which is quicker than last year. We have already paid 93 per cent of  single farm payments, which is also quicker than last year. I know that that has been warmly welcomed by farmers and crofters the length and breadth of Scotland. With regard to the substance of the member's question about making the LFASS payment and the single farm payment at the same time, great minds think alike on that particular subject—I am investigating whether that would be possible in future, because I understand the benefits. As ever with the common agricultural policy, it is not as simple as it might at first appear, given the need for separate audit and accountability processes, but I am investigating it to find out what is possible.

Sustainable development is at the heart of our commitment to sustainable economic growth. We welcome the Sustainable Development Commission's finding that our approach "accords with good practice in sustainable development governance" and the positive assessment by the SDC of so much that we are doing. We will consider carefully all its specific recommendations.

We have redefined what we mean by economic growth. That is why the concept of sustainable economic growth is at the heart of everything that this Government does. The member needs only to look at the raft of sustainable legislation that we have introduced and are bringing forward over the coming months. Among a host of measures, all of which have sustainable economic growth at heart, we have the proposed marine bill, the Flood Risk Management (Scotland) Bill and the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill. Indeed, sustainable economic growth is at the heart of everything we do.  The Sustainable Development Commission has highlighted the potential tension that all Governments in the world have to address. We benefit from and welcome independent scrutiny of our policies to achieve sustainable economic growth. That is what we will continue to do.

I accept the premise of the member's point. Climate change is a big challenge that all members, all parties and all Governments will have to address in the coming decades. That is why Scotland's first ever climate change minister, Stewart Stevenson, has not only introduced what WWF and others described as the world's most ambitious climate change bill, but made a commitment to follow it up with the action that we all have to take to ensure that we achieve the ambitious targets by 2050.

Although the global financial crisis has reduced demand for some material that we recycle, it is important to continue to take a long-term view and work towards a zero waste Scotland. We are already recycling more material than ever before and local authority performance to June this year was over 32 per cent. Taking account of the current situation, we will be working with local authorities and other public sector partners to ensure that Scotland meets the challenging recycling targets that I announced in January 2008.

I thank the member for raising an important issue. The waste and resources action programme—WRAP—is still of the view that the current low prices for recycled materials are temporary. I am sure that we all hope that that is the case. SEPA is working actively with local authorities to address the problem. Although there is no evidence of a reduction in the collection of recycling, many local authorities are looking at storage and other measures to deal with what is, I hope, a temporary situation. It is important that SEPA and others work with them. I assure the member that we are paying close attention to the challenge facing local authorities as a result of the international economic climate, and we will continue to do so.

I welcome the first-class and thoughtful contributions from members throughout the chamber, beginning of course with the speech of Sarah Boyack, the new secretary of the Huw Irranca-Davies fan club. I am sure that her colleagues will want to find out how much it costs to join. I promise that when I meet the minister, whom we have invited to Glasgow to meet representatives of the west coast fishing sector, I will get a signed photograph to bring back to Sarah Boyack. A number of important issues have been highlighted in the debate. I will do my best to touch on as many of them as I can in the limited time available. Perhaps the first issue to discuss is discards, because I think that members mentioned it more than any other issue. I very much welcome the unanimous support from all parties for taking radical action to address discards. The issue is complex, and there will be no overnight solution. However, there is momentum, involving the industry, the environmental community and the chamber, that has not existed before. Of course, the issue of discards is not just for fisheries debates; it is an issue for the public, because discards are seen as precious food that is dumped overboard and back into the sea. At a time when the whole world is debating food shortages, healthy and valuable food is being dumped overboard. Of course, it is not just the Scots fleet that must abide by regulations or face being accused of breaking the law. Across all  fleets in the North Sea, 1 million tonnes of fish has been dumped overboard each year for the past few decades. It will be a huge breakthrough if, over the next few weeks, we can successfully tackle the important issue of discards, around which there is so much consensus. The cost to the Scottish fleet alone of discarding marketable fish is £40 million a year. If the fleet could keep even part of that, it would increase the income of the sectors around Scotland's coasts. It is unacceptable that the fleet is asked to spend money on expensive fuel to catch fish that it is forced to dump overboard dead, then to catch more fish later that it is likewise forced to dump overboard dead. At the moment, it is a lose-lose situation, but I believe that we can get to a win-win situation. Elaine Murray and others mentioned spurdog in the context of discards. We support the Commission's position that there should be a 5 per cent bycatch of spurdog. I know that people think that there should be no such bycatch, but if there is no bycatch of spurdog, there will be a discarding of spurdog. While we must ensure that spurdog is not a targeted fishery, we must allow a bycatch to be taken or spurdog will simply be discarded overboard. The same applies to many species that are up for discussion in the next few weeks. We have to bear in mind the fact that the discards issue relates not just to cod but to other species. I welcome Ross Finnie's speech, which reflected his many years' experience in the talks. We may not have much in common in other areas of politics, but we have our experience of the bizarre machinations of EU fisheries councils in Brussels and Luxembourg. It is testament to Ross Finnie's strong character that he survived eight years of the talks. Last week, in Brussels, I had only six hours' sleep during three days of negotiations.

I was not nightclubbing. I was fighting hard, first for Scotland's fishermen and then for Scotland's farmers. Ross Finnie highlighted the complexities of the discards issue. We should bear in mind the fact that there will be no overnight solution. Sarah Boyack mentioned the important issue of adding value to the fish that are landed. We must work more with the industry in Scotland to get the message across that increasing income and making more profit are about not just landing more and more fish but getting a better return from the marketplace for the fish that are landed. That is important, which is why the Scottish fisheries council set up a working group, in which retailers and the industry can sit down together to try to achieve greater value.  The concept of catch less and land more has won widespread support among members. We are promoting that new approach to fisheries management in Scotland. Where we apply that concept, it is possible to catch less by avoiding cod stocks and other valuable stocks while landing more of what we catch. In a mixed fishery, we will catch cod and other stocks, so fishermen should be allowed to land them. It is possible to promote fisheries conservation, increase the income of our fishermen and achieve many of our objectives by simultaneously catching less and landing more. Robin Harper wondered what measures have been in place in 2008. We have had 15 real-time closures on the basis of 169 inspections. The compliance rate for those closures has been nearly 100 per cent. We have in place not only real-time closures but seasonal closures. The first closure of the season will be on 1 December. Over and above that, many new selective gear measures have been adopted throughout the fleet and more than 200 vessels are using much larger square-mesh panels.

Because the Scottish Fisheries Protection Agency monitors it for us, and works with the fleet on implementing the voluntary closures. As we speak, fishermen are at sea trialling new nets. John Buchan of the Fairline and his partner vessel are at sea with a Government-funded observer on board trialling a new net that it is hoped will allow them to avoid cod but catch more haddock. In the past few weeks, Tam Harcus from Orkney has been trialling a couple of new nets. Those are fishermen coming up with their own ideas and innovations. The Government, with the industry's support, is funding those innovations to see whether they work and whether we can take them forward as part of fisheries management in Scotland. Some members mentioned Bertie Armstrong's comment at the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee about the virtuous triangle that we now have in Scotland, with conservation interests and environmental interests working with the industry and the Government to take forward measures. That has been extremely productive over the past year or two, and it is going from strength to strength. Only last night, I met WWF Scotland and RSPB Scotland to discuss some of the issues that we are debating today. Other members mentioned the impact of fishing on the wider marine environment and ecology. The marine bill will address that. I am glad of the warm welcome for today's announcement that we are getting executive devolution out to 200  nautical miles, following agreement with the UK Government. It is only executive devolution, not legislative devolution, but it is a huge step forward for Scotland, and it means that if marine protection areas are to be established in Scotland's waters, they will be proposed by the Scottish Government and no one else. That is an important message of comfort for Scotland's fishermen, who care deeply about executive devolution coming to the Scottish Parliament. The other big issue that was mentioned during the debate was the future of the west coast fishery, which is a priority for the UK and Scotland. I am not sure what Jamie McGrigor was quoting from, but I assure him that the west coast fishery is a priority for the UK and the Scottish Government in the forthcoming negotiations. We cannot allow our major fleet on the west coast—the nephrops fleet—to be decimated by measures relating to white-fish stocks, because that would decimate our fishing communities there. The nephrops fleet is extremely valuable. As I mentioned in my opening remarks, we are seeking alternative solutions. We are also seeking an increase in monkfish quota, because that will make an alternative fishery available to the west coast of Scotland. We accept that the science must improve. In conjunction with the industry, we are putting a lot of effort into ensuring that we have better science in future. On involving fishermen directly in the alternatives, the conservation credits scheme steering group, which is the industry body that comes up with alternatives to European Commission proposals, has been a major success. Let us put the debate into context. The five most valuable stocks in Scotland are all being fished sustainably in Scotland or are on the road to recovery, for example cod, which is the fifth most valuable stock. This is a good-news story. We should not always get caught up in doom and gloom. We are sustainably fishing our main commercial stocks in Scottish waters. We pay huge tribute to our fishermen for their change of attitude over recent years and to everyone who has contributed to the debate. Dave Thompson reminded us that today's debate is about not just Scotland's past and that of our fishermen—we remember tragedies that affected Lossiemouth, in my constituency, and Eyemouth—but securing a future for Scotland's fishing communities.

I reassure the member that I enjoyed a recent visit to Mallaig to discuss with the Mallaig and North West Fishermen's Association the impacts of the proposals on future fishing policy, and that I have met a number of other fishermen's associations.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The member might recall that all those years ago the RACs were criticised for not having management powers. Indeed, it was said that such a move would require a treaty change. Does he feel that such a criticism was justified?

The member raises an important issue. I should clarify that, unlike the situation in the North Sea, Scotland has a predominant interest in the west coast and very few other nations fish there. As far as sharing scientific responsibility is concerned, we are basically on our own.

I welcome the opportunity to debate this year's fisheries negotiations. They are vitally important to our fishing communities, economy, food policy and marine environment. Today, we will debate not only total allowable catches and quotas, but a way of life and a valuable part of Scotland's heritage. The debate is not just about the vessels and crews that go to sea, but about the thousands of Scots who work onshore in our processing factories and on the quayside. People throughout Scotland know the risks that our fishermen take to put healthy food on our tables and we should reflect on the fact that, once again this year, some have tragically made the ultimate sacrifice in doing so. I am sure that members will join me in paying tribute to the Stornoway coastguard and the wider service, following last night's rescue of the crew from the Banff-registered Enterprise II that got into difficulties. Scotland's people look to their Government to fight hard for their fishermen, and the fishing industry can rely on the Scottish Government to represent the industry's interests relentlessly. The negotiations come at the end of a year that has brought positive developments and challenges in equal measure. The year started on a high when we secured an historic deal in the European negotiations, which brought back to Scotland a degree of fisheries management that enables us to pioneer our own days-at-sea regime. The resulting Scottish conservation credits scheme allows fishermen to benefit from additional days and acknowledges the steps that they take to conserve valuable stocks. We have designed a regime that provides rewards and incentives for responsible behaviour and moves away from the previous emphasis on penalties and disincentives. The fleets have benefited because they have adopted cod avoidance actions, which include avoiding closed areas and using more selective fishing gear. The unprecedented joint working between the Government, industry, scientists and the environmental community was a key feature of our approach to last year's negotiations and has continued throughout the year. Most important, the Scottish sector has shown leadership in Europe by  rising to the challenge of ensuring that cod fisheries are sustainable, leading the debate and offering solutions. It has ensured that its own house is in order, as more than 50 per cent of Scottish fisheries are now under full assessment for Marine Stewardship Council certification as being fished sustainably. Our industry's leadership in fisheries conservation is now recognised in Scotland and beyond by retailers and consumers who seek the stamp of sustainability on Scottish seafood. A commitment to sustainability has underpinned the approach that we have taken to ensure the good management of our seas. In March this year, the Parliament supported our bid for additional responsibilities in the waters around Scotland to ensure better integration and a coherent framework for planning and nature conservation. I am pleased to tell members that, following the First Minister's initiative in reactivating the joint ministerial committee machinery, we have now reached agreement with the United Kingdom Government and the devolved Administrations on nature conservation and marine planning out to 200 nautical miles. That will result in additional executive devolution of marine planning and nature conservation responsibilities to Scottish ministers. It will also provide a framework for joined-up marine planning within the UK, while respecting different constitutional responsibilities; and it will support the Scottish economy by enabling us to manage marine resources coherently. That is good news for our fishermen, our other marine industries and our precious marine environments. Scotland will now take the lead on nature conservation and marine planning out to 200 miles—I know that members in the chamber will welcome that as a step forward for Scotland and for the Parliament. Throughout this year's fisheries negotiations, I have been acutely aware of the fragile economic situation of the Scottish fleet, which will not be immune from recession. Those difficulties come on top of a rollercoaster year, during which there have been soaring fuel prices and now falling prices for seafood. I am under no illusions about the need to work creatively and energetically with the sector to secure a thriving future. During the summer, the Government worked with the industry on a response to soaring fuel prices and we did what we could within our limited budgets to back up industry ideas with cash. We want to take a more strategic approach to funding from the European fisheries fund, seeking quick expenditure with a strategic impact. Therefore, we are accelerating the allocation of EFF expenditure and giving priority to projects that can start quickly and can guarantee spend by 31 March 2009 to deliver immediate benefits for our  fishing communities. I challenge the industry to bring forward important projects that will have the highest and most immediate impact on meeting the industry's needs. Our joint aim must be to ensure that sea fishing is an increasingly successful part of Scotland's food and drink industry, because—as skippers well know—adding value is not just about landing more fish, but about finding and keeping new markets and impressing upon consumers around the world the fact that our nation's product is healthy and of outstanding quality. My objective for this year's negotiations will be to secure outcomes that promote sustainable fisheries and that are fair and just for the Scottish fishing sector. Wherever possible, I will seek solutions that increase the choices for fishermen, reward sustainable behaviour, encourage long-term planning and bring decisions under national control.

I take on board the member's point about his constituents' interests—I will turn to that issue in a few moments. Several stages of the talks are complete. In October, we secured a 33 per cent increase in the mackerel quota. Last week in Brussels, we embedded Scotland's trailblazing conservation credits scheme in the new cod recovery plan, thereby securing the long-term sustainability of cod stocks through cod avoidance measures that have been taken in Scotland, rather than through blunt cuts in fishing effort. However, there is still much to play for and there are some difficult challenges ahead. In this week's European Union-Norway negotiations, the Government is resisting any attempt to swap our valuable mackerel quota and I will pursue vigorously the issue of discards of cod. During this year, we have been active in generating solutions to reduce discards radically. I hosted a discards summit to discuss the problem and to generate new ideas. There was complete consensus among skippers, industry representatives, environmentalists and policy makers that such a wasteful practice cannot go on and must be tackled now.  There is no benefit to the stock, fishermen or our fishing communities when fishermen have to dump dead, good-quality, marketable fish back into the sea. I have raised the matter with my EU counterparts and I met the Norwegian Government in Scotland in October. Other nations also agree with our stance. This year, we have a golden opportunity to address the dumping of good-quality fish overboard. Land more and catch less must be our guiding principle: we need to focus on what we remove from the sea, rather than what is landed ashore. A key part of the package at this week's EU-Norway talks must be a significant increase in the North Sea cod quota—with no unreasonable strings attached. We can catch less by reducing the amount of cod that is taken from the sea, but we should land more of what we catch, rather than force the fleet to dump overboard. Fisheries management in a mixed fishery is complex, but we must allow the fleet to catch sustainable stocks, while safeguarding more fragile stocks and avoiding discards. The European fisheries council negotiations in December are likely to be as difficult as ever. A number of key issues still need to be resolved, which include securing a rollover of the important nephrops quotas; gaining a responsible increase in monkfish and megrim quotas; and, above all, overturning the European Commission's disproportionate and draconian proposal to close demersal fisheries on the west coast of Scotland. The science on white-fish stocks on the west coast is difficult. We need to develop sensible solutions to the challenge, but the Commission's original proposal would devastate fishing communities from Campbeltown to Kinlochbervie. It will be vigorously resisted by the Government and we will present alternative solutions. We are working with the industry on better technical and spatial measures and I am confident that we can put in place a package to ensure that there are sustainable fisheries on the west coast of Scotland. I met the European Commissioner for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries, Joe Borg, last week to express Scotland's fury over the Commission's proposals and to make what I consider to be a good case for alternative Scottish solutions. The Commission has agreed to examine those alternative proposals. In pursuing those objectives, I aim to build on the success of the approach that we have adopted over the past year. That means standing up vigorously for Scottish interests, being prepared to take the lead on the international stage and working in close collaboration with the sector as team Scotland. I will also make it a priority to think of the needs of not only today's fishermen, but future  generations, which is why we have developed this year's proposals to safeguard fishing rights for future generations of Scottish fishermen. We have been prepared to put on the table the inadequacies of the common fisheries policy. We look forward to the European Commission's green paper on the future of the CFP and we seek the EU's agreement to debate the case for having a common fisheries policy in the first place. I am confident that it will accept the need for that debate, which will allow Scotland to present the case for returning responsibility for fishing to this Parliament—where it belongs. The CFP is discredited. The elected Scottish Parliament should manage our fishing grounds, not 27 member states, many of which are land-locked, sitting around a table in Brussels. I believe that what we have achieved this year is the start of something better. We have laid important foundations for a sustainable future and have prioritised communities, working with people throughout Scotland to put the needs of our vulnerable fishing communities at the heart of our agenda. We—the Government, industries and communities—have pledged to protect access to our precious fishing resources and the communities that depend on them. Therefore, I urge the Parliament to support our motion and a sustainable future for our fishermen, our fishing communities and our marine environment. I move, That the Parliament supports the Scottish Government in negotiating a deal that is fair and just for Scotland's fishing communities and that reflects in full the leadership that Scotland's fishermen are showing the rest of Europe on sustainable fisheries.

Our priorities are to improve business viability, to enhance biodiversity and our landscapes, to improve water quality, to tackle climate change and to promote thriving rural communities.

I hope that the generous funding that the Scottish Government has made available will have the same outcomes in the member's constituency in south-west Scotland as it will have in the rest of Scotland—thriving rural communities. I ask the member to advertise to her constituents the many funds that are available and to encourage them to apply, to ensure that her part of the world gets its fair share of that valuable funding.

I thank the member for raising what is a huge social problem in rural Scotland. Just a couple of weeks ago I attended a meeting of the Scottish Government's housing task force, at which many potential solutions to the rural housing crisis were discussed. We await the outcome of the task force's deliberations. I welcome ideas from members across the chamber. A range of issues are being considered by the task force and I ask the member to be assured that the Scottish Government is treating the issue very seriously.

It is striking that the member thinks that the SRDP is not fit for purpose, given that her party's Administration largely designed the programme that we are now implementing. We all agree that it is essential that the rural development programme, which equates to £1.6 billion for our rural communities over the next six to seven years, is fit for purpose in 2009 and beyond. Once the first round of awards has finished, in late December, it will be an appropriate time to take stock. We must take into account the impact of the global situation on Scotland, as well as the experience of the first year of the programme. That includes some of the bureaucratic elements that have been brought to the Government's attention by farmers, land managers and rural interests the length and breadth of Scotland. It is important that we respond. We have already taken steps to address some of the concerns that have been expressed and some of the teething problems of the first year, but we should bear it in mind that the SRDP has been largely successful over the past year, and that awards have been flowing out the door. Many innovative proposals are emerging from across rural Scotland. There have been 4,500  applications for the rural priorities element alone in the seven months since applications opened.

In a consultation exercise from 20 June to 30 September, we asked whether it would be appropriate to continue to set separate minimum rates of pay and other conditions for agricultural workers in Scotland and, if so, whether it should be done by the Scottish Agricultural Wages Board in its existing form or some other way. We are evaluating responses and will announce our decision on the board's future as soon as possible.

As the member will be aware, we are reviewing a number of public bodies in Scotland. A number of concerns have been expressed to the Scottish Government about the fact that the board dates back to 1949 and it is now 2008. It is therefore only right that the board should be reviewed, and we brought that forward by a year or so. The Scottish Government has received a range of responses, none of which have come from the Labour Party, Richard Baker, or John Park, who has also raised the point in Parliament. Those responses have ranged from abolition to increased flexibility or maintaining the status quo. It is the Government's duty to listen carefully to all the views that are being expressed and ensure that we take the right decision for Scotland's agricultural workers and the wider farming sector.

The Scottish Government is focused on reducing the unnecessary use of all carrier bags, not just plastic ones. At the First Minister's supermarket summit in September, retailers committed to working with the Scottish Government to reduce carrier bag usage by 50 per cent by spring 2009. We accept that if householders just switch from using plastic bags to paper bags, then there could be an increase in the amount of waste produced, given that paper bags generally weigh more. That is why we are working with retailers to support the reuse of all bags.

We should congratulate consumers on reusing bags and, of course, we congratulate those towns in Scotland that are trying to become plastic-bag free. That is a sign that the general public and consumers are taking their environmental responsibilities very seriously indeed. By cutting down on the single use of bags, we help to address litter problems and reduce waste to landfill, as well as helping to change the attitudes of people in Scotland to their valuable resources. There are benefits to reducing the use of bags and there is much support in the chamber and throughout Scotland for continuing to head in the direction of reducing the single use of bags.

The results being published by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency today indicate that, over the rolling year period to the end of June, the recycling and composting performance of Scottish local authorities increased to 32.2 per cent. Glasgow's recycling rate for the same period is just over 18 per cent, so there is scope for improvement, but it is fair to say that Glasgow has come some way since 2004-05 when it was only recycling around 9 per cent. My officials are in dialogue with Glasgow to identify what further  opportunities might exist to improve recycling performance and I met representatives a few months ago. Options might include the further roll-out of kerbside recyclate collections from households; the collection of a greater range of materials; and focused campaigns aimed at increasing householder participation. My officials are scheduled to have a further meeting with Glasgow tomorrow.

I point out to the member that, when his party was in power, there was a massive underspend in the funds that were made available to Scotland to help address this issue. I have to say that, given the number of local authorities across Scotland that are making substantial progress towards our recycling targets, I think that our local authorities should be congratulated, irrespective of the fact that there are significant challenges in Glasgow and elsewhere.

Formal discussions between the Scottish ministers and the European Commission about the forthcoming review of the Council regulation on the protection of animals during transport and related operations have yet to take place. The Commission has consulted on options, rather than proposals. We have expressed concern to the Commission about the potential impact of the review on Scotland's livestock sector. We anticipate that the Commission will issue proposals next year. In the meantime, Scottish Government officials are working closely with officials from the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs to ensure that we are in a position to resist any proposals that are against Scotland's interests.

I am aware of the member's concerns, which I know he has raised elsewhere in Parliament. I will be happy to express to the European Commission Parliament's desire to ensure that existing regulations are enforced adequately, as happens here in Scotland. Such enforcement should be replicated throughout Europe. I will seek opportunities to raise the issue with the European Commission.

I am delighted to open the debate on invasive non-native species and to commend the "Invasive Non-Native Species Framework Strategy for Great Britain". Before we begin this debate, it is important that we understand invasive non-native species and their impacts. They are animals and plants that have arrived with the assistance of man and which cause damage to our environment, our economy, our health and the way we live. There are about 1,000 non-native species in Scotland. Most of them are currently benign, but a minority cause serious problems. People tend to be aware of the big-problem species, such as the grey squirrel, Japanese knotweed and American signal crayfish. Unfortunately, those might be the ones that are difficult to eradicate completely. However, it is important that we take whatever steps we can to manage them. More important, we need to raise awareness about the issue, so that we can prevent future problems. I emphasise the threat that invasive non-native species pose to biodiversity here in Scotland and around the globe. The International Union for Conservation of Nature describes their impacts as "immense, insidious, and usually irreversible." In Scotland, some of our most iconic species and habitats are threatened, and the impacts of invasive non-native species on Scottish biodiversity are already far-reaching. They can pass on diseases that are fatal to our native species, they predate on native species, they dilute our native gene pools and they compete for natural resources, such as light, food and water. Action on invasive non-native species contributes to the achievement of the Scottish Government's greener Scotland objective, as well as having clear links to the Scottish Government's purpose of sustainable economic growth. People might be shocked to learn that it is estimated that invasive non-native species not only damage our natural heritage but cost the Scottish economy at least £200 million a year. The cost might even be much more than that; work is taking place to ascertain the economic cost. If we cast an eye south of the border, the impact can be illustrated by the Olympics site in London, where the cost of eradicating Japanese knotweed alone is estimated  to be anywhere between £20 million and £70 million. The importance of the rural economy to Scotland means that impacts of non-native species on agriculture, forestry and aquaculture can be significant. The Colorado beetle, which would pose a serious risk to our potato crops were it to become established, is one such threat. There are also new concerns, such as the citrus longhorn beetle, which threatens horticulture and forestry. Invasive non-native species can also impact on tourism and land development and exacerbate flooding. The impacts of introduced species on health should not be forgotten. They include diseases that are carried by non-native species as well as direct impacts, such as the severe burns that are caused by giant hogweed. Invasive non-native species have the potential to affect us all and the way we live: they can reduce our enjoyment of recreational activities such as angling, hiking and gardening, they are a drain on our economies and they can reduce the quality of our lives and threaten our environment. Those issues are important to the people of Scotland and to this Parliament. As we have gained a better understanding of the problems that are caused by invasive non-native species, the need for a co-ordinated and coherent framework for action has become apparent. The Scottish Government was therefore a key partner in the development of the framework strategy. The strategy provides a clear role for those who are involved in tackling this complex issue, and it ensures co-ordination of policy and action. It has the important and admirable vision that biodiversity, quality of life and economic interests will, when it is fully implemented, be better protected from the adverse impacts of invasive non-native species. The strategy has three main goals: first, to achieve widespread awareness and understanding of invasive non-native species; secondly, to achieve a stronger sense of shared responsibility across government, key stakeholder organisations, land managers and the general public; and, thirdly, to provide a guiding framework for national, regional and local initiatives. It presents a hierarchy of responses: first, prevention; secondly, detection; and, thirdly, eradication and control. The strategy focuses on the preventive approach, which has the most likelihood of success. It is the least environmentally damaging and the most cost-effective method. Once a species has become established, full-scale eradication is possible in only a minority of cases, so we must be pragmatic. Some of the invasive non-native species that are with us today  are most likely here to stay because they may be impossible or prohibitively expensive to eradicate. For example, in 2003, it was estimated that control of Japanese knotweed across Scotland, England and Wales would cost £1.56 billion. We can help to prevent introductions in the first place by raising awareness of the risks and the impacts of invasive non-native species. That takes me to another major section of the strategy, on building awareness and understanding. An approach that ignores greater public awareness will not succeed in the long term, so we firmly believe that greater awareness of invasive non-native species is the best defence against future threats. Evidence suggests that, once people understand the issues, they will do what they can to ensure that they become part of the solution rather than part of the problem. That is why we continue to work across the United Kingdom with the other Administrations to monitor the progress of that important work. An informed public can also assist in detection and monitoring of non-native species, which takes me to my next point and to another key area of the strategy: early detection, monitoring and rapid response. The sooner such species are detected, the sooner action can be taken to reduce any threat. When eradication is possible, we must ensure that any action that is undertaken is cost-effective, proportionate to the threat, as humane as possible and has a minimal impact on native species. We must acknowledge that where species are a threat to Scotland's native species, habitats and economy, they may need to be controlled.

Jamie McGrigor raises an important issue. He will be aware that we recently published a strategy on freshwater fisheries in Scotland that addresses that disease and that issue, and which emphasises the importance of partnership working across the UK. That is why the strategy that we are discussing today is a model of the co-operative spirit and consensus among the range of the partners who are involved. I commend and record appreciation to all those  who have been involved in developing the strategy, which lays a foundation and sets a framework for action that will allow us to achieve its vision. Again, I emphasise that increasing public awareness is essential. If we help to prevent introductions in the first place by raising awareness, we can help to protect our environment and economy from future significant threats. The strategy is a constructive start and we know that there is still a lot to be done. I am sure that that is recognised throughout the chamber. Today, in order to progress implementation of the strategy, we are asking the Scottish working group to complete a legislative review of invasive non-native species in Scotland, so that we can identify gaps in the legislative framework and establish how we might best resolve the issues. We are interested in hearing further suggestions today about how we can better deliver the aims of the strategy. I commend to Parliament the motion and the amendments, which we support. We can all work together to protect Scottish biodiversity, our natural heritage and the Scottish economy. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Invasive Non-Native Species Framework Strategy for Great Britain; notes that this is one of the first comprehensive strategies on invasive non-native species to be developed in Europe; further welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to work in partnership with governments and organisations across these islands to implement the strategy, and acknowledges that continued efforts are required by all partners to progress the key actions of the strategy.

It is erroneous to say that we have ignored all the recommendations because some are being taken forward. I accept that two key recommendations were not taken forward, including that for two separate headage payments. We felt that they would not provide value for money or help the long-term sustainability of the sector. I hope that the member will accept that comment and the fact that major changes have taken place in the industry since the report was first compiled.

Given that the member raised the subject, can he provide clarity by saying whether he believes that the Scottish Government took any decisions during the foot-and-mouth outbreak on a political basis?

Can the member elaborate on how we did not communicate properly with the UK Government on the sheep welfare scheme?

The debate allows us to consider the review by Professor Jim Scudamore, with support from John Ross, of Scotland's response to last year's foot-and-mouth disease outbreak in Surrey. I am sure that we all thank Professor Scudamore and John Ross for their substantive and helpful report, which makes several positive recommendations that can only help to protect Scotland's livestock sector through improved preparedness for the future. The report was published just before the summer recess. The debate will help to ensure that the Parliament's views are reflected in how the recommendations are progressed. Members will recall that the foot-and-mouth outbreak was confirmed on 3 August, following the leak of the virus from the Pirbright site. On confirmation of the disease, the Scottish Government acted quickly to put in place movement restrictions, given the significant uncertainty of disease spread and how devastating its impact can be. Our handling of those movement restrictions reflected an important lesson that was learned from the 2001 outbreak reviews. Throughout, we worked with stakeholders to minimise the impact of the necessary restrictions. We worked hard to lift them whenever and wherever it was considered safe and appropriate to do so. Our ability to do that was heavily supported by the analytical work on risk levels to Scotland that was undertaken by the Scottish Government's centre of excellence in epidemiology, population health and disease control. Within days of the restrictions being lifted after the first outbreak, the disease was again confirmed in Surrey on 12 September. That was a devastating body blow to the industry, which had started to see the light at the end of the tunnel after the earlier disruption, and it happened at the peak time of the year for animal movements, particularly in the sheep sector. It was clear to me that we must do everything that we can to reduce disruption in future, so I commissioned Professor Scudamore to review Scotland's handling of the outbreak. Overall, the Scottish response to the outbreak was a strong team effort between Government,  industry and others. Professor Scudamore concluded: "the FMD outbreak was handled well by the Scottish Government which reacted swiftly and in line with contingency planning arrangements." On the contribution of the wider agricultural community and everyone else who was involved, including Scottish Government officials, Professor Scudamore said: "The Scottish agricultural community as a whole should be commended for their role during this difficult period in working with government to reduce the risk to Scotland of disease incursion and spread." The Scudamore report provides an invaluable set of conclusions, many of which are applicable to areas beyond foot-and-mouth disease. In taking forward the conclusions, we will be ambitious and apply the findings broadly. Supporting animal health and welfare is a priority for the Scottish Government. High levels of animal health and welfare are good for animals, for the livestock sector and for Scotland. We have a reputation for quality produce, to which animal health and welfare contributes. The Scottish Government acknowledges that good standards contribute to a sustainable livestock industry. Although we do not currently have the budget for animal health and welfare, we will continue to maintain our support for areas for which we have financial responsibility. Although Government has a significant role to play, I stress that the only people who can make a real difference to animal health and welfare standards are animal keepers. Government's role is to help when that is appropriate. Animal keepers must recognise their responsibility and the potential impact of their actions. We recently witnessed examples of poor practice when, for bewildering and incomprehensible reasons, some individuals saw a need to source stock from bluetongue-affected areas. We asked Professor Scudamore to review our actions and to identify measures that would mitigate the impact of future outbreaks and practical steps that we could take to protect our red meats sector. He made 55 recommendations, which we are working to implement. Sensible sourcing of stock is just one element of disease preparedness—the first theme of the report. We have accepted that movement licences should be prepared in advance, particularly to allow low-risk movement to happen quickly when that is appropriate. Such an approach would reduce some of the pain of a necessary movement ban and will be informed by detailed risk assessments, to justify movements. High-risk movements are less easy to relax and it is important that the reasons for that are understood.  The package will sit alongside the contingency plan and will provide clarity on what will happen in an outbreak, thereby allowing farmers and crofters to plan for themselves. The national contingency plan worked well in practice, but the review found areas for improvement, particularly in highlighting links to other, more operational plans such as those of Animal Health. The experience of last year also showed that the plan lacks detail on the implications of a movement ban. We have accepted those points and we have commissioned an independent expert to revise the plan, which will then be put out to public consultation in November. The plan will continue to be a framework, to reflect the reality that every outbreak will be different. We will also consult on the communications strategy, which is an integral part of our disease control response. Changes will build on innovations that we made last year, such as our use of text messaging. During the outbreak, there was considerable discussion about regionalisation within Great Britain to allow resumption of exports from areas that were considered to be low risk, such as Scotland. The term "regionalisation" often meant different things to different people. The report highlights the challenges that are associated with regionalisation in the United Kingdom, given the nature of food chain logistics and supply routes. For example, 55 per cent of Scottish lambs are slaughtered outside Scotland—that was highlighted last year. That can make it harder to concentrate activity in a geographic area, which in essence is what the regionalisation debate is about. Later this year, I will meet stakeholders to ensure that there is a common understanding of the issues and that there is consensus on the right approach for Scotland. Our aim must be to minimise the risk of disruption to our industry from events elsewhere while maintaining all our important trade links. In advance of that meeting, my officials have been considering practice elsewhere in Europe. We have had initial discussions with the European Commission. The discussions have highlighted the complexity of regionalisation and raised the possibility of assisting some or all Scottish islands. Of course, it would depend on the specific disease scenario, but trade with other countries could be permitted in the event of an outbreak. Our discussions with industry might include abattoir provision, particularly in rural areas. It is in the industry's interests to maintain a good network of abattoirs, to retain production in Scotland and to protect Scotch and Scottish brands. I was pleased to note the recent approval of the Islay abattoir.  Overall, Scudamore concluded that relationships among Administrations worked well. The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs had to deal with extremely difficult circumstances and, in the main, performed well. However, communications among the Administrations were not perfect. One of several examples that come to my mind is the fact that, despite the existence of previously agreed official communication channels, I first heard of the Pirbright connection to the outbreak via BBC News 24. As members can imagine, my officials would have preferred to have had advance warning. We need to work on our communication channels. The review highlighted other areas for reform. First, although the Scottish Government has full responsibility for animal health and welfare policy, the budgets are held on a Great Britain basis. That results in a lack of alignment of policy and financial responsibility, which is in no one's interest. Secondly, the arrangements are managed under a concordat written in 1999. There is a wide divergence in the understanding of the spirit and intent of the arrangements, and the people who wrote the concordats are no longer working in the relevant departments. We are working hard to update the arrangements. The joint ministerial committee is considering the revision of the overarching memorandum of understanding among all the Administrations of the United Kingdom. That will follow on naturally from the resolution of GB budgets. We await imminent information from DEFRA on current spend so that we can conclude discussions on the potential devolution of GB budgets. This week, we have seen DEFRA making decisions under the cost-sharing umbrella, which impact on Scotland through DEFRA's control over the budget. I must stress that, although I am keen to achieve better alignment of policy and budget responsibilities, I will accept only an offer that is right for Scotland. We must ensure that appropriate arrangements are in place to deal with the contingent liabilities of a large outbreak like that of 2001. In that context, I welcome the Liberal Democrat amendment to the motion. We must also recognise that the negotiations are happening against a financial background of a falling baseline. No matter what the outcome, we will need detailed discussions with stakeholders to inform them of what are likely to be difficult decisions about our funding priorities in the months and years ahead. Control over the budget will allow the Scottish Government to take decisions that are in Scotland's best interests. At present, financial decisions are principally taken by DEFRA ministers with input from those in the devolved  Administrations. We are working to address that, but we must get the right solution for Scotland, not just any deal that DEFRA cares to offer us. It is essential that we minimise the impact of DEFRA's cost cutting on any budget that is eventually transferred to Scotland. The European Commission recently announced its intention to introduce new animal health legislation by 20 November 2008. I am keeping a close eye on developments in Europe so that we are prepared both to influence and to respond in the best interests of Scotland. However, DEFRA has decided to implement responsibility and cost sharing ahead of the European timetable. Although I have much sympathy with the principles of responsibility and cost sharing, I am already on record as having concerns about the DEFRA timetable and about the importance of demonstrating that its proposals are affordable and consistent with a sustainable industry, particularly at this time of significant economic pressures on Scotland's rural communities and livestock sector. Once we are clear about the outcome of negotiations with Whitehall and we know Europe's timetable, I will make proposals for the Scottish agenda for animal health and welfare. On the back of the report, I have already announced that we will take forward the review of the delivery landscape, and we are establishing a short-term, issue-focused expert forum to do that. We must continue to engage with stakeholders as we have done successfully on bluetongue vaccination. Finally, we must make more of our European Union relations. They worked well during the outbreak last year, and we have made more progress. A ban on Scottish exports was threatened because bovine tuberculosis-positive animals were imported to the Netherlands from south of the border. Thankfully, our negotiations as part of the UK team ensured that Scotland escaped it. We are committed to building our contacts. I wrote to Commissioner Vassiliou to welcome the European Commission's recent announcement on an animal health strategy, using the opportunity to seek changes in the current bluetongue regulations. Each outbreak is unique, and we will learn lessons from the last outbreak just as those dealing with it learned from 2001. Foot-and-mouth reminds us that our livestock sector faces many challenges. I note the Labour and Conservative amendments, and I welcome the fact that they highlight many of those challenges. The Scottish Government is urgently addressing many of the issues through the common agricultural policy health check and the review of  the less favoured area support scheme, which is one of the main support mechanisms. We are also addressing the recommendations in Professor Scudamore's report, which I hope that we can all work together to take forward to ensure a sustainable livestock sector in Scotland. I move, That the Parliament supports the Scudamore report's conclusions on Scotland's handling of the 2007 foot and mouth disease outbreak, contained in Foot and Mouth Disease Review (Scotland) 2007 , and welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to take the recommendations forward, including consideration of any potential opportunities for regionalisation and other steps to minimise the potential future disruption to the Scottish livestock industry.

A dedicated measure in the Scotland rural development programme offers new entrants up to £27,395 of interest rate relief on commercial business development loans. The SRDP also offers young farmers enhanced capital grants—10 per cent above the normal rates—for business development, restructuring and diversification.

I will take great delight in telling Scotland's agricultural community that, for the first time, we have a dedicated £10 million fund for new entrants under the Scottish rural development programme, which I hope will prove a success in the coming years. The issue is complex, but finally we are attempting to address it. As the tenant farming forum discovered during its inquiry, there are no simple, easy, off-the-shelf solutions, contrary to what the member perhaps suggests. I am happy to work with Jim Hume and other members to find solutions but, so far, there are no simple solutions and we must accept that the issue is challenging. However, the £10 million is new money and it is available under the Scottish rural development programme for new entrants.

There has been interest in the measure under the Scottish rural development programme, as I outlined in my previous answer, and some awards have been offered to applicants. On the Conservative party's report, I welcome any good ideas from any part of the Parliament. I will soon be responding to the tenant farming forum's report, which suggests a range of measures, and I am happy to build in the measures that the member suggests.

I will take on board that concern. The programme is new, and we should all be big and bold enough to accept that there might be some teething problems. I am unaware of the particular concerns that some members have mentioned, but I am happy to take them on board, as we have the ability to tweak or amend the programme as appropriate. I am certainly willing to do that to make its measures more attractive.

Currently, information on increases in the amount of locally sourced food is not held centrally. Under the Scottish national food and drink policy, I announced a work stream called walking the talk, which will help Scotland's public sector to become an exemplar on food procurement. The work stream will address how to measure the amount of locally sourced food and how to improve the uptake of the food procurement guidelines.

Scotland's public authorities have existing guidelines, and I urge all authorities to use them to increase local procurement. Like other members, I am extremely keen for us to measure the progress that we make on local food procurement. However, it is difficult even to define the word "local" when it comes to local food sourcing. That is one of the first issues that we must address. Indeed, the definition and interpretation of "local" is being addressed by one of the food and drink policy work groups. I am confident that there has been an increase in the local procurement of food produce. That is certainly the case with the Government's own contracts. Indeed, one of the Government contracts, for 4,000 civil servants, is up for renegotiation, and we hope to make it an exemplar of local food sourcing. Of course, we must be cognisant of European procurement rules, but we want to push the boundaries as far as we can.

I agree. I am pleased that a number of school meals pilot projects around Scotland—in particular, the recent project in the Western Isles—use locally sourced food. Shetland Islands Council has another pilot project in the pipeline, and we have seen the success of the hungry for success initiative that was piloted in East Ayrshire by Robin Gourlay, who is involved in the Scottish national food and drink policy work stream. The free school meals policy is a huge opportunity. I urge all schools to source as much food as possible locally as the policy comes on stream in the coming months and years.

The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has had such discussions. I take a keen interest in the matter, because we support that approach across the Government. The East Ayrshire initiative has been very successful, which is why Robin Gourlay, who piloted it, chairs the work stream that is charged, as part of policy development, with spreading best practice throughout Scotland.

It is a matter for local authorities to negotiate contracts and enter into whatever partnerships they consider necessary, either with the private sector or other local authorities, to provide and utilise recycling waste facilities on a joint basis.

Michael McMahon paints a picture of doom and gloom, whereas the story throughout Scotland is optimistic and positive. In South Lanarkshire Council's area, for instance, the household waste recycling rate is 35.4 per cent, which is quite a bit above the national average. Things are going smoothly in the member's area. We are working closely with local authorities on a range of campaigns. They are well aware of our targets. We have had many meetings with local authorities and the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to discuss the issues. The zero waste fund will contribute to infrastructure projects, and discussions about each local authority's share of that fund are advanced. Local authorities have a generous settlement. They are aware of the targets, which they mention in their outcome agreements. They have plenty of opportunities to make progress and to help to protect Scotland's environment.

The Scottish Government considers the suitable-for-use approach to be the most appropriate to deal with contaminated land. That approach focuses on the risks of land contamination and recognises that the risks that any given level of contamination present depend on the use of the land, any proposed development and the requirements for remediation. The primary consideration is the identification of risks to human health or the wider environment.

I am sure that the concerns that Margaret Mitchell outlined are a familiar story to many of us who have issues with contaminated land in our communities. Perhaps that shows how  standards today have changed from those in the past. If she writes to me about the issue, I will certainly investigate her concerns.

I will speak slowly and carefully, then. This has been a very good debate. I welcome the consensus among all parties on many of the key issues for the future of Scotland's hill farming and remote communities. Let me welcome Sarah Boyack on her reappointment as the Labour Party's spokesperson on rural affairs and the environment. She is clearly seen as a big asset for her party. My slight criticism would be that, because she is always so negative when she speaks, she is sometimes an even bigger asset for the Scottish Government. I welcome Liam McArthur as the Liberal Democrat spokesperson. I look forward to working with him in the months and years ahead. I also welcome Elaine Murray and others who have participated in the debate with eloquent contributions. Many members, including Peter Peacock, have recognised that the markets alone cannot deliver if we want the benefits that accrue from our hill farmers, uplands and remote communities to continue. For that reason, there is a strong case for on-going support from public funds for those communities to ensure that we get those benefits. It is a question of ensuring not only that the appropriate support is delivered to hill farmers and others but that we do all that we can to encourage our producers to produce for the market. I took note of Jamie McGrigor's contribution. I am not sure whether he was speaking in all seriousness when he told us about the farmer who had sold lamb stovies at the Connect festival in Argyll. However, the fact that that was such a successful exercise for the farmer shows us that farmers can produce for the market.

It is a pleasure. Last night, we had the farmers market in Parliament, which is also about selling directly to the consumer. I hope that all producers in Scotland will have the opportunity to take advantage of that. Indeed, the Scottish Government is seconding an official to promote the farmers market initiative. We must recognise that, although Governments and the EU can and should intervene, the fate and success of many farming enterprises in Scotland are in the hands of the farmers and crofters  themselves. We cannot escape from that. The decisions that they take—for example, on the genetics of the livestock or breeding stock that they choose for the hills of Scotland—are crucial to their success as businesses. We want the businesses to be successful in our rural areas, primarily because we want to attract new entrants into the industry. We must send out a positive message, and we want the businesses to make a profit. Many members have painted a picture of doom and gloom, but we must also paint a positive picture of life in rural Scotland and working in the hills, in the crofting counties and elsewhere. Otherwise, young people will not be attracted into farming and the lifestyle. Aileen Campbell and David Stewart both referred to the need to be positive as well as to address the serious challenges. We also all agree on the benefits that accrue to the Scottish public from the activities on our hills and in our remote communities: producing food, tackling climate change, looking after our landscape, which has benefits for tourism and so on, and maintaining the population in rural areas. Many members referred to the need for integrated policies to achieve that—a theme picked up by the Royal Society of Edinburgh in its report. Roseanna Cunningham and Elaine Murray focused on land use. The Royal Society of Edinburgh and members have raised the issue, and a few weeks ago the Scottish Government announced our first steps to develop a land use framework policy for Scotland. We are bringing together 70 experts at the end of the month to kick that off. We all agree that it is a pertinent debate for this part of the 21 st century. We have to get it right in considering the competing demands on Scotland's land. Sarah Boyack and John Scott mentioned food policy. We need an integrated food and drink policy for Scotland, and we are developing that with cross-party support. I am delighted that the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee is also taking up the theme. The issues of food security and self-sufficiency in the 21 st century are crucial.

I was just about to refer to the Labour Party amendment and local food procurement. As part of our food policy, we have established a working group led by Robin Gourlay, who is admired by many for his success with East Ayrshire Council. I do not want to pre-empt his  work. Setting targets might not be the right way to go because they would be artificial and they could put local authorities or other parts of the public sector into illegality because of European procurement rules. I am not keen on that part of Labour's amendment. Nor am I keen on the reference in the amendment to the SRDP. The Labour Party says that the SRDP is not transparent or fair, but it was the previous Labour Administration that set the programme's objectives, structure, measures and delivery mechanisms and which involved the stakeholders but took the final decisions. It is therefore a bit rich for Labour to come to the chamber and say that the SRDP is not transparent or fair. We will therefore reject the amendment.

I am sorry, but I have to move on. The issue of rural development funding in Scotland has been raised by a lot of members. We have to look at the bigger picture and the historical reasons, as some members have said. The RSE says that it believes that "hill and island agriculture in Scotland and in similar parts of the UK and the EU, with their comparative disadvantage, cannot survive without public support for agriculture and land management. We are astonished that such a proposal has been put forward to the EU without assessing the implications for farming in the different parts of the UK". That is the RSE's position, and I am sure that it is the position of many members. We have to look at the historical lessons that the Labour Party, in particular, is very keen for us to learn. Allocations to member states are still based largely on the system that was used in the 2000 to 2006 EU budget, which was, in turn, based on national spending on rural development in the 1990s. The Governments in Ireland, Austria and elsewhere spent heavily on their rural communities, but the UK Government chose not to. The allocation for 2007 to 2013 was finalised in—wait for it—2005, under the UK's presidency of the EU. So, in 2005, the UK Government had the opportunity to gain a larger share for Scotland but failed to do so. The bigger picture and the historical lesson from this debate is that rural Scotland is not a priority for UK Governments. I have priorities for getting a better deal for Scotland, and I will put Scotland's case as much as I can in relation to the CAP health check and other issues in the months ahead. The DEFRA vision that the UK Government has proposed is not Scotland's vision. As today's debate has illustrated, we must have continuing support for Scotland's upland areas and more remote  communities. I will continue to communicate that message to the European Commission as well. While attending the Council of Ministers, I have been astonished at how the Irish, the Austrians, the French and numerous other states express policy that is much closer to Scotland's position than the policy that is being expressed by the UK Government. We all have to accept the reality that the UK Government does not always speak for Scotland in these important negotiations. Scotland is different. Eighty-five per cent of our land has LFA status, which is the opposite of the situation south of the border. We have to keep reminding the UK Government of that important fact. I will continue to address the issues that have been raised in the debate, such as the pesticide regulations and the impact of inappropriate sheep-tagging regulations on the sheep sector and the hill farms.

I confirm to the member that, under current EU regulations, it is not possible to deliver the LFASS payment within the timescale that is proposed in the Liberal Democrat amendment. We have to carry out eligibility checks before we pay, but we have not done that yet. The timescale is to complete those in December and make the payments thereafter. I ask the parties to put themselves in the shoes of crofters and hill farmers in Scotland. If we jeopardised the timetable for the payment of single farm payments, which we would do if we went down the road of making the LFASS payments early, LFASS recipients would lose about £240 million of the overall single farm payment, which is due four weeks after the date by which the Liberal Democrats want to make the LFASS payments. For the sake of four weeks, I ask members to reject the Liberal Democrat amendment because we cannot deliver it, it would be illegal and it would jeopardise a much bigger benefit for LFASS recipients and other farmers in Scotland, such as the arable farmers who currently have cash flow problems and are telling me that they do not want their December payments to be delayed. I ask all parties and those who think that we can deliver LFASS payments in October to live in the real world. Scotland's biggest assets are our land and, of course, our people. If we can ensure that people  are living on our hills and in our more remote areas, using the land to give us all the public benefits of tackling climate change, delivering food, looking after biodiversity and being the engine of our rural economy, that is the way forward and that is what we should all be aiming for. I look forward to working with all parties and stakeholders to ensure that, where we can have influence, as we can over LFASS payments, which we can adjust—that is what the consultation is about—we exercise that influence, and to ensure that rural Scotland has a vibrant future of delivering benefits to the whole nation.

I share many of the member's views about the need to support farmers in less favoured areas at the present time. However, the member will recognise that there is a clear distinction between the emergency support that was delivered to our sheep farmers last year during the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak, and LFASS payments this year, because the LFASS is a European scheme and the payments to our sheep farmers came out of Scotland's money, which meant that we were able to dictate the conditions under which that money was paid. There is a completely separate database for that payment and completely separate legal conditions apply to it. Will the member at least accept that we are not comparing like with like?

Will the member give way?

Is the member aware that Scotland receives such a poor share of European funding for its rural communities because successive Labour Governments—and their predecessors—failed to fight for Scotland's rural communities? As a result, a lesser allocation of European funding goes to Scotland. That is why Ireland and Austria enjoy much greater benefits from European funding than Scotland does.

Anyone attending last night's parliamentary event to mark Scottish food fortnight and Scotland's farmers markets will have been reminded of the valuable role that farmers and crofters in Scotland play. I am delighted that today we have the opportunity to debate agriculture in our less favoured areas. The debate is timely, for two main reasons. First, today the Scottish Government is launching a consultation document on the future of less favoured areas. The consultation follows a great deal of work by the less favoured area support scheme stakeholder group on future options for that vital support. I look forward to working with the organisations that are represented on the group, such as NFU Scotland, the National Sheep Association, the National Beef Association in Scotland, the Scottish Beef Cattle Association, the Scottish Crofting Foundation and Scottish Environment LINK, on the future shape of less favoured area support. Secondly, the debate is timely because of the various powerful reports on the topic that have been produced recently. They include reports by the Scottish Agricultural College and the Royal Society of Edinburgh, as well as the "Manifesto for the Hills" published by NFU Scotland. The reports draw attention to the serious challenges that livestock businesses in our less favoured areas face. Over the past quarter of a century, sheep numbers have declined by 8 per cent. That figure hides some wide fluctuations—from a flock of about 8.2 million in 1982, to a high in 1992 of nearly 10 million, to around 7.5 million in 2007. Recent declines have been high, with regional variations. I will say more about the reasons for that later. For cattle, the long-term perspective has been more stable, with the total number of beef cattle staying around 1 million since 1982.  The Government shares the concerns that people in the industry and elsewhere have expressed about the scale and speed of the change that is taking place in Scotland's hills and more remote areas. Livestock farming is vital for the future economic, environmental and social welfare of Scotland's hills. No one should pretend that there is an easy answer to the current challenges. Today I commit the Scottish Government to addressing those difficult issues and offer Parliament the opportunity to debate an important Scottish sector. The benefits of having livestock farming in the hills and in our remote communities are clear and were set out well in the recent reports to which I have referred. There are economic, environmental, and social and cultural benefits. Farming helps to maintain our economy, produces food and maintains employment in related sectors, both upstream and downstream. The total income from farming in Scotland in 2007 was £627 million. The total value of cattle and sheep production in 2007 was £538 million, which illustrates the livestock sector's importance in the overall picture. There is also great economic benefit from tourism, which depends on the landscapes that farmers and crofters manage. Livestock are important for the environment of our rural areas. Livestock production means grazing, and grazing helps to deliver biodiversity in the hill and island areas of Scotland. A balance between overgrazing and undergrazing delivers a mosaic of habitats that support important species such as corncrakes, curlews and hen harriers. In social and cultural terms, livestock farming is vital to maintaining viable populations in remote areas. It plays a key role in supporting flourishing local communities in areas of low population density and must sit at the heart of a rural development policy that offers opportunities and support to everyone who lives in rural Scotland. [ Interruption. ]

Alasdair Allan makes an important point. The issue that he raises is a serious concern for the industry and for all parties  that are represented in the Parliament. I commit the Scottish Government to fighting for a system that is practical in Scotland and which does not have the disadvantages to which he refers. Agriculture brings a wide range of public benefits, so it is right and proper that public authorities should support it through public funds. I make it clear that the Government is committed to continuing to support farming and crofting in less favoured areas, in recognition of those important public benefits. We cannot leave the issue to market forces; if we did so, we would lose populations and the public benefits that I have described. The Parliament wants to see active industries in our more remote areas. We are all alarmed by the reported decline in livestock numbers and ask ourselves why that is happening. The situation is complex. As the SAC report points out, changes in the number of livestock in the hills are not new. The long-term trend is for the number of farms to reduce, with the size of farms increasing in all sectors. In Europe, sheep production has fallen by 20 per cent in 15 years; China is the only country in the world where the sheep population is increasing. Less favoured areas are particularly vulnerable because they are affected by the challenges of climate, soil, slope and remoteness from suppliers and markets. We are all aware that recent increases in input costs have hit the sector hard. In the past year, the costs of the main inputs have risen strongly. Feed costs have increased by up to 80 per cent, fertiliser prices have increased by up to 80 per cent and red diesel prices have increased by 40 per cent. Sheep production is a low-input sector in terms of feed, fertiliser and fuel costs, so we would expect it to fare relatively better than beef production. However, although the broad prospects for Scottish sheep producers are positive, margins for hill sheep enterprises continue to be tight. The good news is that demand for food is rising both globally and here in Scotland, with beef sales up by 7 per cent and lamb sales up by 8.2 per cent last year. There are reports from the autumn sales of strong demand and good prices. Early suckled calf sales have been characterised by strong demand recently, with prices well up on the year. The marts are even reporting record prices for cast cows. Those trends are testimony to the quality of the Scottish product, the work of the processors and, on the promotional side, the work of Quality Meat Scotland. This month I had the honour of launching Quality Meat Scotland's festival of Scotch lamb, which will help to promote that fantastic product. Future viability is not only about getting the support right but about producing for the market.  One crucial reason for the declines in livestock numbers is the reaction to the 2003 common agricultural policy reforms, the centrepiece of which was decoupling. Decoupling has the merit of freeing farmers and crofters to take production decisions that are based on the market. It was always expected that that would lead to a decline, rather than an increase, in livestock numbers, to reflect the fact that, in a logical response to the flawed European Union policies of the past, some producers had expanded to more than the sensible carrying capacity of the land. Today I do not want to pre-empt decisions on implementing the CAP health check, but I commit the Government to ensuring that Scotland retains the freedom to take decisions on the future of schemes such as the beef calf scheme. The Government is already investing heavily in LFAs. Out of single farm payments of about £380 million a year in Scotland, more than £240 million goes to farmers and crofters in less favoured areas. Twenty thousand holdings benefit from the single farm payment, and 12,500 farmers and crofters also receive a slice of the less favoured area support scheme, which is worth £61 million a year. The Scottish beef calf scheme is worth £18 million a year. The rural development programme is worth £1.6 billion between now and 2013. Livestock farming continues to receive a range of other Government support, including support for research and development and emergency support. The Government helps the industry with research at the Moredun Research Institute and the SAC that costs about £11 million annually. What about future support measures? I start with single farm payments. There is a growing consensus that the current single farm payment model has a limited shelf life. The move from an historical basis for payments to some other basis—perhaps flat rates differentiated by region—is inevitable, but it represents a huge step for Scottish farmers and crofters. As many have pointed out, moving to an area-based system will at least allow payment to be linked to the land rather than to the farmer—sometimes, to farmers who do not actually farm. However, the Government will ensure that Scotland is not forced via the health check to change its system at someone else's pace. We must have the freedom to plan any transition so that the timescales meet Scotland's needs. The current LFASS needs to be reviewed because it was designed as an interim scheme, to last until the end of 2009. Today I am launching a consultation document that the Government has prepared, in full and open collaboration with stakeholders. The consultation period will last until 19 December. I do not wish to pre-empt the outcome, but serious concerns have already been expressed about the lack of a link between LFASS  payments and active farming—farming with the outcomes that the public want, such as food production. As the Royal Society of Edinburgh highlights in its report, that involves difficult and complex issues, and our work with the LFASS stakeholder group has made apparent those difficulties and challenges. Our consultation paper reflects that. However, I undertake to find an effective and transparent scheme for the future that will deliver the public benefits that we all want. People who express concerns at the moment generally do not advocate a return to old-style headage payments, but they raise an important issue about the conditions under which support payments are granted. Our consultation provides an opportunity to investigate how we can establish a link between payments and active farming that generates public benefits. I turn my attention to the amendments to our motion, starting with the Labour Party amendment. We cannot support it. Given that the Scottish rural development programme was largely designed by the previous Administration, I am surprised that it is now being criticised heavily. It is being suggested that somehow the SRDP is not transparent, not effective and not delivering. The SRDP has been up and running for only a few months. Perhaps there are teething problems, but the suggestion that the programme is not transparent and not effective is wide of the mark. We simply cannot support the Labour Party's misleading and inaccurate amendment. We accept the Conservative party's amendment, which highlights the future priorities for our agricultural sector in Scotland, which are different from those that are being promoted in Europe and elsewhere by the United Kingdom Government. It is unacceptable for the UK Government to call for an end to subsidies and support for Scotland's less favoured areas, when the market will not deliver the public benefits that we want. There is a need for continuing support, given that 85 per cent of land in Scotland has less favoured area status, whereas the opposite is the case in the rest of the UK. It is clear to me, having visited many Council of Ministers meetings in Brussels and Luxembourg, that the UK is not speaking for Scotland on the issue. [ Interruption. ] As we debate less favoured areas in Scotland today, I hope that we all agree that they require continuing support for many years to come to deliver public benefits. I must reject the Liberal Democrat amendment. It is contradictory, asking us to make advance or emergency LFASS payments "before the end of October, without compromising the delivery of single farm payments"  in December. I am afraid that that is not possible. It is a serious issue, and I have investigated it thoroughly. I have written to the NFUS, laying out the reasons why we are unable to do that. We must meet EU conditions and ensure that all the checks are in place before we make LFASS payments. Crucially, the LFAs will benefit from about £230 million to £240 million under the single farm payment in December. [ Interruption. ] To hold up that huge amount of cash in order to deliver the £61 million earlier would not benefit Scotland's farmers.

I think that I am running out of time, but I will certainly return to the matter later.

Okay.

I am happy to do so: the current timetable is January. The member wrote to me recently, calling for the payments to be made by the end of the year—as opposed to "before the end of October", as his amendment says. I assure him that we will work flat out to ensure that the payments start to go out before the end of the year, once the single farm payments are out. We will fight as hard as we can to bring the date forward, but we simply cannot deliver that in October, as the amendment asks. This debate is part of a process to achieve a situation in which we have a contract with Scotland's farmers and crofters, covering the public benefits that they will deliver in meeting our national outcomes and in benefiting the people of Scotland and our rural economy. In return, we recognise that they require continuing support. Let no one think that there are easy, off-the-shelf answers to all the challenges that we will be discussing. However, the Government is committed to working with the Parliament, all the parties and the industry in our rural communities to find the best possible solutions to protect a valuable sector that forms part of the backbone of our rural economy in Scotland. I move, That the Parliament recognises the valuable contribution made by farmers on Scotland's hills and other remote areas to food production, environmental management and our rural economy; notes the publication of the Scottish  Agricultural College's report, Farming's Retreat from the Hills , funded by the Scottish Government, and the Royal Society of Edinburgh's report on its Inquiry into Scotland's Hills and Islands as well as other recent publications highlighting the challenges and opportunities facing the sector, and welcomes the publication on 18 September 2008 of the Scottish Government's consultation on the Less Favoured Area Support Scheme and its commitment to work in partnership with stakeholders to consider the range of relevant economic, social and environmental issues with the aim of securing a sustainable future for agriculture on our hills and in our more remote communities.

As I am sure we all agree, Scotland needs a positive farming future, which in turn needs new entrants. Interest rate relief of up to £27,395 is available to participants under the new Scotland rural development programme. However, let no one pretend that there is a simple or easy answer to removing the barriers to new entrants.

Given the importance of attracting new blood to the agricultural sector, we have committed an initial £10 million to the Scotland rural development programme. Of course, it remains open to us to reprofile the expenditure under the SRDP in line with demand for that scheme. I contrast the £10 million that the SNP Government committed to and delivered to help attract new entrants with the £5 million that the Conservatives promised in their manifesto. The SNP Government's commitment is in black and white. The issue is complex and challenging, but we will do all that we can to help attract life-blood into many of our rural and remote communities to work in the agricultural sector in the years ahead.

As Alasdair Allan knows, we take the issue seriously. The theme of attracting young people and new entrants into crofting is central to the Shucksmith report, which was issued recently. It was debated in the Parliament and received a generally warm welcome. The report contains many suggestions for encouraging new entrants into crofting, which we are taking seriously. The Highlands and Islands croft entrant scheme, which assists new entrants and encourages inactive crofters to release crofts to young people through financial incentives, is successful. As we consider our response to the Shucksmith report, which will be published in the coming weeks, we will continue to progress the debate.

I thank the member for making an important point. Tenant farming is extremely important to the viability of many agricultural and remote communities. I asked the tenant farming forum, on which the Scottish Tenant Farmers Association is represented, to give me its input on how we can break down the barriers to new entrants to agriculture. As the forum's report—which I am sure the member has read from cover to cover—shows, the subject is complex and difficult. The forum continues to do good work on issues that it identified in its report "Barriers to New Entrants to Scottish Farming". If a simple solution to access to the single farm payment scheme existed, I am sure that the previous Administration would have found it, as the scheme was adopted a few years ago. We continue to investigate how we can make the scheme more appropriate to today's circumstances. That is part of the debate about the health check of the common agricultural policy. Our consultation document asks questions about that point and I look forward to Jim Hume's response.

Scottish ministers, like everyone in Scotland, need to take decisions on transport, energy use, purchases and waste that contribute to lower carbon lifestyles. Our greener Scotland campaign shows people how simple steps can improve the environment.

Sometimes I think that the best way to help to tackle global warming would be for the member to reduce the amount of hot air that he produces in the chamber. Unlike many others who have to travel to the Parliament from far and wide around Scotland in their everyday business as ministers and members of the Scottish Parliament, the member does not have far to travel from his constituency office and home. If we had not inherited such a neglected public transport system from previous Administrations, perhaps the situation would have been different. Like other members of the Government and members across the chamber, the First Minister is showing leadership by supporting some ambitious environmental legislation to protect the planet and our precious environment here in Scotland. He announced that yesterday as part of his statement on the legislative programme. In particular, we have Scotland's first climate change bill. That is leadership of the best quality. The First Minister is in the lead.

A task  force is being set up by the Scottish Government in conjunction with Dumfries and Galloway Council. The group, which consists of representatives from the local authority, the Scottish Government and experts from Scottish Natural Heritage and Science and Advice for Scottish Agriculture, will assess the urban gull problem in Dumfries. Its remit will be to agree a non-lethal approach to urban gull control to be implemented prior to next spring in an attempt to disrupt gull breeding success in the town. Expertise from the private sector will be sought on specific aspects of gull control as the need arises.

The issue is a serious one that affects many members' constituents. I am surprised that the member is adopting such a sour note in response to the summit, given that I understand that 65 delegates attended it. The meeting was very successful. All the relevant bodies that were represented want to work closely together to address this social nuisance in Dumfries and elsewhere in Scotland. I contrast the member's approach to that of Jack Groom, the provost of Dumfries, who was quoted in the Dumfries Courier of 22 August as saying: "I am delighted the task force will be set up, to remove nests and break up the Gull colonies." The initiative has been warmly welcomed. It is important that we all work together closely to try to find a solution to this social menace.

I assure Nanette Milne that I am aware of the seagull problems in Aberdeen and elsewhere in Scotland. I made specific reference to the fact that the task force is the first of its kind in a long while. I hope that it will come up with solutions that can be implemented throughout Scotland to address what we all accept is a major social nuisance.

Yes.

The member may be surprised to learn that I am not particularly familiar with the publication to which she refers. However, I will be delighted to read the article in question if she sends it to me. I am not in a position to pre- empt the review of national parks that is taking place at the moment. Hopefully, stage 1 of the review will conclude in a few weeks' time; stage 2 will look at the planning functions of national parks. I do not want to pre-empt that consultation process, to which the member and others will be able to input. I am aware that in its forthcoming draft national park local plan, which is due for publication in November this year, the Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority will review some of the issues that the member raises. Hopefully, some of the members' concerns will be addressed in the draft plan.

The member highlights the fact that there are three regional parks in Scotland, designated by local authorities with the support of Scottish Natural Heritage. They are spectacular places that all of us treasure. The application process for designation of national parks will be addressed in the current national park review. I urge the member to input to that consultation, to ensure that the issue of how regional parks can be upgraded to national park status is addressed properly.

I am aware of the area to which the member refers, as it borders my constituency of Moray. It is a spectacular area. The work that is under way to extend the boundaries of the Cairngorms national park is not complete. SNH is taking forward the Government's commitment to support the extension of the park to Highland Perthshire, which has already been announced. We must await the outcome of that process. I urge the member to ensure that he inputs his views to it.

Among other measures, we are funding the Carbon Trust in Scotland, the energy saving Scotland advice  network and Envirowise in Scotland. All provide free or subsidised support.

I am happy to give that commitment and to learn more about the students' initiatives that will be discussed in the Parliament on Friday. We are always open to new ideas for promoting energy efficiency in Scotland. Given the current economic climate, it is in the interests of the business community to seek energy efficiency, not only to protect the environment by lowering our carbon footprint, but to save cash. I am therefore very interested in the subject and look forward to learning more about the students' initiatives.

Public procurement plays an important role in the development of the national food and drink policy. On 19 June, I announced how the Scottish Government would take forward the development of that policy. I have asked Robin Gourlay, head of facilities management at East Ayrshire Council, to chair a working group—reporting to the food and drink leadership forum—that will produce guidance for Scotland's public sector on becoming an exemplar for sustainable economic growth in Scotland.

The member raises an important point. The promotion of local food throughout Scotland's communities attracts cross-party support in the Parliament. The Scottish Government's catering contract will go out to tender and must be in place by March 2009. We are working on the use of that contract as an exemplar to the rest of the public sector in Scotland and we are pushing the boundaries as far as we can within the current procurement rules in Scotland. I hope that we will make substantial progress in doing that. I support the member's comments about promoting local food in Scotland's schools, in our hospitals, and in the wider national health service. I was delighted to read that Western Isles Council is this week undertaking a two-week pilot, using local produce in school meals in selected schools. Shetland Islands Council and other local authorities throughout Scotland are considering similar initiatives. In the past few months, I have written to the NHS, local authorities throughout Scotland and the Scottish Prison Service to promote the concept of having more local produce on their menus to help support Scotland's primary producers and, at the same time, our health and environment record.

I support the sentiments of the organisations that the member mentions. It is important that we do what we can to link up local food to supply chains. There are some excellent initiatives in Scotland, such as the Skye and Lochalsh food link group, which links up local produce to local hotels and restaurants. That is a fantastic initiative, and I am keen to see how we can spread such initiatives throughout the rest of Scotland. The working group that was set up under the food and drink policy has been charged with considering how Scotland can become more food secure. As I am sure the member knows, the  debate is not simple. We have to ascertain the extent to which Scotland is self-sufficient at the moment and what more can be done to make it more self-sufficient in the future. On negotiations over the common agricultural policy and other policies, it is important that we ensure that our farmers are given every support to remain food producers so that, in turn, Scotland remains a food-producing nation. That will support food security.

The £1 million package of measures to support the pig sector that was announced on 7 August includes £100,000 for research into labelling and work to improve animal health. Around £700,000 will be used to support a range of measures and will be allocated in partnership with the industry. The remaining £200,000 will be used to improve the marketing of pig meat products. As the 7 August announcement made clear, this will be drawn from the £1 million already announced in October 2007 for investments to support the resilience of the red meat sector following the outbreak of foot and mouth last year.

I reiterate to the member that the £1 million to which I referred is new money for the pig sector in Scotland. The pig sector faces huge pressures. I fully appreciate and understand that pig producers were disappointed that we were unable to support the two headage payment proposals in the task force report. With our limited resources, it is important that we support the long-term sustainability of Scotland's vital pig industry. To do that, we have to promote productivity, health and marketing. The task force report was extremely valuable and we are building on it and taking forward some  of its recommendations. Since I commissioned the report, there have been fundamental developments in the pig sector in Scotland. First and foremost, there was the takeover by Vion of the Grampian Country Food Group. That was a massive development and I hope that it will be positive for the future of the pig sector. It would be remiss of me not to take that development into account, given that the organisation will slaughter 80 per cent of the pigs in Scotland and will have 25 per cent of pig production. If I were not to have Vion working hand-in-hand with the industry in Scotland, we would not have the best outcome. It is in the industry's interest that we use our limited resources to take forward that positive agenda. I would urge everyone in the chamber to support Quality Meat Scotland's current pork campaign.

Mr McNulty seems to suggest that money for the flooding element in the local government settlement has been divided equally among the 32 local authorities. That is certainly not the case. When that money was built into the settlement, the relevant needs of various local authorities were taken into account. For example, out of the overall £126 million budget for flooding, Moray Council was allocated £40 million over the next three years.

I warmly commend the committee for its thorough investigation and report, which are certainly helping to ensure that flooding remains firmly on the Parliament's agenda. The report contains many useful and important recommendations that we are considering with great care. We have now published our initial response to the recommendations and will continue to build the committee's work into our thinking in the time ahead. We welcome this morning's debate on the ever-increasing threat of flooding in Scotland. Floods inflict devastation on people's lives, on communities, on property and on Scotland's precious environment. As Roseanna Cunningham said, to understand the seriousness of the issue, we need only look at the devastating impact of last summer's floods in England and Wales. There is no doubt that Scotland will be able to learn valuable lessons from Sir Michael Pitt's review, which was published just this week. We must remember that flooding is a natural process that has been made more problematic by human activity. Historically, we have constructed dams, straightened rivers, built on flood plains, constructed artificial drainage systems and removed natural vegetation. Now we must assess  how we can deal with those man-made problems in the most sustainable way in the decades ahead. Research into climate change tells us that we can expect an increase in the flood risk for all types of flooding. Given that that increased risk stands to affect Scotland's economy and society as a whole, how we manage it is one of the biggest challenges that Scotland faces in the 21 st century. Tackling climate change and the rising sea levels and extreme weather events that it causes, which have consequences for communities both in Scotland and around the world, is also a priority for this Government. That is why we plan to introduce a climate change bill. Those of us who represent communities that have experienced severe flooding will know that the committee has confirmed such communities' view that the present statutory framework is not up to the challenge. Legislation from the 1960s is not fit for purpose in the 21 st century. That is why we have decided to take a completely new approach to flood risk management in Scotland. We all know that a number of key players deal with the many sources of flooding, but there is a lack of co-ordination of the various powers and duties that exist under different pieces of legislation. That lack of co-ordination is the result of the absence of a national framework within which our local authorities, Scottish Water, SEPA and others can take decisions on the management of flood risk. The bill that we will introduce in September will change all that and will establish a modernised and sustainable approach to flood risk management. It will address many of the concerns that the committee's report highlights. The bill will encourage sustainable flood management at a catchment scale, allowing local authorities and others to take the best possible approach to the flood risk in their areas. The options will range from traditional defences in urban areas to improved flood warning and natural flood management measures where appropriate. The bill will make available to the public and the responsible authorities better information on the risk and consequences of flooding from rivers, the sea, extreme rainfall events and groundwater. It will improve flood risk management planning at the strategic level and ensure that flood risk management plans are prepared for all areas that are at a significant risk of flooding. It will also transfer the enforcement responsibilities under the Reservoirs Act 1975 to a single national body and introduce a compulsory post-incident reporting system, which will create a uniform approach to enforcement of that act throughout Scotland. We set out many of our proposals for those changes earlier this year in "The Future of Flood Risk Management in Scotland—A Consultation Document". In addition to the formal consultation  process, we developed our proposals with the assistance of the flooding bill advisory group. Of course, we also held stakeholder events throughout Scotland. At those public meetings, we heard at first hand the views of individuals who have been affected by flooding and we intend to learn from their experiences. We are extremely grateful for the consideration that the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee gave to flooding and flood management during its recent inquiry. I welcome the recommendations in the committee's report, which are generally in line with the proposals that we have developed for the bill and with the results of our public consultation. I will comment on some of the committee's key recommendations. We agree with the recommendation that SEPA should be given the role of competent authority and that it should take the lead at a national level on flood risk management. However, local authorities will be identified as responsible authorities for flood risk management and there will be scope for designating other bodies, such as Scottish Water, as responsible authorities and giving them a duty to collaborate to deliver flood risk management plans. Co-operation and collaboration between the bodies that are involved in flood risk management are essential, so that will be one of the core elements of the flooding bill. We agree that catchments should be the basis of flood risk management. The flooding bill will give SEPA the responsibility for identifying appropriate catchments for managing flood risk. We agree with the committee that the Scottish Government should retain a national budget to fund research and other overarching flood management initiatives. However, it remains our view that local authorities' expenditure on flood risk management should be supported through the local government settlement. It will then be the responsibility of each local authority to allocate the total financial resources that are available to it on the basis of local needs and priorities, having first fulfilled its statutory obligations and the agreed priorities in its single outcome agreement. The committee recommended that the Scottish ministers remain involved in the process of approving proposals for strategic flood prevention schemes. We have considered that issue with great care and taken full account of the responses to the public consultation. We agree that our present process is not working, but we consider that the committee's proposal is not necessarily the best way forward. One main concern with the current process for flood alleviation schemes is the length of time that it takes for such schemes to complete the required statutory process. The responses to our consultation on the future of flood risk management showed that a clear majority, including a majority of local authorities,  considered it appropriate to take a local authority-led approach to the approval of flood risk management measures, rather than retain the existing process of ministerial confirmation. Therefore, the bill will establish a new local authority-led approval process for flood risk management measures, which will enable the Scottish ministers to call in proposals, but only where appropriate. That must be right. Ministers should be involved when an issue cannot be resolved locally—that is a valid role, but it is not a valid role to have to approve every single local authority proposal. We simply do not see how that can accelerate the process. As Parliament is aware, the Scottish Government's intention is to stand back from micromanaging the delivery of local authority objectives. The new approval process in the bill will ensure that the Scottish ministers meet that goal while maintaining a role in the process of approving proposals for flood risk management measures, when necessary. The new statutory process that will be set out in the flooding bill will streamline procedures by enabling deemed planning consent. The process should also shorten the time that it takes to get approval for non-contentious measures. In doing so, it will continue to ensure that individuals and organisations who are directly affected can object to proposals, without allowing the approval process to be extended unreasonably. We welcome the committee's recommendation that the Scottish Government establish further pilot studies to assess the contribution that natural flood management measures can make at catchment scale. We acknowledge that natural flood risk management is an important component of sustainable flood management. Detailed studies across a range of catchment scales are required to establish a credible body of evidence on how natural flood risk management could sit with other proven, sustainable, catchment flood risk management measures. We are in the process of establishing a natural flood risk management working group, which will advise on future pilot studies to improve our understanding of the contribution that natural flood risk management can make to reducing flood risk. The forthcoming bill will enable the most sustainable approach to flood risk management to be taken in each case. The Rural Affairs and Environment Committee has asked us to consider a number of other policy issues that do not relate directly to the bill, as its convener, Roseanna Cunningham, pointed out. I confirm our commitment to address those issues in due course and to continue to work with the committee on the way forward. We all share a desire to prepare Scotland better for the threat of flooding. We look forward to working with the Rural Affairs and Environment  Committee, the Parliament and the rest of Scotland in the times ahead to achieve that end. Flooding is one of the biggest threats facing Scotland in the 21 st century. It is a threat to our people's lives, to our property, to our communities and to the environment. It is also a global issue. We look forward to working together to tackle those issues head on in the times ahead.

Monitoring of progress on single outcome agreement targets will be undertaken through submission of annual progress reports by local authorities.

The Scottish Government set ambitious targets, which by definition are challenging. I have met representatives of local authorities in the member's area, who have given me a different, extremely enthusiastic message. The vast majority of councils in the area have exceeded the target that had to be met by the end of 2007 and continue to make excellent progress. I am confident that many targets will be met by authorities in North East Scotland and elsewhere. A record level of funding was transferred to local authorities as part of the local government settlement. We have had extremely positive feedback since then on the priority that local authorities are giving to their environmental obligations.

That is certainly one aspect that we hope to take into account in the revision of the national waste plan, which will be taken forward shortly. At the moment, of course, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency publishes many such figures quarterly. I will discuss with SEPA what potential there is for publishing  separate figures in the future to give to Rob Gibson and others who require that information.

We already support local authorities by, for example, funding work on waste education and awareness and supporting work on developing markets for recycled products. We are considering with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities how best to allocate much of the zero waste fund, and we have also considered with it whether a national advice service on recycling collections would be beneficial.

The Scottish Government is very conscious of the different levels of challenge that face local authorities in different parts of the country. We do our best to take that into account. I am pleased that Aberdeen City Council recently committed to achieving a 40 per cent recycling rate by 2011. Although I recognise that it has a long way to go to reach some of the existing targets, I welcome the ambitious 2011 target that it has set. A national advice service would help local authorities to share best practice, given that they face different challenges. When I met Glasgow City Council a week or so ago, I learned that it faces challenges similar to those in other urban areas, particularly with tenements. There is a strong case for sharing best practice between authorities so that they can move forward and achieve their ambitious targets.

The Scottish Government considers that businesses should be encouraged to take steps to reduce, re-use and recycle the waste that they produce in line with our policy of moving towards a zero waste society. To help private sector firms, we fund the envirowise programme, which provides free advice and support on recycling and other activities to make more efficient use of resources, often resulting in lower costs to business in the process. The Scottish Government also funds the Scottish waste awareness group, which produces a business recycling directory to give advice on facilities available locally.

One commitment that we have given and which I am sure the member will welcome is to set distinct recycling targets for the business and commercial sector. If there is one lesson that I have learned during the eight or nine years since the Parliament was established, it is that that area has been neglected because much of the emphasis has been on municipal waste. We must do a lot more to encourage recycling in the business sector. One of the difficulties is lack of information. Although a lot of recycling is going on in the business and commercial sector—which, let us remember, accounts for more than 80 per cent of all waste in Scotland—it is difficult to ascertain exact recycling levels. First, we need good information. As the member said, SEPA is making progress in that regard. Secondly, we need to set distinct targets in the future.

Our waste policy pays close attention to the waste hierarchy. That is why, as I said in my ministerial statement a few months ago, we set the ambitious target that 70 per cent of municipal waste will be recycled by 2025, with a maximum of 5 per cent being sent to landfill and a maximum of 25 per cent being used for energy from waste. That target gained broad support in the Parliament and it is supported by the Sustainable Development Commission, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and many local authorities to which I have spoken in the past few months. It is vital that we pay close attention to the waste hierarchy and that only residual waste is sent to energy-from-waste plants in the years ahead.

The Scottish Government is working in partnership with stakeholders to minimise the risk that the disease will spread to Scotland in the near future. A key risk is the movement of animals from high-risk areas. The industry is discouraging animal keepers from sourcing stock from high-risk areas and the Scottish Government has put in place arrangements to monitor any such movements to Scotland. Vaccination will be a valuable tool in protecting Scotland's livestock industry. The Scottish Government is in the process of securing vaccine on behalf of stakeholders at the best possible cost.

I assure the member that there is constant communication on bluetongue and the protection of Scotland between the Scottish Government and all our stakeholders, and indeed directly with farmers and people with holdings in Scotland. The most important measure to protect Scotland continues to be for farmers to be careful about where they source their livestock, to remain vigilant for signs of disease, and to report any suspicions immediately. Many farmers throughout Scotland have reported suspicions in recent weeks. Thankfully, all those cases were negative, but that shows that farmers are indeed being vigilant.  A great deal of legislation has been put in place to ensure that farmers who could pose a risk to Scotland with some of their activities are held to account. From tomorrow, Friday 6 June, a new bluetongue amendment order will be in place to provide for the compulsory vaccination campaign in Scotland late in the year. It also requires animals coming into Scotland from a bluetongue-restricted zone under vaccination conditions to be accompanied by a veterinary certificate to prove that they have been vaccinated. Other requirements are also in place.

The vaccine procurement process has successfully been completed, and I will receive advice in the coming days about which vaccine best serves Scotland's needs. There has never been a commitment that the vaccine will be made available in the next three or four weeks, but I hope that it will be made available sooner rather than later. On funding, the Scottish Government made a unique contribution of either up to £3 million or 50 per cent of the cost of the manufactured vaccine. That has been warmly welcomed by all stakeholders in Scotland, and it is of course £3 million more than has been contributed for vaccination elsewhere in the United Kingdom. That is a one-off contribution—a joint agreement was signed with all stakeholders in Scotland, and the situation is fully understood. The industry will continue to carry the costs thereafter.

I met the Edinburgh, Lothians and Borders councils on 21 May. Progress continues to be made on recycling in those councils and across Scotland. European Union targets can be met by waste prevention, recycling and composting and the appropriate use of technologies. I am reviewing the landfill allowance scheme with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities.

All councils, the Scottish Government and, I am sure, everyone in the chamber accept that the targets that we must achieve are challenging. The targets have been challenging for the past few years, not only for the past 12 months. I had meetings, which were much more constructive than the member's contribution, with the Edinburgh, Lothians and Borders councils. I am encouraged by the progress that they are very keen to make in the best attempt possible to meet those ambitious targets, which are good for Scotland's environment.

rose—

Will the member take an intervention?

It is always under review.

I am delighted to have the opportunity to open this debate on the European Commission's health check of the common agricultural policy. Farming and crofting play a central role in our economy and we all enjoy the products of Scottish agriculture in our homes and in restaurants. We can all be justifiably proud of Scotland's strong reputation for quality food and a spectacular environment, and we must equip our agricultural sector for the challenges ahead. As I am in a generous mood today, I begin by welcoming the Labour Party amendment, which refers to the sector's role in sustaining our rural communities. I may even have something positive to say about other parties' amendments as well. The Commission's health check provides an important opportunity to take stock of how far we have come since the previous reforms. The health check is a pit stop that will allow us to check on wear and tear and to anticipate what is needed over the next few years if agriculture is to remain a dynamic industry that is competitive in markets and plays its full part in achieving sustainable economic growth for Scotland through food production and the environmental management of our land. The decoupling of payments has had a major impact on the industry. On the positive side, it has given farmers greater freedom to choose what to produce. In the past 12 months, I have had the opportunity of seeing plenty examples of farmers using that flexibility to the full, switching resources into new and innovative types of production and searching out higher earnings in the market, in return for higher-quality products capable of capturing new and expanding markets. Examples range from ice cream manufacture through to niche marketing of locally produced beef and lamb. However, I am acutely aware of the challenges that decoupling has brought, particularly in the more fragile areas of Scotland where there is a high dependency on livestock farming. Looking ahead, we need to try to anticipate the new pressures that Scotland will face. We can expect increasing pressure to be put on the CAP  budget from other policy areas in the years beyond 2014. The European Union budget review is starting to consider such issues. The eventual outcome of the World Trade Organization Doha development round may lead in general to reduced commodity prices, although that might be offset by an increase in global demand for food. In addition, there is the challenge of climate change. Scottish agriculture must play its part in helping to achieve our ambitious target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 80 per cent by 2050. The health check is not a radical review of whether we need the CAP. A thorough review of the policy may be needed when the budget proposals for the EU after 2013 become much clearer. Nevertheless, the health check provides an opportunity for making sensible changes. We in the chamber will want to ensure that the changes are in Scotland's best interests.

I am certainly impressed by the argument that we must continue to offer appropriate support to our livestock sector. I hope that the health check will give us the opportunity to do that. The issue will be part of the consultation that we will issue in two or three weeks' time. There is much in the European Commission proposals that we can welcome—for example, its desire for simplification. However, we are determined, as we move towards negotiations in the autumn, to listen to what people have to say about the proposals. As a Government, we need to be sure that the CAP that will operate in Scotland from 2010 to 2013 is fit for our purpose. The consultation that we plan to launch in June will help us to do that. We look forward to hearing from as many people as possible so that we are fully aware of the issues and can ensure that Scotland's voice is heard in Brussels. Our objective is to ensure that the outcome of the negotiations later this year meets Scotland's needs. We must do all that we can to ensure that Brussels is fully aware of the special types of farming that exist in Scotland—Tavish Scott referred to one of those sectors—how much we value them and the support that we require in Scotland for the times ahead. At my invitation, Commissioner Fischer Boel will visit Scotland for two days in July, and I will ensure that her  programme highlights many of the issues that we are discussing today. Scotland is different. Scotland has almost 20 per cent of the UK's cattle herd and more than 20 per cent of the UK's sheep flock. We produce almost half the UK's spring barley, for which our distillers and feed merchants are grateful. We also have more than our fair share of challenges, with 85 per cent of the Scottish agricultural area officially being classed as less favoured areas. That means that our land is less able, for reasons of geography, climate, soils or terrain, to produce a wide range of crops. That contrasts with the LFA figure of only about 15 per cent for the English agricultural area. We are therefore committed to the continuation of the less favoured area support scheme, which helps some 13,000 livestock farmers and crofters to undertake types of farming that are considered to be good for the environment. We are currently operating an interim scheme for 2007, 2008 and 2009, but we will consult later this year about how the scheme should operate in 2010 and beyond so that the important environmental benefits are not lost. We need to consider the European Commission's health check proposals carefully against the background of the special nature of Scottish agriculture. I will do all that I can to ensure that the United Kingdom Government recognises Scotland's case. Chancellor Alistair Darling's recent intervention, when he wrote to the EU presidency calling for an end to direct support for farmers, was not particularly welcomed in Scotland. The UK's vision for farming does not always chime with our vision, and I will do my best to make that clear. We do not have the rolling fields of East Anglia. When the CAP was reformed a few years ago and payments were decoupled from production, the perfectly valid argument was that farmers should not produce for subsidy. Today, however, it is increasingly clear that in many parts of Scotland farmers require support to produce, especially if we want Scotland to remain a food-producing nation. The Government certainly believes that that is in our national interest, and I welcome the reference to that issue in the Liberal Democrat amendment. The Liberal Democrat amendment also refers to a review of the Scottish rural development programme. We are keen to keep the SRDP under review. We will not launch a formal review, which could lead to chaos, but we will certainly keep the programme under review to ensure that it reflects Scotland's priorities.

I will address that point later. My experience at agriculture and fisheries council meetings in Europe tells me that many other member states are closer to Scotland's position. That should give our industry some comfort in the months ahead. The Commission's proposals were published last week. It said that the proposals aim to ensure that single farm payments work effectively and that we have market support tools that offer a true safety net for genuine crises and catastrophes rather than quotas that can be an obstacle that prevents farmers from expanding production. The Commission also said that there will be a new emphasis under pillar 2 rural development schemes on four new challenges: fighting climate change; managing water; making good use of bioenergy; and protecting biodiversity. When I recently met Commissioner Fischer Boel, she said that she was impressed by the SRDP and that it already addresses many of the issues. We appear to be ahead of the game in Scotland. To meet some of the challenges, the Commission wants to increase funding for pillar 2 rural development payments across the European Union by increasing compulsory modulation. As we already have voluntary modulation, the Commission wants us to replace that with compulsory modulation. In addition, it proposes a progressive element to compulsory modulation so that the rate increases as the size of single farm payment rises. The intention is to reduce the large payments made to a comparatively small number of individual farmers. I agree with Conservative amendment because we have to think through very carefully those changes and their impact on Scotland. I believe that our approach should be outcome based.

It could certainly lead to unintended consequences, such as large farms splitting into smaller farms to escape the regulation. That is why we must think through carefully the consequences for Scotland. The Commission is also proposing increased flexibility in the use of the national envelope. That would make it possible to move a certain amount  of funding between sectors by top-slicing single farm payments, moving money from one sector to another and using it, for example, to target support at particular sectors or geographic areas or to help with the consequences of disease. We would welcome that flexibility in Scotland. We already have the Scottish beef calf scheme, which is funded by the beef sector, so we have used such flexibility in the past. The new flexibility would go a stage further. There are several other important proposals under the health check, including changes to cross-compliance requirements, abolishing set-aside, clarifying the definition of farmer and so on. The final element that I want to address was mentioned by Alex Johnstone. We draw members' attention to the proposal that would allow countries that have adopted the historical model for the single farm payment to move towards flat-rate payment entitlements from 2010. Even if we do not move forward on that accelerated timescale, we need to think hard about the future of historical payments. When the next European budget has been agreed, we will be some 12 to 14 years beyond the reference period used as the basis for current single farm payments. Increasingly, we can expect questions to be asked about why the production levels of 2000 to 2002 should determine support payments both at present and in the future. However, if historical production levels are not to be used, what should be the basis for future payments? What should we be trying to achieve through single farm payments? Those questions will be addressed in the Scottish Government's consultation paper. Farmers and crofters manage nearly three quarters of Scotland's land. They produce the food that we take for granted and have also helped to create a variety of environmentally important habitats. The quality of our landscape not only stirs emotions but represents a real asset for Scotland. Our forthcoming consultation will provide an important means of helping us to ensure that Scotland's views are heard and that the outcome of the health check is appropriate for Scotland, our farmers and crofters, our environment and our national interest. I commend the motion to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament, noting the European Commission's legislative proposals for the health check of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) reform, welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to consult on these proposals, and on the longer-term implementation of CAP in Scotland, in order that agriculture remains a dynamic and competitive industry with farmers playing their full part in achieving the Scottish Government's purpose of sustainable economic  growth through food production and environmental management of our agricultural land.

Progress continues. The most recent figures from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, which were published on 11 February, show that Scotland recycled or composted more than 30 per cent of its waste. Earlier this month, I launched our new community recycling sector grant and support scheme. On Tuesday, I launched this year's home composting campaign for Scotland, and yesterday  I chaired the first meeting of our new zero waste think tank.

I recently visited Fife Council, on Tuesday. It has an ambitious programme to achieve zero waste to landfill by 2020, which is even more ambitious than the Scottish Government's proposals. The local authorities that I am speaking to are extremely confident that they will make huge progress as a result of their generous financial settlement. Of course, there will be outcome agreements with each local authority in Scotland, which will be published. It is important that the agreements are open and transparent, so that local electorates can hold their councils to account. The member has a wealth of experience and is aware that the financial situation is challenging. I recall that when she was a minister she presided over a 35 per cent underspend in the waste budget in Scotland, so I am confident that under this Administration our expenditure on tackling waste and promoting recycling will be greater than that of the previous Administration.

The Scottish Government acknowledges the valuable role of the community sector in tackling waste in Scotland. Indeed, we have allocated £2.5 million per year over the next three years from the centrally held zero waste fund to support community operations the length and breadth of Scotland. I have visited a number of initiatives in my constituency. Last Friday, I visited Lochpark Challenge, which recycles timber, and I have visited the Golspie initiative in the Highlands and Islands to which the member referred. It is not right that we micromanage the relationship between local authorities and community initiatives in Scotland, although we  support the work that is carried out. It is only right that when contracts come to an end, local authorities carry out reviews to ascertain whether the contracts provided value. However, local authorities that I have spoken to value the role of the community sectors that are dealing with waste management and recycling, and I hope that they continue to offer support.

I have offered to meet the local authorities concerned—East Lothian Council, West Lothian Council and Scottish Borders Council—in connection with their former regional waste proposals. The Government's recent announcement about the energy from waste policy, which dealt with the scale of energy from waste developments in an attempt to ensure that we are not building big white elephants that have to be fed with hundreds of thousands of tonnes of waste every year for the next 25 years or so, has been warmly welcomed by local authorities, community groups and everyone who is interested in protecting Scotland's environment. I would be surprised if the people of the Borders did not also welcome that approach.

Eighty per cent of the funding allocated to LEADER local action groups is formula based. The other 20 per cent is discretionary, and is allocated on the basis of the LAGs' local development strategies. For the 80 per cent tranche, the allocation is proportionate to an area's share of population on the one hand and surface area on the other. Population accounts for two-thirds of the allocation and surface area for one third, thereby advantaging the more sparsely populated areas of Scotland. The remaining 20 per cent tranche is based exclusively on an independent assessment of the bids received. The assessment criteria can be grouped under four headings: partnership; alignment with the Scottish rural development  programme and other strategies; leverage; and quality and realism.

Not yet, Presiding Officer— not for a few decades, anyway.

I understand why the Kelvin valley local action group is disappointed, given that it bid for a considerably greater sum than the £530,000 that it was awarded. The formula that was adopted is fair and equitable. We have to balance a number of bids that come in from across Scotland, and ensure that they meet the criteria that have been laid down by the Government, which largely reflect the criteria from previous programmes. I hope that those programmes whose bids were successful—even if they did not receive as much as they would have liked—will make a great contribution to bottom-up rural development, which is the purpose of the LEADER programme. If there are any specific issues in relation to how Kelvin valley's award was decided and calculated, I would be happy to receive a letter from the member and to reply to it with further details.

It is a pity that the member did not notice the press release that was issued a month or two ago, which was widely covered in  the agricultural press and gave an update on the situation. The review group is up and running and is carrying out good work. In a few months' time, we will know the outcome of its investigation into the appeals procedure in Scotland, which has caused widespread concern in our agriculture community. Many complex and difficult issues, including legal issues, need to be addressed. I assure the member that, after many years of complaints about the system, there is now a Government that is reviewing it.

Yes, I would. Other funding streams may be available to that area that we can consider. If Jamie Hepburn or any other member wishes to contact me to put a case for a greater share of public funding to go to that area from existing funding schemes elsewhere, I would be happy to consider it.

In respect of the Scottish ewe scheme, £18.8 million was paid to approximately 11,600 producers on 10 December 2007. In addition, around £1.7 million was paid to producers under the sheep welfare scheme between October and December 2007. Both schemes are now closed. Although the bulk of the money that we announced on 24 October last year was directed towards the sheep sector, all livestock producers in Scotland will benefit from the £1 million that has been allocated to promote and enhance the resilience of the red meat sector. It is worth reiterating that we believe that moral responsibility for compensation rests with the United Kingdom Government.

The Scottish Government agrees entirely with the member's eloquently expressed sentiments. We continue to press the issue with the UK Government. We will not let the issue lie, and we continue to support in any way we can the efforts of Scotland's agricultural communities to secure the compensation from the UK Government that is rightly theirs. I reiterate—and I hope that all members agree—that the moral and political responsibility for the foot-and-mouth outbreak, which had such a damaging economic impact last year, lies with the UK Government. That Government should do the decent thing and provide the compensation that is due to Scotland.

One of my officials met Glasgow City Council on 29 February to discuss waste management and  recycling. I plan to visit Glasgow shortly and I will require to meet the council leadership.

I recognise the challenges that face Glasgow City Council, which is why I am keen to meet its leaders soon. The zero waste fund amounts to £154 million over the next three years. We are discussing with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities the best way to allocate £100 million of that to infrastructure projects, and Glasgow will be able to bid for part of that money once we have agreed a concordat with COSLA.

The sea has defined and shaped Scotland and sustained our communities and nation since time immemorial. Our relationship with the sea has helped to forge our nation's identity, our culture and our economy, and generations of Scots have, down the centuries, played a leading role in maritime history, trade and communications. Today, however, it is accepted that we need a new relationship with the sea. In the 21 st century, we accept that we cannot simply take from the sea or dump things into it without understanding the consequences for our marine environment and the need to safeguard precious resources for future generations. With the increasing and competing demands that are being made on our seas, it is time to modernise and streamline the management of our marine environment. Scotland has a unique coastal and marine environment, and the seas around us are essential to our wellbeing. The marine ecosystem stabilises temperature, absorbs CO 2 and is essential to life as we know it. The scale and importance of Scotland's marine area cannot be overstated. We have 10 per cent of Europe's coastline. If we measure Scotland's area out to the 12-nautical-mile limit of territorial waters, more than half of Scotland is water. About a fifth of Scotland's population live within 1km of the sea and the vast majority live within 10km. Scotland's seas are unique. Our seas are oceanic and deep, whereas those of the rest of the United Kingdom are enclosed and shallow. Our seas have a good or excellent environmental status, whereas those of the rest of the UK are compromised or severely degraded. Large areas of the Scottish coast are inaccessible, sparsely populated and underdeveloped, whereas the coasts of the rest of the UK are intensively developed, readily accessible and heavily populated. Our uniqueness can be illustrated by the impact of marine climate change. Warming has been faster in the English Channel than in Scottish waters. However, we still expect marine climate change to impact on some sectors, such as aquaculture, which is a predominantly Scottish industry. Our seas generally might be unique, but our important marine environment is spectacularly  unique. Our seas are among the most biologically productive in the world, containing over 40,000 species. They are among the richest in Europe for marine mammals. We have about 70 per cent of Europe's population of grey seals and about 35 per cent of the European Union's population of common seals. More than 20 species of whales, dolphins and porpoises can also be seen around the Scottish coastline, and the international importance of our seabird populations is well documented. It is no wonder that Scots feel an enormous responsibility towards our marine environment, which manifested itself during the recent furore over proposals for ship-to-ship oil transfer in the Forth. We are all aware of the current anxiety that is being caused by the proposal for oil exploration in the Moray Firth and its potential impact on the UK's most northerly dolphin population. Members will be aware that I have written to the UK Minister of State for Energy, requesting him to heed the concerns of Scottish Natural Heritage on that important issue. The community-driven Lamlash Bay initiative, which is establishing a marine reserve off Arran, further demonstrates the commitment of Scots to preserving their local marine environments. That grass-roots project is the first of its kind and it shows that, with hard work, it is possible to develop a regime for marine protected areas that minimises conflict and achieves a good outcome, not only for our marine environment but for all the communities that use our seas. The Government and the Parliament have a duty to recognise that, in 21 st century Scotland, the sea remains a hugely important natural resource, on which many communities, jobs and industries depend. The breadth of economic activity ranges from the domestic production of oil and gas to the smallest scale of enterprise, such as the dive-boat operators who exploit the wealth of Scotland's historical wrecks in Scapa Flow. Scottish ports handle 110 million tonnes of cargo and 10 million ferry passengers every year. As members are well aware, our fishing interest is considerable. The Scottish fishing zone is the largest of any EU nation. We catch just over 8 per cent of the total EU fish catch, which was worth more than £370 million last year. Aquaculture represents another vital industry to Scotland, producing around 150,000 tonnes of product annually, which is worth more than £280 million to the Scottish economy. Scotland's seas are central to the economic and environmental wellbeing of the Scottish nation. The Scottish Government and Parliament are determined to improve the stewardship of our seas to ensure that future generations continue to enjoy the benefits. That is why there is widespread  support for a marine bill for Scotland, the process for which is under way. As a minimum, the marine bill will need to transpose the EU marine strategy directive into domestic legislation. However, there is widespread support throughout our nation and throughout the Parliament for any new legislation to go much further: to provide for planning at both strategic and local levels; to provide a more focused conservation effort; and to simplify the regulatory system for the marine environment by taking a comprehensive look at all marine legislation. After all, more than 85 acts of Parliament and other laws emanating from Europe, London and here currently apply to our seas. On top of that, we have international obligations such as those that are highlighted in the Greens' amendment, which the Government will be accepting. The current management regime is not fit for purpose. It is cluttered, it is difficult to navigate and it is unlikely to cope with the increasing demands on our seas in the 21 st century. The marine bill will therefore place sustainable development at the centre of Scotland's strategy. A balance must be achieved between environmental protection and resource utilisation. Where activities are unduly damaging or the marine environment is particularly vulnerable, action and protection are vital. Marine planning that is based on an ecosystem approach is an essential tool to deliver sustainability in Scotland's seas. The planning system will be essential for improving our conservation effort and for protecting some areas of outstanding environmental importance. I will not shirk from what is required to deliver the protection that the world-class environment of our marine waters deserves. Scotland has already made a significant contribution to protecting its marine and coastal biodiversity. At present, Scotland has 49 special protection areas that have one or more species of seabird that qualify for protection. We also have 31 special areas of conservation for seals and bottle-nose dolphins, as well as important habitats such as reefs and lagoons. Further, our rich marine heritage is now fuelling growth in marine wildlife tourism. Our scientific advisers are developing advice on what additional areas may be needed to complete our contribution to the European network of Natura 2000 sites. Better management and protection of our ecosystem is essential if we are to ensure that the seas continue to deliver benefits for future generations of Scots. One benefit is fishing. Scotland is a proud and successful fishing nation, and many of our key stocks are being fished sustainably. That was confirmed at my meeting on Tuesday with EU fisheries commissioner Joe  Borg, who said that Scotland's fishermen are now viewed as being at the forefront of fisheries conservation in Europe, thanks to the many innovative measures that are being implemented in our waters. Our coastal waters and our inshore fishermen face some particular pressures. From the holiday maker to the commercial fisherman, people place many competing and quite often conflicting demands on Scotland's inshore fisheries and coastal environment. That is why we are piloting inshore fisheries groups and placing fishermen at the heart of the management process. Sea fishing remains at the forefront of our mind as we develop our policies on marine planning and marine conservation. Marine energy is a new benefit and an illustration of a new industry that will increasingly and necessarily make demands on our seas. Another technology with the potential to transform the way in which we generate power is carbon capture technology, which will help us to tackle climate change. Westminster's proposals for a UK marine bill have already been presented in the form of a white paper setting out plans for legislative reform. Given that I have just outlined the unique qualities of our own marine environment, it will come as no surprise that I have misgivings about the proposed UK approach. We have our own unique challenges and opportunities. Scottish waters are different. We are pressing the UK to respect subsidiarity and ensure that decisions are taken at the right levels and as close to home as possible. Everyone I have spoken to in Scotland believes that most decisions in the seas round Scotland that affect Scottish interests should be taken in Scotland, although our interface with the UK, the EU and the international community remains vital. That is why we will reiterate our support for Scotland's legislation to apply out to 200 miles from shore, rather than the artificial 12-mile boundary. Accordingly, we will accept the Liberal Democrat amendment. We will support our coastal communities, our industries, including our fishermen, environmental organisations and others by continuing to put that case to the UK Government. Parliament has the opportunity today to speak with one voice and to back Scotland's case. I will continue to work constructively with the UK Government to find a mutually beneficial way forward. However, I must say that I look forward to the day when then Opposition parties lodge amendments calling on the UK Government to work constructively with the Scottish Government. As members know, in January I launched the sustainable seas task force to examine how  smarter licensing, planning, protection and marine management can be achieved, and to prepare the way for our consultation paper on the bill. To date, the task force has shown that there is a remarkable degree of consensus on a range of issues. In particular, it has highlighted the lack of a consistent knowledge base in relation to what is on the sea bed and in our waters. I believe that now is the time for Scotland to manage our seas in a manner fit for the 21 st century. In January, I announced that I want 2008 to be a year-long celebration of Scotland's seas. A number of trail-blazing initiatives are already under way in Scotland's seas to protect our marine environment, and they will all ensure that our precious resources can be enjoyed today and by future generations. The jewel in the crown will be Scotland's first marine bill. I look forward to working with Scotland and all parties in this chamber to make it a reality. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to consult on proposals for the sustainable management of Scotland's seas and coast, including coherent framework measures for marine planning, conservation and sea fisheries, and believes that this will enhance Scotland's stewardship of the seas, support sustainable development and provide protection for the marine environment, so ensuring that future generations of Scots will be able to enjoy the many social, cultural and economic benefits that the seas deliver.

I agree with Sarah Boyack that the debate has been good. I might take issue with Nigel Don, who I think confused the High Street of Braemar with the Highland wildlife park at Kincraig, but I know where he was coming from. Out of self-interest, I will refer to upper Speyside. Residents of that area, which is in my constituency of Moray, might not feel lucky this week, after the United Kingdom Government's smash and grab on the local whisky sector, but my constituents there feel lucky to live in the midst of the spectacular landscape of Cairngorms national park. Last year, I went along to speak to the children of Glenlivet primary school. When I arrived at the school, which is adjacent to the cairn that marks the gateway to Cairngorms national park, I thought how lucky they are to go to school in such a spectacular location, surrounded by a rich cultural and natural heritage. As Rhoda Grant was, I was proud to be involved in the first debates on national parks back in 2000. Many members will feel their age today—that was eight years ago, and it is now five years since the parks got up and running. The creation of the national parks had cross-party support back then and we are delighted that such cross-party support for the review has been expressed today. In the previous parliamentary session, I was a member of the Environment and Rural Development Committee, which considered in 2007 John Swinney's member's bill to extend Cairngorms national park's southern boundary. Having heard the powerful case that was presented by John Swinney and—most of all—by communities, whose views the committee heard at first hand when it visited Blair Atholl, I know that the communities concerned will warmly welcome the Government's announcement that the park's southern boundary will be extended to include highland and eastern Perthshire. I say to John Swinney, "Your Government was listening to you." I pay tribute to all the campaigners and to Murdo Fraser, who mentioned his role in the campaign, although I was concerned that it has taken him several years to begin to warm to Michael Russell. Many of us warmed to him many years ago. As many members have said, Scotland's national parks use a distinctive model with four aims that combine conservation of natural and  cultural heritage with the sustainable use, enjoyment and development of an area's communities. National parks seek to conserve and enhance the qualities that make such places special, and offer significant benefits to the people of the whole of Scotland. Our national parks are helping to develop solutions for rural Scotland that improve people's lives. The people, places and special qualities of the national parks are strongly connected and interdependent. The landscapes, habitats and species that give the areas their special character are actively shaped by land management and the communities that live there. Both national parks have successfully developed with their partners the first Scottish national park plans, which will ensure that the public sector organisations that are involved in managing the areas are joined up and working towards a shared vision. To see the number of organisations that are involved, we have simply to look at the number of logos on the first page of the "Cairngorms National Park Plan 2007". It is great that all those organisations are working together. As Jamie Hepburn said and Sarah Boyack reiterated, John Muir—that great Scot—is looking down on us from above and will be proud of the Scottish Parliament's actions. As Jamie Hepburn and Sarah Boyack also said, if there were no Scottish Parliament, there would be no national parks in Scotland. Our national parks are important not only because of their iconic landscapes and outstanding environments, but because of their cultural heritage and qualities. Those reasons combine to give the national parks their distinctive identities. Scotland's national parks are not only places that are visited by millions of people each year: they are also living and working landscapes. Many members talked about the potential for more tourism and John Scott talked about the greater potential for eco-tourism. The national parks are huge assets that have helped to put Scotland on the international stage. Our parks put the best of Scotland on show and contribute to increasing tourism revenue through sustainable means, while helping to look after nationally and internationally important species and habitats. Cairngorms national park was the first national park in the UK to be accredited with the European charter for sustainable tourism and 50 businesses in Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park have achieved green tourism business scheme accreditation. As many members highlighted, many innovative approaches to rural development are being taken in our national parks, which provide the opportunity to develop and test out innovative solutions to rural issues.  As Jamie McGrigor highlighted, in Cairngorms national park, for example, the land based business training project, which has had wide acclaim, helps organise and fund many training courses for land-based businesses. In four years, more than 2,000 people from more than 200 businesses have been trained in a wide range of skills. As many members highlighted, excellent examples of bottom-up rural development exist in our national parks. Parliament acknowledges that the parks are playing that crucial role. In Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national park, the successful communities future programme has led to more than 18 communities forming their own community development trusts, through which local issues are being tackled to bring improvements to the people who live in those communities. A book has been published that sets out a step-by-step guide, so that communities throughout Scotland can learn from the excellent bottom-up approach that has been adopted in both national parks. Rob Gibson and a number of other members highlighted the point that rural housing is central to rural development in our national parks. It is important that we encourage our national parks to seek out innovative solutions to address the affordable housing crisis in rural Scotland, rather than criticise them for doing so. That is vital—their efforts run parallel to many of the initiatives that the Scottish Government is progressing to address the rural housing crisis. Michael Russell said in his opening speech—his remarks have been echoed by many members from all parties—that the enhancement and protection of local democracy is a paramount consideration of the forthcoming review. That will be the review's top priority. We all recognise that we have to protect local democracy and that, as Sarah Boyack highlighted, there has to be local buy-in for the work that is undertaken by national parks. Scotland's national parks are parks for all. They allow people from all over Scotland and further afield, and from all walks of life, to enjoy, learn and benefit from special areas. Over five years, 4,200 people have gained a John Muir award while getting active and learning more about the nature and wildness of the Cairngorms national park. Since their establishment in 2002 and 2003, both national parks have achieved a great deal, but there is more to be achieved. Even today, as Sarah Boyack said, Loch Lomond and the Trossachs National Park Authority won an award in the Scottish awards for quality planning for its work with the developer of the Carrick golf resort. That is another sign of excellence and I know that  the whole Parliament will want to congratulate the authority on winning that award this morning. The national park authorities have worked very hard since their establishment. They have led and enabled the action and partnerships that have been necessary to achieve the four statutory aims of the national parks. The authorities' role has been to facilitate and co-ordinate management of the national parks. However, as we all know, things do not stand still and reviewing after a reasonable time how things are working and identifying where improvements can be made is the natural course to take. We welcome the unanimous support for having the review now. As the Minister for Environment explained, now is the time to carry out the review of Scotland's national park authorities. Many of the specific issues that have been raised today will be taken into account by the review. I can only reiterate what Michael Russell said about the Lib Dem amendment: we cannot today pre-empt the review before it has even begun. It is illogical for many members of certain parties to say in Parliament today that they welcome the review, but then to give lots of reasons why there should not be change. That is why we will not support the Lib Dem amendment. I will highlight how, as many members have said, the national parks are contributing to Parliament's and the Government's green objectives in respect of microrenewables, sustainable housing and local food produce. Many innovative measures are being adopted by our national parks to help Scotland achieve our greener Scotland objective and to ensure that we live in a greener nation. Of course, the national parks are ideally placed to play that role, particularly in relation to protecting biodiversity and our magnificent landscape. However, we must not forget the people who live there. This issue is about landscapes and the environment, but it is also about living, working communities. That must be at the heart of our future strategy for our national parks in Scotland. In conclusion, we all agree that Scotland's national parks have been a big success, but we all agree that there is now a case for a review. We cannot be complacent: we have to look to the future, which is what the review is all about. I urge Parliament to support the Government's motion.

Does the member accept that it is not up to ministers in Edinburgh to decide where new national parks should be created; it is up to communities to bring their own ideas for the future to the Government?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Having just returned from Norway—that small, independent and prosperous nation—a couple of hours ago, I tell Parliament that this Government takes seriously the opportunity to learn from other nations. I was there to support our extremely valuable seafood sector, but used the opportunity to meet my Norwegian counterpart to discuss the many agendas that are common to our two north-western European nations. I am keen to return to Norway in the near future to learn more about Norway's successful rural policies and its rural development agenda. We have set time aside today for a short but important debate on the recent OECD review of rural policy in Scotland. As many members will be aware, representatives of the OECD visited Scotland in early 2007 and, after gathering evidence, took a few months to put together a report to assess and make recommendations on our rural policies. I do not doubt that all members agree that it is useful to compare and contrast Scotland with other countries and to have the insight of external specialists who can give us the benefit of their impartial views and advice. With a new Government in Scotland, the OECD report is timely and comes hot on the heels of reports into the future of our rural communities by the Carnegie Commission for Rural Community Development, which has issued its charter for rural communities, and the Scottish Consumer Council, which looked at rural advocacy. All three reports recognise that our rural communities are special places and all three give us plenty of food for thought. One million of us live in rural Scotland. We all agree that it has tremendous assets that are renowned worldwide—our countryside, wildlife, culture and above all, the energy, enthusiasm and commitment of the people who make rural Scotland a great place to live. We believe that the OECD report is a vote of confidence in the general direction of travel of the rural policies that have been adopted by the new Scottish Government. It is also a vote of confidence in the direction of travel that has been  taken since we won our own Parliament nine years ago. A great number of positives were identified by the OECD. For instance, people in rural Scotland believe that they have a better quality of life and live in safe neighbourhoods. In contrast to many OECD rural regions, the population in rural Scotland is on the increase, as opposed to the decrease that has been witnessed in many European countries. Our rural regions have the highest levels of tertiary education attainment of any of the OECD nations. The OECD visitors also commented favourably on the level of innovation in rural Scotland, both in terms of quantity and quality. As the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, I must be the first to ensure that we do not allow the good news to mask the considerable challenges that face many of our rural communities. For instance, the report states that accessible rural areas—those closest to our urban populations—have the highest incomes in Scotland. That is a healthy sign and it is good news, but the report also flags up the significant challenges that face our more remote communities. It states: "However, there is still a significant divide between remote and accessible rural areas with regions facing serious challenges in terms of ageing, outmigration, poor economic performance and access to modern services." The report comments that, in rural Scotland, employment is higher and unemployment is lower than in urban areas, but members will know from experience that many areas of Scotland suffer from low wages.

Jeremy Purvis raises an important issue for the south of Scotland. I was struck by how the OECD report alludes to some of the challenges that face the south of Scotland. That is why it is so important that we digest the assessment in the report. Members will be aware of the hidden rural poverty in many of the communities that we represent. Research is under way, in partnership with rural stakeholders, on many of the rural poverty indicators, so that we can measure rural poverty better. Therefore, although we can  celebrate the many positives that the report highlights, we in the Government and Parliament must never take our eyes off the significant challenges that many areas face. Last summer, Michael Russell and I travelled round many rural communities and have continued to do so. We listen closely to the concerns that are expressed to us when we visit rural communities and we learn from them. The Government has not only listened; it has responded with action to what we have heard in the past 10 months. In a mere 10 months, the Government has established a track record on dealing with many of the challenges that face rural Scotland. Our document "Firm Foundations: The Future of Housing in Scotland" has a strong rural dimension and covers tackling the affordable housing crisis that exists in many rural communities. We have given a commitment to publish a consultation document on the introduction of a legislative presumption against closure of rural schools, in recognition of the detrimental impact that it can have on rural development. We are cutting or abolishing business rates for small businesses the length and breadth of rural Scotland. As the Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change said during question time just before the debate, we are launching a pilot scheme for a road equivalent tariff to benefit the Western Isles, which will allow us to consider whether that is the way forward in helping to build our islands into mainstream Scotland through economic development. We have adopted ambitious renewable energy targets and given a commitment to develop a national food policy, which are two issues that the OECD identified as having big potential for rural areas in Scotland. I am sure that many members are struck, as I am, by the fact that the OECD identifies—with some alarm—that more than 100 agencies are involved in delivering rural development in Scotland. That vindicates strongly the Scottish Government's decision—which was made after the evidence for the report was gathered—to streamline the number of public organisations that operate in Scotland, to ensure that those that remain are much more effective and efficient, and to tackle bureaucracy and red tape. Too many communities and businesses in rural Scotland are hampered by the complexity of the cocktail of rural initiatives and agencies. As members well know, we are addressing that. Much of the commentary in the OECD report is thought provoking and deserves mature and considered debate in Parliament and its committees in the months ahead. For instance, the report questions the sector-by-sector approach to delivering rural policy and asks whether too much  emphasis is put on that, rather than on the alternatives. It also questions whether environmental expenditure as part of the Scottish rural development programme is likely to create jobs and economic growth—I am sure that many members disagree with that assertion. The report flags up the possibility of implementing rural development through a regional approach. It also addresses the enterprise agencies in Scotland, which we discussed through the intervention that I took earlier, and gives us food for thought on that.

I have already given way on the subject. Some crucial messages come out of the OECD report. First, as we all agree, rural Scotland is a diverse area. The needs of and solutions for the Western Isles are different from those in Galloway and the north-east of Scotland. Therefore, a one-size-fits-all approach to delivering rural development policy in Scotland is not appropriate. I hope that we can all agree that there must be more emphasis on our communities taking a bottom-up approach to rural development. We are pleased that that will be addressed, given that it fits well with the Scottish National Party Government's approach to rural development, which is about empowering rural communities. I hope that all members accept that since 1999 devolution has been good for consulting, given the extension of consultation of rural stakeholders when policy is developed. The OECD report addresses that issue. However, I hope that we all agree that we need to move on to the next stage and empower rural communities to take more control of their destinies, rather than just being consulted by central Government. The Scottish rural development programme reflects local priorities, as does the LEADER programme, which builds capacity in rural communities. Of course, the lottery has a role to play in that, too. At the village hall summit, I spoke to about 200 people who represent community councils, community associations and village hall committees in Scotland. Members of such organisations do sterling work and give up much of their free time to serve their communities. I was struck by the number of remarkable individuals that we have in rural communities in Scotland and by the number of inspirational community organisations, which have had take their destiny into their own hands in seeking outside finance and expert assistance so that they could provide what their communities required, whether it was a village hall or other facility. There are many skills  out there, and we must encourage those skills to be utilised for rural Scotland. The Government has announced that it will soon appoint a rural development council. The first task I will give the council will be to consider the findings and recommendations of the three reports that I mentioned, in particular the OECD report, and to work with the Government on the way forward. We are determined to take more action to ensure that sustainable economic growth benefits not just urban Scotland but the whole of Scotland. That is essential. Rural Scotland is a special place to live. If Parliament and the Government work with the voluntary, private and public sectors, rural Scotland can go from strength to strength. We congratulate the OECD for its report, which we welcome. I look forward to listening to members' speeches in the debate. I move, That the Parliament recognises the progress made in supporting rural development since the establishment of the Scottish Parliament; welcomes the analysis set out in the independent review of rural policy in Scotland by the OECD, and believes that this report and other reports on the future of rural Scotland published in recent months provide the opportunity to further develop rural policy to ensure that all our rural communities enjoy the economic, social and environmental benefits of sustainable economic growth and that they are empowered to greater influence their own destiny.

It is expected that recommendations for the first allocations of ERDF funding for 2007 to 2013 in lowland and upland Scotland, including for the rural development priority, will be made at the programme monitoring committee meeting on 19 March 2008.

I take on board the member's point. It is the case that, currently, only 10 of Scotland's 32 local authorities are eligible for funding under the rural development priority. However, although South Ayrshire is not one of the 10 qualifying councils, East Ayrshire qualifies for funding under all four priorities in the programme, not just the rural development priority, so at least part of the member's constituency is set to benefit. I will reflect on the member's comments, but as the programme runs from 2007 to 2013, time will tell how many applications have been made. We will have a better idea of the situation on 19 March.

Again, I take on board the member's points and will reflect on them. I am happy to write to him about the number of funding streams that apply to his constituency, given that only 10 of 32 local authorities qualify for ERDF under the rural development priority. I think that he will be reassured that, over coming years, significant funding streams will apply to his constituency.

In January, I launched a national discussion on food to help us develop a national food policy for Scotland that will boost jobs and business, help make food healthier and minimise environmental impacts across the food supply chain. I believe that our food policy will help to ensure that fresh, high-quality Scottish food is the first choice on everyone's menu in Scotland and beyond.

I thank Willie Coffey for his question and comments; he made a number of good comments. The Scottish Government has paid extremely close attention to the situation in relation to beef imports from Brazil. We have made known our strong views on the matter to the European authorities and the United Kingdom Government, and contributed, I hope, to the European Commission's decision to impose the ban a few weeks back. As the member said, it is absolutely essential that our primary producers and the agriculture  sector, including the livestock sector in particular, have a level playing field in Europe. Therefore, imports to Europe must meet the same high standards that our producers in Scotland have to meet. I join him in congratulating those who prosecuted the case in Europe on behalf of our livestock farmers in Scotland.

Family-owned farms in Scotland have a crucial role in delivering food for the nation and we are determined to support them so that they can continue to play that role. The member refers rightly to the current situation in which the costs of inputs, such as energy, fertiliser and, in the livestock sector, grain, are putting enormous pressure on parts of the agriculture sector in Scotland. However, at a time when the global trends are potential food shortages and rising food costs, food producers in Scotland have an opportunity to receive a greater return for the food that they produce. I hope that that will begin to happen. In recent days, the prices that farmers receive for their produce have increased. As the member says, it is important that the Scottish Government continues to support that.

Yes, we are considering ways of achieving that. The current debate on the national food policy is considering those issues. Only last Friday, I spoke to the annual NFU Scotland council meeting in Dunblane and discussed several of those issues with the industry. I assure the member that, as I am sure all members are aware, the debate on food security and food production in Scotland is now near the top of the political agenda, and we all want it to be there, because it is important. That debate touches on other debates in Scotland, such as that on how we use our land, to which the member referred. We need to consider whether land should be used for energy crops, forestry or  producing food. We must get the balance right to ensure that we act in the national interest.

The member's sunny disposition is always blinding, and I am delighted to answer his question. Access to healthier food at affordable prices for those living in deprived areas is a priority for the Scottish Government and has been highlighted in the discussion paper "Choosing the Right Ingredients". Some programmes are already making a difference—examples include the community food and health (Scotland) programme and the Scottish Grocers Federation's healthy living programme—but we will use the discussion to enable the development of closer links across the supply chain in a way that will benefit health outcomes. The discussion is of course on-going and everyone, including the member, is encouraged to have their say about food and health outcomes.

I agree that many such local projects play an invaluable role in promoting the healthy eating agenda. Phase 2 of the healthy living programme, which is run in conjunction with the Scottish Government and the Scottish Grocers Federation, has seen a 28 per cent increase in fruit and vegetable sales in participating stores, many of which are located in our more deprived communities. Local initiatives, to which the member referred, are playing a full role and are making their own submissions to the national discussion on food policy. We are keen to hear  their views on what role they have to play in the development of a national food policy for Scotland.

Nanette Milne raises an important issue. Many chefs who have commented on the food policy for Scotland have made those points—some of Scotland's celebrity chefs are keen that there is movement in that direction. I urge the member to submit her views to the national food policy discussion. She asks me what my opinion is, but the Scottish Government's opinions will reflect the submissions that we receive between now and late April as part of that discussion. The issues raised by Nanette Milne will be addressed in many debates and events around Scotland. We look forward to the outcome of the discussion.

No, we have not used that figure. Instead, we announced in our statement on 24 January that by 2025 no more than a quarter of municipal waste, at both national and regional levels, should be treated by energy-from-waste processes. We also made it clear that energy-from-waste plants should have high levels of efficiency.

As the member is aware, I am limited in what I can say about applications that may come before ministers in due course. Enforcement of the Government's policy, which I outlined in my statement to Parliament, will be reflected in the national planning framework, in both the regional and national caps. The Government's policy will also be reflected in the Scottish Environment Protection Agency's guidelines and in its consideration of the permits that it is asked to issue to such plants. I think that that is very clear. On regional caps, although no decision has been made yet, if the former area waste group that included East Lothian Council, the City of Edinburgh Council, Midlothian Council, West Lothian Council and Scottish Borders Council were to be one of the regions where the 25 per cent cap was applied, the cap would equate to 145,000 tonnes of municipal waste, which is much less than some of the figures that are being quoted as arising from a particular project. The direction of the Government's policy is clear. It has wide support throughout Scotland, and I hope that it also has the member's support.

The Scottish Government takes a close interest in the role that could be played by anaerobic digestion. As part of the budget, we announced the zero waste fund, which amounts to £154 million over three years. Of that sum, £100 million will be earmarked for infrastructure for the purposes of recycling and treating waste and so on, which potentially includes anaerobic digestion. We are setting up a short-life working group with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to ensure that we have discussions with local authorities about how the £100 million will be distributed, but there is lots of potential that it will include projects such as those mentioned by the member.

In our parliamentary statement on waste policy on 24 January, we indicated that we would establish a short-life working group with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to discuss the allocation, over three years, of more than £100 million from the zero waste fund. COSLA has provided us with the names of its representatives for the group and the first meeting will take place shortly.

I see no reason why they could not be covered by the £100 million, but that would, of course, be subject to the discussions with COSLA. The views of local authorities, including those of Glasgow City Council, will be taken into account in those discussions. As I said, the £100 million is for infrastructure, and we look forward to the outcome of our discussions with local authorities.

I am grateful for this opportunity to outline the Government's policies for a zero waste Scotland. In 1999, the Scottish people voted for a Parliament that would improve our environment, and we all agree that Scotland must play its full part in being a good guardian of the planet and an exemplar for the rest of the world. Managing waste as a resource is an important part of achieving sustainable economic growth and a greener Scotland. Prior to the Scottish Parliament, Scotland's record was dreadful. We were a throwaway society, burying our waste out of sight and out of mind and recycling barely 5 per cent of household waste. As everyone acknowledges, we need to move away from landfill. Although landfills may be better run and regulated than ever before and although we are capturing more methane from them and using it to produce energy, they remain a waste of valuable resources. They emit the powerful greenhouse gas methane, which is more than 20 times more potent than carbon dioxide, and if we are to play our part in the fight against climate change, we must significantly reduce our greenhouse gas emissions. With cross-party support, the previous Administration produced the 2003 national waste plan, which has helped us to make progress. The best illustration of that progress can be found in the latest figures, which show that local authorities are now recycling or composting almost 30 per cent of household waste. I pay tribute to everyone involved in that achievement: the previous Administration, local authorities, the private and community sectors and bodies such as Waste Aware Scotland, Remade Scotland and the Waste and Resources Action Programme. Of course, we could not have made progress without the commitment of householders the length and breadth of Scotland. However, we must do more to help to address climate change; to ensure that waste is treated as a resource; and to meet European Union targets on reducing the amount of biodegradable municipal waste that is sent to landfill, not only because it is the right thing to do but because we  need to avoid massive EU fines. Moreover, we desperately need to focus more and have better information on the commercial and industrial sectors that account for most of Scotland's waste. Progress has continued under the new Government. For example, we are funding trials in Perth and Kinross, East Renfrewshire and elsewhere to collect food waste from households for composting, and more councils—such as, most recently, Moray—are looking to introduce plastic-bottle recycling at recycling centres. Some members in the chamber attended our very successful waste summit, which brought together experts from Scotland and overseas to discuss how we might move towards zero waste. Following that summit and the Government's consideration of waste policy, I can now outline the broad principles of how we will move towards zero waste in Scotland. Zero waste is about the zero misuse of resources and about building on the waste hierarchy of reduce, reuse and recycle. As we all agree, moving towards zero waste is a long journey, but it is a journey that we must start now. Of course, waste prevention is the key. The previous Administration produced an action plan that covered work on the design and lifespan of products, producer responsibility, food waste, packaging, bags, reuse, unwanted mail and home and community composting. We will continue work in those areas. Indeed, we will do more. We will retain the challenging target of stopping growth in municipal waste by 2010. Of course, our ambition and focus as individuals and as a nation must be to reduce the amount of waste that we produce in the first place. We will consult on a range of potential legislative measures, including waste prevention, to implement zero waste. For example, we could introduce site waste management plans to measure and minimise waste from construction sites. We could also follow the example set by California, where recent legislation requires retailers over a certain size to provide recycling facilities for plastic bags. Initially, we will continue to provide £2.5 million a year over the next three years to support community recycling. Those funds will be focused on waste prevention and on innovation in recycling and support for social entrepreneurs. That money is in addition to our continuing financial support for the Community Recycling Network for Scotland. Let me be clear that waste prevention and reducing the amount of waste that is produced will be challenging. It requires changes in behaviour to reduce unnecessary consumption, and everyone has to accept their responsibility. Many householders throughout Scotland are doing their  bit, but we need everyone in Scotland to play a part. So too must retailers, who play a key role in respect of matters such as packaging, the marketing of products, food waste and specifying the design of products and packaging. Reducing the unnecessary use of plastic bags is crucial. After Mike Pringle introduced his member's bill on plastic bags in the previous session of Parliament, the then Scottish Executive became a party to a voluntary agreement with the retailers to reduce the environmental impact of bags. The first substantive results are expected at the end of next month. Clearly, the Scottish Government will want to see significant progress. If that is not forthcoming, it is likely that we will have to take further action. As well as waste prevention, the Government is committed to a substantial expansion of recycling and composting. Recycling has major environmental benefits, including helping to tackle climate change. The environmental benefits of recycling are shown in a report that the Scottish Environment Protection Agency is publishing today on the environmental impact of a number of waste management options, including high recycling. There are economic opportunities in recycling. At the waste summit, David Dougherty, a recycling adviser from the United States, said that one of the ways to increase recycling rates was to treat recycling as a business. We will encourage that approach. There are greater job opportunities in collection, sorting and reprocessing—turning recycled materials into products. Scotland has companies that turn recycled glass into bottles and companies that recycle wood. We have a growing composting industry and a thriving community recycling sector, which often provides job and training opportunities for disadvantaged people. The Sustainable Development Commission Scotland stated in a report, which was commissioned by this Government and published last month, that Scotland has seen impressive increases in recycling but that there is room to set more ambitious targets. The Government agrees. For a start, we need to be recycling or composting 40 per cent of municipal waste by 2010 to meet the first EU landfill directive target. The most impressive municipal waste recycling rates that are being achieved in Europe are 60 to 70 per cent, which is double Scotland's current rate. I am today publishing an analysis by the Government of recycling policies in other countries. Scotland must aspire to be up there with the best, so I propose a recycling and composting target for municipal waste of a minimum of 50 per cent by 2013, to help us to achieve our challenging landfill targets that year; a target of a minimum of 60 per cent by 2020, compared with  the existing target of 55 per cent; and a further aspirational target of a minimum of 70 per cent by 2025. I think that, cross-party, we all accept that that is challenging. Scotland has rural areas and cities with flats and tenements. It is harder to recycle in blocks of flats, but the challenge can be met through the provision of sufficient on-street recycling facilities and advice to householders. We will continue our work on the provision of information and advice to the public on recycling and we will help to develop markets for recycled materials. For example, we will need to focus on markets for mixed plastics. This Government will engage further with retailers on the types of materials that they use for their products and packaging, to ensure that more of those materials can be recycled. We will retain the existing landfill allowance scheme for local government in the meantime to ensure a continued focus on landfill reduction. However, we have discussed the issue with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities and have agreed to bring forward an early review of the scheme. I have outlined our ambitions on recycling. The Government also wishes to be ambitious about reducing the amount of waste that is landfilled. Our aim is to reduce the amount of municipal waste that is landfilled to a maximum of 5 per cent by 2025. If we wish to reduce landfill to 5 per cent by 2025 and increase recycling to 70 per cent over the same period, we need a solution for the remaining 25 per cent of municipal waste. There are several forms of waste treatment. I want to make a number of points clear today. As I have said, the Government's priorities are to reduce the amount of waste that is produced, encourage reuse, and recycle as much as possible. We support technologies such as anaerobic digestion, which can be used to treat food waste and produce biogas. Some exciting initiatives to generate energy from biogas are proposed. The Government fully supports that innovative and effective technology. In our approach to waste, we are determined to remain mindful of the wider climate change challenge and our energy policies. That is why the Government is opposed to large, inefficient energy-from-waste plants. Such plants could easily become white elephants and drain public funds. They require excessive transportation of waste and could crowd out recycling and waste prevention. However, many countries use energy from waste to move away from landfill. It forms part of their work to obtain value from a resource, rather than simply putting waste straight into landfill. In a  report last month, the Sustainable Development Commission said: "energy from waste may be, in the right circumstances, compatible with sustainable development and a move towards a Zero Waste society". Of all the options that SEPA considered, the option of 70 per cent recycling with 25 per cent energy from waste performed the best in relation to climate change and non-renewable resource depletion. At the waste summit, we had a vigorous debate on the issue. A very significant majority thought that energy from waste should have a limited role but that energy from waste is preferable to landfill. Used efficiently, energy from waste can make a contribution to our energy needs and reduce our reliance on fossil fuels. Of course, heat can be also be recovered. In considering waste policy, we have taken account of key areas such as the proximity principle, energy policy and climate change. For example, our wood fuel task force, which has just reported, shows that waste wood can make a useful contribution to energy by way of biowaste. We are proposing that, by 2025, no more than a quarter of municipal waste, which amounts to less than 4 per cent of all Scotland's waste, should be treated by energy-from-waste plants. Of course, the cap of one quarter will include anaerobic digestion, if it is used to treat mixed waste. In the indicative allocations that the previous Administration awarded to local authorities last year, it envisaged that in some areas, such as the Lothians and Lanarkshire, around 40 per cent of municipal waste would be incinerated. The Lothians suggested that around 50 per cent of their waste could be incinerated. The Government rejects that option. We will include our 25 per cent limit for energy-from-waste technologies in the national planning framework, at both national and regional level. We will also lay down conditions to reflect our view that energy-from-waste plants must deliver a high level of efficiency through combined heat and power or district heating. To back up that preference, SEPA is strengthening its existing guidelines on thermal treatment of waste to require applicants for environmental permits to show how they intend to achieve the necessary levels of efficiency. As I mentioned, the previous Administration provided indicative allocations to groups of local authorities for residual waste infrastructure, most likely to be energy-from-waste plants. We cannot support the building of large energy-from-waste plants that have low efficiency levels, which could prove a disincentive to recycling and require major public funding over a very long period. We will not support such large-scale waste incineration in any part of the country. We are therefore revoking the  indicative allocations and my officials are writing to local authorities accordingly. I will, of course, offer to meet authorities in due course. The Scottish Government has a zero waste fund of over £150 million over the next three years. We intend to allocate over £100 million of that fund to support recycling and composting infrastructure, including anaerobic-digestion plants that treat source-segregated organic waste, high-efficiency energy-from-waste plants, and other facilities that divert waste from landfill and have high environmental performance. I will establish a short-life working group with COSLA to discuss how best to use those resources. The remainder of the zero waste fund will be used to support work on markets for recycled products, waste education and awareness, community recycling, waste prevention and commercial and industrial waste. Most of Scotland's waste is commercial and industrial. Unfortunately, of course, the main lever in this regard, the landfill tax, is for the time being reserved. The Scottish Government has powers in areas such as placing a ban on sending material to landfill, producer responsibility, and advice to business on waste prevention, through bodies such as Envirowise. I propose to increase the focus on commercial and industrial waste. In particular, I will consult on new targets to reduce the amount of commercial waste that goes to landfill. That consultation forms part of a review of the national waste plan that I am announcing today. I have outlined a number of new proposed targets and policies. It is right that those policies and targets should be included in a revised plan, which will go through a strategic environmental assessment and will be subject to wide-ranging consultation. We will set up a zero waste think-tank to bring together leading authorities from Scotland and overseas who can advise on the best way of achieving zero waste. I hope that parliamentary colleagues will get involved in the debate on reviewing the national waste plan so that we can achieve cross-party consensus on this long journey. Effective waste regulation is vital for protecting the environment and human and animal health. Equally, we must ensure that waste regulation is proportionate, so that we do not impose unnecessary burdens on business. Along with SEPA, I am publishing our response to the consultation on better waste regulation that was carried out last year. The response outlines future steps that are designed to achieve the more effective regulation of waste.  This statement has outlined a new direction for waste policy in Scotland. At the heart of our policy proposals are commitments to move Scotland towards zero waste and to make Scotland greener. I commend the statement to Parliament.

We have a budget of £154 million for the zero waste fund over the next three years. We have transferred £65 million a year to local government to meet existing commitments under the waste obligation. Over and above that, grant aid has gone to local authorities to deal with waste collection.  I want to give the Labour Party and Sarah Boyack an assurance. The previous Administration massively underspent the waste budget, but this Government will spend its waste budget in order to achieve its ambitious targets. I am therefore very confident that, over the next three-year spending period, more money will be invested in reducing Scotland's waste mountain than was spent in the previous three-year period. I tried to make it clear in my statement that we are laying down strict criteria on energy from waste. I hope that that will have cross-party support; it will certainly have lots of support outside the chamber and across Scotland. As I have said, we propose a cap on the proportion of waste that can go to energy-from-waste plants. Also, if proposals for such plants are forthcoming, the plants will have to be highly efficient and will have to take the proximity principle into account. Ultimately, this will come down to the guidelines from SEPA. We will discuss the issue with SEPA, which will have to issue the permits to any proposed facility in any part of the country. We will wish to discuss the proposed regional cap with local authorities. It is not a local authority cap but a regional cap to ensure that no one part of Scotland is diverting massive amounts of waste to energy-from-waste plants as opposed to concentrating on recycling and other forms of reducing waste in the first place. I hope that that gives some comfort to the member. I genuinely believe that there is consensus throughout Scotland. Our proposals have the support of the Sustainable Development Commission and SEPA. The overwhelming majority of the more than 120 experts from Scotland's local authorities and organisations who attended our waste summit were in favour of a limited role for energy from waste, provided that the energy plants are highly efficient. Combined heat and power was the favoured option. I hope that we can maintain the cross-party consensus.

On the issue of compensation for local authorities where the indicative allocations have been withdrawn, as I said in my statement I have offered meetings to the local authorities concerned. I have met them previously, a few months ago, when they outlined their views on the matter, and I am willing to meet them again to discuss their response to today's statement. As I rose to my feet, they were being informed of our decision. I will discuss all elements of that decision with those local authorities. I make no commitments at present on where those conversations might go. We have laid down ambitious targets for the future. I think that all parties in the Parliament accept that the 2013 target on reducing landfill, to help Scotland to avoid fines, is a tough target to meet. It has been a tough target to meet for some time, and not simply since the new Government came to office. All parties should recognise that, and some in particular should take responsibility as well. However, I am confident that we will meet the 2013 target. A lot of effort has been put into that. The fact that we have achieved the 30 per cent target for the recycling of household waste early is a good sign that local authorities in Scotland, with the support of all parties in the Parliament and of course the Government, are up for this. I am confident that we will meet the 2013 target. It will be challenging, but we will do it. I have not had the opportunity to visit the facility in Dumfries and Galloway. I look forward to learning more about it in the near future.

Mike Rumbles at least began graciously. However, I will address his more negative points. Had the previous Administration—if I recall correctly, there was a Liberal Democrat Minister for Environment and Rural Development—not delayed some important decisions over the past few years by dilly-dallying over them, to the dissatisfaction of local authorities, we might be even further forward today. It is important to make that point. On the budget, I reiterate what I said in response to Sarah Boyack. I am completely confident, and there is plenty of evidence to show, that the expenditure on tackling waste over the next three-year spending period will be considerably more—millions of pounds more—than during the previous three-year spending period. On the money that is transferred to local authorities, it is sad that the member does not trust his or other local authorities to spend the required investment on tackling Scotland's waste problems. I know that they are up for it. Many of them are achieving their targets early, and we should commend them for that. Because of the generosity of the local government settlement, local authorities have the flexibility to add to their waste budgets if they wish. Perhaps some of them will do so. We will discuss the outcome agreements with local authorities in the coming weeks, reflecting the SNP Government's new waste policy.

I thank Roseanna Cunningham for her question. As I indicated in my statement, we take the role of the retailers in achieving our targets extremely seriously. The difficulty with persuading many supermarkets to reduce needless packaging and to put greater demands on their suppliers to reduce such packaging has been raised in Parliament many times over the past few years. The legislation on excessive packaging is reserved to the United Kingdom Government. I am disturbed to learn that there have been only four prosecutions under that legislation in the UK since the provisions came into effect. There have been no prosecutions in Scotland, and I am keen to investigate why that is the case. Perhaps we should be doing more to send a stronger message to retailers. We are building up a positive relationship with supermarkets, and their waste strategies and policies will be at the top of the agenda as we meet their representatives over the next few weeks and months. The packaging issue will also be central to the work of the zero waste think-tank that we are setting up.

I thank the member for his many questions; I will try to address at least two or three of them. First, West Dunbartonshire Council must be extremely upset with former Labour ministers if it did not get a fair share of the strategic waste fund when they were in power. We will certainly do our best to ensure that local authorities that bring forward constructive proposals get their fair share of the Government's funding. The announcements that I have made today will be reflected in the single outcome agreements that will be negotiated with each local authority in Scotland. The member should be more optimistic. As we speak, East Renfrewshire is bringing forward new proposals, as are Moray Council and Perth and Kinross Council. Clearly, over the past couple of weeks, a number of local authorities have shown that they have a great deal of confidence that, in the years ahead, they will have the resources to spend on new, innovative measures to tackle Scotland's waste issue. He should have more trust in the ability of our councils to take their environmental obligations seriously, because they are doing so. On the position of each local authority, we have to maintain a degree of flexibility, as the situation differs in each part of the country. Various authorities have generated different policies over the past few years and that must be taken into account. We must maintain a degree of flexibility in relation to the proposals that local authorities ask Government to support.

Of course I believe that if this Parliament had greater options to work up eco-taxes—if we had the fiscal powers to do so—that would greatly help our environmental and waste strategies. Unfortunately, for the time being, we do not have those powers. Perhaps that is something that the other parties in this chamber  can reflect on. The environment is far more important than the unionist parties' obsession with the constitution. Control of the landfill tax should be devolved to this Parliament. It is estimated that, of the roughly £1 billion that the United Kingdom raises from landfill tax, perhaps—I say "perhaps" because Scottish figures are not published—up to £100 million is generated in Scotland. That will not be reflected in our Barnett consequentials, so we are paying a net fund to the UK Treasury under the landfill tax. Of course, we should be able to retain that resource in Scotland in order to invest it in the future of Scotland's environment.

I understand that the amount of waste that is sent to landfill in New Zealand is enormous. New Zealand might not have energy-to-waste plants, but it sends an amount of waste to landfill that is way beyond the amount that we hope to send to landfill. If Robin Harper is suggesting that it is better for climate change targets and for the environment to lock up valuable natural resources in big black holes in the ground, rather than getting some benefit from them, I have to disagree with him. We agree on many things in connection with environmental policy, but, it seems, not that. The independent and impartial Scottish Environment Protection Agency, the independent and impartial Sustainable Development Commission and those who attended the waste summit also agree with me that, rather than putting our rubbish into big black holes around Scotland in the coming decades, we should find better uses for it that can help us to achieve our climate change targets and other benefits at the same time. We are laying down a maximum cap on waste that is diverted to energy-from-waste plants, should that be the option favoured by a number of local authorities in Scotland. The choice, however, remains with the local authorities—they might wish to exceed our recycling targets, for example. It is a cap, so it is a maximum figure. If new technologies  come forward—I do not know, and no member in the chamber knows, what will happen in the next few years—they will perhaps offer local authorities more options. We are simply laying down the criteria that we think are appropriate for Scotland should any local authorities wish to go for energy from waste.

Rob Gibson reminds us of the valuable contribution that social enterprises and the community sector make to our local communities, not just through recycling and achieving environmental objectives, but by giving employment to those who are perhaps more disadvantaged and by creating jobs generally. As I mentioned in my statement, Mr Dougherty, who came over from the United States and spoke at our waste summit, pointed out that there are huge job creation opportunities. We have to encourage a climate in which businesses are starting up, whether they are social enterprises or businesses in the private and profit-making sector, and becoming self-funding in the future. The waste policy that we are announcing today is a huge business opportunity, and many businesses have taken advantage of previous waste policies in previous years. I certainly agree that there are huge job creation opportunities, and I know that the local authorities that fund many of the social enterprises take into account factors other than the volume of waste that those organisations deal with, such as the social and economic benefits that flow from them.

As the member helpfully points out, I am limited in what I can say with regard to live applications. Speaking generally,  however, I repeat the point that I made to Sarah Boyack, which is that the permits that are required by such plants in Scotland have to be issued by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. Our forthcoming discussions with the agency, which will take place in the coming weeks, will reflect what I have announced in today's statement, with regard to the Government's policies. Therefore, SEPA can take those factors into account.

I reiterate that the 2013 target is challenging, but I am confident that, with local authorities, central Government and everyone else who is involved working together, we can achieve it. It is absolutely vital that we do so; otherwise, as the member rightly points out, there will be fines. The landfill allowance scheme that currently applies to local authorities can lead to penalties for local authorities if they fail to meet their obligations to divert from landfill. We work on a case-by-case basis, so it is difficult for me to project what the situation may be post-2013 if local authorities fail to meet their targets. Our energies, investment, resources and time must be devoted to ensuring that we meet the 2013 target.

Shirley-Anne Somerville mentioned her constituents' views. We should  remember that today's announcement is all about our constituents' views and what is best for their futures and for Scotland's environmental future. I believe that her constituents will welcome today's statement and that people in Scotland will support energy-from-waste plants, if they are highly efficient, if the proximity principle is taken into account and if the schemes do not divert our attention from recycling and reducing the amount of waste that we produce in the first place. That is the purpose of today's announcement. We should remember that the technologies that are available today, which I outlined in my statement, are a million miles ahead of the technologies that were deployed in some of our communities in the past few decades. It is worth pointing out to the Parliament and to Scotland that many clean and environmentally friendly plants with high environmental performance are being built throughout the world. I hope that some of those technologies will play a role in Scotland if that is deemed appropriate.

When I have spoken to local authorities in Scotland, they have often expressed to me their unhappiness with the two-year or so delay that they experienced under the previous Administration. That happened simply because the decisions and policies are challenging. I accept that we have now been in power for eight months, during which we have had to work with Scotland to put together and develop the zero waste strategy that we want to be implemented throughout the country. The decisions that are involved are difficult ones that will affect future generations in Scotland and the financial ability of future Parliaments to fund multimillion pound schemes. Should certain large-scale projects go ahead, they will drain our public finances and will have to be fed with hundreds of  thousands of tonnes of waste, year in, year out for decades, which is not in the interests of finances in Scotland or the environment. On the Lanarkshire proposals, any such proposals in Scotland that we are asked to fund must fit with the Scottish Government's aspirations and objectives.

Nanette Milne raises a couple of interesting points. On encouraging better design, one of the reports that we are publishing today might not go into detail, but it is designed to ensure that we learn from what is happening elsewhere in the world. It is important that our zero waste think-tank, which we will set up shortly, and other initiatives reflect on the fantastic things that are happening in the country, such as those that Nanette Milne mentioned, or elsewhere in the world. We will certainly do all we can to learn from them. On creating new markets, we are keen to involve more organisations in the private sector and our economic agencies in our zero waste strategy. We want to get all those people around the same table and to view the strategy as a massive economic opportunity as well as an environmental opportunity. One of the purposes of today's statement is to point us in that direction. Our consultation on the national waste plan for Scotland will give us another opportunity to consider the issues.

Cathy Peattie agrees with virtually everything that I said in my previous answers and my statement. Any proposal from a local authority has to go through a considerable consultation process. Such consultations are local processes and only in certain circumstances would central Government get involved. I mentioned SEPA's role in determining the efficiency of a proposed scheme and the other factors that would apply. The schemes that meet our criteria have to be highly efficient. The 60 per cent energy efficiency figure that the Sustainable Development Commission gave is a good one. I hope that the planning process will take such figures into account.

I pay tribute to Mike Pringle's contribution to the debate about the role of plastic bags and their environmental impact. I was an Opposition member on the former Environment and Rural Development Committee, which considered his member's bill on plastic bags. That was at times quite a tortuous experience, but it was educational too. His efforts and those of others have had an impact on public consciousness and on the policies of many of our supermarkets, for which they should take great credit. As I said in my statement, we will pay close attention to the first substantive report on the  progress of the voluntary agreement between central Government and retailers, which is due to be published at the end of next month. We will reflect on that and in doing so will have correspondence or, no doubt, meetings with Mike Pringle to gauge his views on what progress has been made and on the way forward.

I thank Peter Peacock for his questions and for mentioning Moray. I assure him that I hope that my constituents—the people of Moray—will warmly welcome today's statement. Moray Council and Highland Council will have the opportunity to produce their own proposals, which I hope will reflect the Government's policy intentions, which were outlined in the statement. We will take it from there in deciding what support might be available from central Government. As for future legislation, all that I can say is that, if the SNP Government has its way, there will be no council tax in Scotland.

I announced during my visit to Lamlash on Monday that I will consult on the proposals that were put forward by the Lamlash bay working group. The proposals are for a community marine conservation area made up of a marine reserve and a fisheries management zone.

I congratulate the member on the timing of his oral question. The Government has lent its support to the proposals that will now be consulted on formally. We shall pay close attention to the progress made in the years ahead to see what lessons can be learned. I pay tribute to the community that worked up the proposals over many years; the Community of Arran Seabed Trust; the local fishing community; and the rest of the local community. The initiative creates the potential for many benefits for the marine environment and for fishing management, and wider benefits for those in the community of Arran, whom I thank for their hospitality during my visit.

I assure the member that the Scottish Government takes seriously the contribution of sea angling, which will, of course, continue in the proposed fisheries management zone in Lamlash bay. I remind the member that the Government has commissioned research into the economic contribution to Scotland of sea angling and we look forward to the outcome of that study.

The Scottish Government will work with the farming community in the NVZs on how to implement most effectively the new measures in the nitrates action programme. The proposed Scotland rural development programme includes support for the capital costs of manure or slurry storage, which are expected to be the largest costs for farmers in the NVZs.

The Presiding Officer will be paying close attention to what I say, given his constituency interest in NVZs. The Government's strategy is, of course, to ensure that no farmer goes out of business as a result of the nitrates action programme, which is meant to help farmers work with the Government and others to minimise the impact of nitrates on our water environments. Many farmers in Scotland take their responsibility in that respect very seriously. We have given a commitment on a joint implementation group involving the Government and the agricultural sector that will help the potential 300 farmers out of 12,000 farmers who  live in NVZ areas in Scotland to make the transition to abiding by the nitrates action programme, and financial assistance will be available within the rural development programme to help towards meeting the costs of slurry storage. We want to prioritise access to that fund for farmers in the NVZ areas that are most affected. We have secured a transitional period of three years. I hope that, over that time, we will be able to work closely with Scotland's farmers and help them to adapt to the new circumstances.

The Scottish Government does not intend to change how low-level radioactive waste from the civil nuclear industry is managed. We continue to support what is said in the document "Policy for the Long Term Management of Solid Low Level Radioactive Waste in the United Kingdom", which was published in March 2007. The Scottish Government's policy on higher-activity waste in Scotland was announced on 25 June 2007. It supports long-term, near-surface, near-site storage facilities to ensure that such waste, which will remain active for thousands of years, is retrievable and subject to monitoring. The policy will also minimise the need for transportation over long distances.

I reiterate that the Scottish Government has signed up to the policy that was adopted by the previous Labour/Lib Dem Administration, which was finalised—as I said in my initial answer—in March 2007. That policy recognises the fact that there is a need for at least one extra facility in the south of Scotland for the storage of low-level waste. The national framework refers to that. The consultation on the potential location and nature of such a facility will take place in the coming years. At that point, the member will have the opportunity to make submissions to the consultation, as will everyone else.

I encourage all local authorities, including Glasgow City Council, to take vigorous and effective action against fly-tipping.

I know that Bashir Ahmad takes a close interest in the issue, which is a serious social nuisance for many people as well as an environmental blight especially for people in Glasgow, as he says. I join him in congratulating clean up Glasgow on its campaign. I wish it every success in the future if there is a continuing need for that campaign. The Government takes the matter seriously, and I would be happy for my officials to speak to Glasgow City Council to get an update on the latest situation in the city. Fly-tipping is an offence under the Environmental Protection Act 1990 and anyone who is caught fly-tipping could face a fine of up to £40,000, six months in prison, or both. For more minor offences, the police have the power to enforce fixed-penalty notices of £50. I would be interested to know the extent to which the law is being enforced in Glasgow in that respect. I will find out that information from my officials and get back to the member.

As in the rest of Scotland, our priority for farmers in Mid Scotland and Fife is to promote a sustainable and prosperous agricultural industry. We need to see food production earning a fair return for farmers and processing businesses, and we must maximise the other environmental and social benefits that flow from agricultural activity.

The member raises very important issues from the point of view of farmers and, indeed, of the nation. Of course, fair trade should not just be international; it is important to have a fair trade relationship between our farmers and the retailers here in Scotland.  I assure the member that we are keen to involve the retailers, the primary producers—the farmers—and the rest of the supply chain in the development of our national food policy for Scotland. We want everyone around the table to talk to each other to ensure that we have a more transparent, open and productive relationship. I remind the member that the Government has gone to great lengths to build a new dialogue with the supermarkets to ensure that they are well aware of opinion in Scotland on a range of matters, including the role of our primary producers and the need to protect the future of food production and to ensure a fair deal. I believe that we are making progress in that regard, and I have invited the chief executives of United Kingdom supermarkets to a supermarket summit that will be held in the coming months. I hope that they can accept that invitation. Not only would the summit, if it happened, be a first, but it would be very productive for the supermarkets, the primary producers and the many other agendas that would be discussed at it.

Funding for village halls will be available through the new £1.6 billion Scotland rural development programme for 2007 to 2013, once it has gained approval from the European Commission of course. In the meantime, we will commission research in partnership with the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations to establish the current state of rural community facilities in general.

As the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, I am paying close attention to the issue, which of course comes under the remit of the Cabinet Secretary for Finance and Sustainable Growth. The Government is considering the responses to the review of the charging regime, including on the element that will apply to small organisations, including village halls.

I assure Christine Grahame that the Scottish Government is working flat out to  sustain our rural communities. The SCVO is holding a conference in February on the future of village halls. I am looking forward to hearing the outcome of the deliberations then to see how the Government can further help to sustain our rural communities generally and village halls and facilities in particular.

I told Parliament last November when we debated our approach to the autumn negotiations that Scotland can rest assured that the Government will always treat our fishing industry as a major priority. With a Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment who represents the fishing communities of Moray and with a First Minister who has represented Scotland's most fishing-dependent constituency for more than 20 years, no one should have been too surprised. When the Government came to power, I made it clear that we would bring a fresh approach for Scotland's fishing industry and fishing communities. So today, as evidence of that fresh approach and of the importance that we attach to fisheries, I make this statement on the outcome of the autumn fisheries negotiations, which are crucial to the livelihoods of Scotland's fishing communities and to Scotland's marine environment. I understand that today is the first time a statement has been made to Parliament after the negotiations, giving members an account of what has been agreed. I will range more widely than the December fisheries council—important though it is—and I will report on the other negotiations that take place over the autumn, such as the important negotiations between the European Union and Norway, in which so many key decisions are taken. Before I go any further, however, I pay tribute to the work of the Scottish fishing industry and to the environmental non-governmental organisations that contribute so much to the development of our fisheries policies—I am grateful for the wise counsel that they gave me last autumn. Above all, I am grateful to them for the deep sense of responsibility that they have demonstrated and continue to demonstrate. I also pay tribute to the Government officials who fought hard to secure a good deal for Scotland. That sense of co-operation and partnership has allowed Scotland to grasp the initiative to deliver groundbreaking policy developments that are profoundly influencing the debate, both within the United Kingdom and Europe. Those policy developments position us in a leadership role for the future. I am proud to report that team Scotland came together  magnificently this autumn, and I am grateful to all those who played a part. In the November debate on sea fisheries, I said that the Government was going into the autumn negotiations with two overarching aims. The first was to secure rewards for Scotland's fishermen, who have made many sacrifices and gone to great effort to conserve our fish stocks, and to secure fishing opportunities that would ensure the fleet's continuing profitability and allow it to plan for the future. The second aim was to secure a deal that promotes sustainability. I am pleased to report to Parliament today that we achieved both those aims. I will outline the key achievement of the autumn negotiations, which is the historic agreement that provides unprecedented flexibility to run our own days-at-sea scheme. That is a landmark breakthrough. It is the first time since the inception of the common fisheries policy in 1983 that such significant management control has been passed back to Scotland from Brussels. We are already beginning to loosen the shackles of the CFP. One day soon we hope to shake ourselves free. The new agreement allows us to establish what we will call the conservation credits scheme. It will give us the flexibility to reward our fishermen with additional days at sea if they can demonstrate that they are signed up to initiatives that will have a positive impact on conservation of fragile fish stocks. The measures could include trialling and implementing new gear types to increase selectivity and to reduce the level of discards, as well as building on the innovative real-time closure schemes on which Scotland led last autumn. In that connection, I am delighted to report today that the first real-time closure of a cod spawning ground was triggered at the weekend. That provides concrete evidence of the commitment Scotland is showing to protecting North Sea cod stocks. We are working closely with the industry and fishermen on this and we greatly value their co-operation. A successful scheme in Scotland will lead to its being adopted more widely throughout Europe. The deal that was secured at the December fisheries council also included significant progress with respect to headline cuts in days at sea. For the west coast nephrops fleet, the cut was reduced from 25 per cent to 10 per cent, while white-fish fleets can avoid cuts altogether by operating under our existing system of automatic licence suspensions and/or in the west of Scotland, by fishing beyond the French line. The significant point is that headline cuts in days at sea will no longer be relevant to Scotland because our conservation credit scheme allows us to work altogether outside the Brussels-centred days-at-sea regime.  The concept of the conservation credit scheme was made in, and delivered by, Scotland. It was a hard-won achievement at the December council. It allows us for the first time to work together to devise and implement measures that are tailored to the particular circumstances that are encountered day to day by our fishermen at sea. Members should not just take my word for it; here are some comments from others. Mike Park of the Scottish White Fish Producers Association said: "This deal marks a new era for Scots fishermen. This is our opportunity to show that we are a responsible industry that wants to build a sustainable future for our seas." Bertie Armstrong of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation said: "One of our key aims was for Scotland to gain influence over the administration of a separate effort management scheme that will provide flexibility. This has been achieved and will hopefully pave the way for more effective fisheries management in the future." WWF Scotland spoke of "The greater power Scotland will have over fisheries management". However, I make it clear that the deal that we secured from Brussels, and our conservation credits scheme, will be no easy option. The deal brings with it real responsibility—Scotland must now deliver and show the rest of Europe that we can achieve and maintain sustainable stocks—not least, of course, sustainable North Sea cod stocks. Many people will be watching how we deliver with those new freedoms. We must grasp the opportunity to demonstrate that our way is better. The issue is not about increasing effort regardless of the impact on fish stocks; it is about showing that we can reduce mortality and discards through other means than Brussels's tired old recipe of blunt cuts in days at sea. Scotland has won the major prize of securing more responsibility for what we do, but with that prize comes the responsibility to show that we are up to the challenge. I am confident that we will rise to that challenge and I believe that, together, we can deliver. To make progress on the initiative, we have already convened a steering group that comprises representatives of the industry and of conservation and scientific interests. We are making good progress towards having the first stages of the scheme up and running by 1 February. The full involvement of the steering group and the fleet is absolutely essential to ensuring that we design a scheme that is good for conservation of our fish stocks, good for our marine environment and good for the fishing industry. The autumn negotiations covered many more issues than just days at sea. The total allowable  catches and quotas are vital to Scotland's fishing communities and to the sustainability of our stocks. I was particularly pleased with the increase of 11 per cent in the North Sea cod quota in the EU-Norway negotiations, which is the first increase in the quota for 10 years and is long-awaited tangible evidence that the tide is finally beginning to turn. On other important North Sea stocks, I was pleased with the 8 per cent increase in the megrim TAC, given the high value of that stock and its importance to the Shetland fleet. On North Sea whiting, the original scientific advice was for an 80 per cent cut in the TAC, so the final 17 per cent cut represents a significant achievement and secures important fishing opportunities for the white-fish sector. We also successfully resisted a European Commission attempt to push through draconian mandatory gear measures that could have had a serious impact on our nephrops fleet. On North Sea haddock, the combination of invoking Hague preferences and securing a substantial quota transfer from Norway meant that we restricted the reduction in the quota to 13 per cent. Even with that cut, the haddock quota for 2008 will be greater than the amount that was landed in 2007. On North Sea herring, the scientific advice was particularly gloomy and painful decisions had to be taken. I was disappointed that the unanimous recommendation of the pelagic regional advisory council for a 35 per cent cut in the quota was not implemented in the EU-Norway negotiations, although we must keep a sense of perspective because mackerel still dominates pelagic returns and the 18 per cent increase in the Atlanto-Scandian herring quota is to be warmly welcomed. However, I acknowledge that the pelagic sector faces real challenges in 2008. I plan to meet the sector shortly to discuss how we can offer support to the industry which, through the employment that it provides in the processing sector, is the life-blood of many of our fishing communities. A key priority for 2008 is to prepare for the vital pelagic negotiations in the year ahead, particularly on blue whiting and on improving the way in which our fishermen can contribute their knowledge to the scientific assessment of the mackerel stock. Turning to the west coast, although disappointing decisions were made on cod and haddock at the December council, the decision to increase by 50 per cent the 2008 TAC for Rockall haddock was particularly satisfactory, as that is a vital safety-valve stock that offers some of the sector significant fishing opportunities away from the North Sea. There was also a satisfactory decision on west of Scotland herring. The scientific advice was for a 56 per cent cut in the TAC, which would have had a serious impact on parts of the fleet, but a 20 per cent cut was achieved thanks to the hard work of the Scottish Pelagic Fishermen's  Association, which led on the development of a revised management plan for the stock. Without the work of the association, we simply would not have achieved that satisfactory outcome, so I pay tribute to its leadership. I also pay tribute to what I earlier called team Scotland. The meeting was my first December council as Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, even if it was anything but my first attendance at the council. The hard-won successes were a direct result of the industry and Government working together as team Scotland. I also had a good working relationship with my ministerial colleagues in Belfast, Cardiff and London, both in the run-up to the council and in Brussels itself. We worked very well together at times and, although Scotland was never afraid to take a robust stance where required, it was a co-operative relationship. I believe that this Government's pressure on London to improve the decision-making processes paid dividends. We had crisper, more transparent processes in place as a result of this Government's pressure. Quite simply, we got a better deal as a result. However, it is also clear that the wider negotiating situation needs to be improved. The Brussels negotiating processes are tortuous: 25 Commission officials manning seven computers in a small room working through the night to come up with compromises on 136 fishery stocks for a score of member states is no way to do business and no way to decide the future of our fishing communities. The December council brought home to me the strength of our argument that we should lead the negotiations. It brought home to me how much more we could achieve if we had greater influence. Nations that are the same size as Scotland—or which are even smaller, such as Estonia and Malta—sit either side of the United Kingdom in the Council chamber. When I see them taking their place at the top table of European negotiations, I fail to understand why anyone could say that Scotland, with so much of Europe's fishing waters off its shores, should be denied its rightful place alongside them. Turning to the year ahead, it is clear that 2008 will be a year of many challenges. Tough decisions lie ahead of us in driving down cod mortality, in reducing discard rates, in implementing our conservation credits scheme and in rising to the challenges that face the pelagic sector. However, I am confident that the co-operation and mutual respect between the Government and fisheries stakeholders that has developed in recent months will continue to bear fruit. I am confident that we in Scotland can rise to the challenges that we face and that we will  continue to demonstrate leadership for the whole of Europe. However, let us be clear that 2008 also brings many opportunities. Next week sees the inaugural meeting of the Scottish fisheries council, which will set the framework within which the sector as a whole can advise me on the best way forward for Scotland. Next week also sees the first meeting of the sustainable seas task force, which will consider marine legislation that can balance the competing interests of users and protect our seas at the same time. In 2008, I will take forward our vital work on the future of fisheries management. That work will explore more democratic and suitable alternatives to the discredited common fisheries policy. Also in 2008, we must build on our new approach to inshore management. Inshore fisheries group pilots will be established and new strategies will be developed to deliver more benefit from non-quota stocks such as crabs, lobsters or scallops. I also want to see licensing and quota management arrangements in place that are properly tailored to Scotland's circumstances, explicitly recognising the importance of fishing to Scotland while providing stability for the future. Almost 50 per cent of Scotland's key fisheries by value are embarking on the journey towards Marine Stewardship Council accreditation—the vital gold standard. I look forward to great progress being made this year towards that important goal. I am sure that we all recognise that sustainability is increasingly the key to the marketplace. We must grasp the challenges as they arise in 2008 and we must continue to demonstrate leadership to the rest of Europe. Members may remember that the debate on sea fisheries in November was attended by 10 aspiring skippers who are currently training at Banff and Buchan College in Fraserburgh. I had the pleasure of meeting them after the debate and was delighted to hear of their enthusiasm for the sector and their optimism for the future. I said in the debate that the Government has the responsibility of ensuring that those young men can join a sector that has a bright future. I believe that the hard-won deals that were secured in the autumn negotiations will help to lay the foundations for a brighter future for those young aspiring skippers, for our industry, and for our marine environment. Scotland today stands at the forefront of a new era of sustainable fisheries. It is clear to me that Scotland punches above its weight and that we should take pride in the leadership that has been shown by the Scottish fleet. We are surrounded by a priceless marine environment that gives us some of the most productive fishing waters in the world. Our waters produce a primary product that is in world-wide demand, of which we should be  proud. Yesterday, I launched the discussion period for the first-ever national food policy for Scotland. Our fishing communities will play a central role in that. I firmly believe that the Scottish industry is sailing into calmer waters after too many years of pain and instability, even if there always remains a sense that, as long as we are in the CFP, we have to prepare for new storms around the corner. However, I am confident that we can deliver the greater certainty, optimism and hope that we promised our fishing communities. In the course of 2008, we will demonstrate to the rest of Europe not only that Scotland is committed to the goal of sustainable, profitable and well-managed fisheries but that Scotland now has the leadership and the ability finally to make that goal a reality.

One of the reasons why the doom and gloom in Scotland's fishing industry is evaporating is because we now have an SNP Government that is fighting for our fishing communities with lots of results, as we saw just a few weeks ago in Brussels.  I say to Sarah Boyack that it is pretty churlish when the Scottish Government comes back with a deal that has been described as "historic" by all commentators and all sections of the industry—

I have lots of quotes that I could give Mike Rumbles that prove the comments are not from the Scottish Government. As spokesperson for the Opposition, he gives zero credit to the Scottish Government and all the credit elsewhere, which is rather churlish. Sarah Boyack asks how Scotland would have done better had we taken the lead in the negotiations or had an independent seat at the top table. At the moment, we are in the ludicrous situation in which we have 70 per cent of the UK's fishing industry, yet our efforts to influence the decisions that affect thousands of livelihoods in Scotland are compromised and diluted by going to the UK Government then to Europe among representatives of 27 member states who sit around the table. Surely if we had our own voice or could lead for the UK in the negotiations, we would be in a more powerful position to have much better, longer-term policies for Scotland's fishing communities. I do not see Malta or Estonia, who sit alongside the UK, asking to leave the table because they feel that they have no influence. Sarah Boyack started her question by welcoming in part what I said in my statement. We have a genuine opportunity to take a fresh approach to how we manage our stocks in Scottish waters. That is largely down to the fact that we have wrested some control back from Brussels in respect of how we manage our fishing efforts. I genuinely hope that we can all work together; there is a huge opportunity to do so. Fishermen from every sector in every part of the country are up for that. It is absolutely vital that political parties and members of Parliament all stand together and help those fishermen to move towards prosperity.

I thank John Scott for his opening remarks and his questions. We introduced the first real-time closure because I wanted to ensure that I gave a positive response to his parliamentary question. As the scientific advice that we have received—and that we have to take into account—makes clear, many challenges face us on the west coast of Scotland. We have secured an increase in the Rockall haddock quota, which should help much of the west coast fleet. As for the nephrops—or langoustines, as we are calling them now—on which the west coast fleet is also heavily dependent, that quota was not up for negotiation in the 2007 council, but is up for negotiation this year. That stock is being fished sustainably and is continuing to sustain the west coast fleet. On encouraging the use of selective gear, that issue is linked directly to the conservation credits scheme. Fleets that adopt new technical measures such as better selective gear, or which sign up to real-time closures, will get more days at sea. Of course, different fleets in different parts of Scotland will find different measures more relevant and therefore more attractive to their fishery, but that will be a key approach to encouraging the use of selective gear. As for finding an alternative to the CFP, we will this year appoint an expert panel to find the best fisheries management regime for Scotland's unique fishing stocks and marine environments and our fishing communities. Instead of taking the top-down approach that has been taken by Brussels for the past 30 years, we will work back from there. That is what should be done and that is how we will take this matter forward.

It strikes me that there is an enormous gulf between Mike Rumbles and the real world outside the Parliament. No doubt he spent a lot of time on his way to the chamber thinking about how he could attack the Government over the outcome of the December negotiations. Even his own local newspaper, The Press and Journal , which he often quotes in the chamber, said in an editorial that was published following the outcome of the talks: "For the first time in recent memory, everybody seemed reasonably happy in general, apart from a few issues here and there." Moreover, an editorial in The Herald said: "For once the European fisheries negotiations have produced a genuine breakthrough." That view is reflected throughout the industry and among all the commentators in Scotland. [ Interruption. ]

As I said, there is a huge gulf between Mike Rumbles and the real world. If I had totally ignored the scientific advice with regard to the stocks on which quotas were cut—cuts, I should add, that were often supported by the industry—Mike Rumbles would have been the first member to attack us in the chamber for doing so. I ask him to put the deal into perspective. We have secured an increase in many vital stocks. For example, we have secured an 11 per cent increase in North Sea cod—the first increase in a decade. I am confident that we met many of our priorities in the December talks. Perhaps if we had our own voice and more influence, we would achieve all of them.

Nigel Don's question goes to the heart of many of the issues that were discussed at the December council. We now have the ability to manage fishing effort in our own waters and to adapt it to Scottish circumstances. Key to that will be the conservation credit scheme, which represents the way forward on reducing cod mortality and increasing cod stocks. Cod stocks are going in the right direction and if some of the measures that we are implementing now had been put in place in Scotland's waters a decade ago, they would be in an even better state. [ Interruption. ]

The real-time closures will be aimed largely at protecting juvenile cod stocks in cod spawning grounds. Those new and innovative measures were not promoted by previous Scottish Administrations or by the UK Government. The initiatives that this Government is promoting will bear fruit.

That is a good question. We must balance the benefits or otherwise of permanently closing areas against the use of technical measures, seasonal closures and so on. Deciding which measure to use is an important fisheries management dilemma. In the review of fisheries management in Scotland's waters, we are looking at the success or otherwise of all such measures, so the windsock closure will be considered as part of that process. I am happy to correspond with the member on that point.

I hope that the 50 per cent increase in the Rockall haddock TAC will offset some of the more painful cuts that had to be imposed on the fishing of other stocks as a result of scientific evidence. That increase is important, because it should help to provide a reasonable income for the crews of vessels that would otherwise stand to lose income. As Alasdair Allan says, the most important fishery on the west coast and in his constituency is the nephrops and shellfish fishery. The science on the nephrops stock will be reviewed in the run-up to this year's negotiations. If we are to support the nephrops fleet, it is vital that we have accurate science that allows us to make our case and to ensure that the sustainable fishing of that stock and the good volume of quota that Scotland has for it continue from 2008 into 2009. We produce world-class food in Scotland and our langoustines, which command a premium in international markets, are near the top of the list of our products. That will be taken into account as part of Scotland's first national food policy.

Thankfully, given the vital role that they play in the member's constituency and elsewhere in Scotland, fish processors have benefited from the increase in fish prices over the past year or two. Although that is helping the viability of many fish processors, the cuts mean that they will face some challenges. I am thankful for the increase in the Rockall haddock quota and for the fact that the mackerel quota, which represents the vast majority of the pelagic quota, received only a 9 per cent cut—that is within the existing management plan—and I hope that the supply of fish landed in Scotland, as opposed to imported from elsewhere, will continue to flow to fish processors. On the common fisheries policy, Scotland has major fishing interests. If we had more control over  the ability of our fishermen to fish waters sustainably and over the overall activity that takes place, our fishermen would have a more sustainable fishery. We will work tooth and nail in the current regime to get the best possible deal for Scotland and to do what we can to protect thousands of jobs.

The issue is important to the Clyde fishermen and to the west coast of Scotland. We devoted a lot of time and effort to negotiating with the European Commission to get the error—as we see it—on the 28 days rectified. The initial indication was that Commission officials acknowledged that perhaps there had been an error, but unfortunately at the December council officials did a volte face and said that there had been no error and that there was justification for the situation continuing. I will be happy to write to the member to follow up those details. We were disappointed by that approach. Of course, given the number of negotiations that took place during the December council, the Commission refused to dwell on the issue for any length of time. We will continue to revisit the issue. The situation does not look particularly hopeful at this stage, but I hope that the flexibility that we have in relation to the days-at-sea regime in Scotland will enable us to offset potential loss for the fishermen concerned.

My understanding is that there is no threat to the Solway fishery, but I will come back to the member with more detail on that. On fisheries-dependent area status for the member's communities, as I said last week during question time, I am conscious of the importance of fishing to a number of communities in the south of Scotland. We are taking that into account. We will shortly issue a draft European fisheries fund programme. The member and everyone else will have an opportunity to respond—on that point or on others—to the consultation that will take place before we issue the final programme, which will set out fisheries-dependent area status for communities, by the end of the year.

I assure Robin Harper that sustainability will be at the heart of our fishing strategy in Scotland. I hope that I have given lots of evidence not only today but previously why that is the case. I cannot give him information at the moment on the number of observers that we will deploy in 2008 because this is only 16 January and the talks on the new deal concluded only two or three weeks ago. We are digesting the outcome and plotting with our steering group how we  should implement the conservation credits scheme and how it should be monitored, verified and so on. I know that he takes a keen interest in the observers issue and I will certainly keep him up to date. It was a successful initiative in 2007, so I see no reason why we should not continue it in 2008. On assistance for selective gear, I am keen that we should find ways in which we can assist the fleet to adopt new selective gear and use technical measures. I hope that that will be possible with existing funds. We will look for routes to provide that assistance. I am keen that Scotland should lead the whole of Europe in the new technical measures that we put in place, including selective gear.

The Scottish sea fisheries council meets for the first time next week, and the convention on the future of Scotland's fishing communities will meet in two or three months' time. We feel that the community dimension of fisheries policy in Scotland needs more attention. I am sure that the Parliament agrees that fisheries policy is about not simply TACs and quotas but the impact that it has on real, living, working communities on our shores. That is why it is important to recognise the community impact, as well as the cultural and social impacts, of decisions that are taken in Brussels. The purpose of the convention on the future of Scotland's fishing communities is to bring together local authority representatives with organisations around Scotland that might not be directly related to fisheries management issues but which have a clear interest in the future of our fishing communities.

I hope that the deal has a positive impact on the under-10m sector, as well as on the rest of the industry. We will announce the next tranche of inshore fisheries groups in the next few weeks, and we announced three prior to the new year. The success or otherwise of the inshore fisheries groups will have a bearing on the  success of the under-10m sector, to which we are keen to give more of a say. We want to involve it in all kinds of conservation schemes, as well as letting it have a say on local fisheries management. There is a bright future for the under-10m sector in Scotland, but it has to be carefully managed. We look forward to negotiating with the sector in the weeks and months ahead.

On the latter point, I assure Tavish Scott that the industry is at the heart of deciding the rationale for how the real-time closures are operated. We have to remember that as things stand that is a voluntary initiative. If our fishermen wish to get extra days at sea through the conservation credits scheme, they have to sign up to taking part in such initiatives. If they do not take part in such initiatives, they do not get any more days at sea—it is as simple as that. I totally agree with Tavish Scott on the economic benefit of our new regime for the fleet in Scotland. Many fishermen have said to me that they are not happy with the idea of having to lease days to go to sea when those days are allocated elsewhere and are not being used. I am sure that Tavish Scott has heard that complaint many times in his constituency. We hope that the new regime will offset some of the economic costs involved. If the fishermen sign up to certain schemes, they will get extra days. We hope that that will, in some cases, remove the need for fishermen to lease days elsewhere and that it will save them considerable sums of money.

I thank Ian McKee for raising the issue. Many members across the parties take a close interest in that horrific issue, which represents a waste of valuable fish stocks and of a valuable economic resource. The EU is consulting on a discards reduction plan, and Scotland will have her say in that. Our contribution will comprise many of the initiatives that we have discussed today—the measures that  we want to implement in Scottish waters to reduce discards and, at the same time, protect juvenile stocks from being caught. There is a lot happening in that regard. The steering group has been set up and will, we hope, come up with new ideas on how to reduce discards in Scottish waters. We will also ensure that Scotland's specific circumstances are taken into account in the EU consultation. We have a mixed fishery in Scottish waters and it might not be as simple as some people think to reduce discards. It could, in some cases, mean simply that no fish are caught. We must be careful about how we approach that matter, and we must take those factors into account.

I had hoped that Karen Gillon would give us some credit for the outcome in December. Her point is important, but I must be up front with her and say that I have not had time to digest the committee's views on the use of the budget for such measures. However, I am open to such suggestions. I will not give a commitment on exactly where funding support for new technical measures in Scottish waters will come from, but if we are to pilot some of the new measures in Scottish waters, we must work closely with the industry to ensure that that happens, and I have an open mind as to how we can do that.

The Scottish Government attaches great importance to safeguarding the interests of the Berwickshire fishing communities and all fishing communities in Scotland. In particular, it secured long-term fishing opportunities for the Berwickshire catching sector at last month's important European fisheries council in Brussels. On 3 December, I announced that the south-east of Scotland will be an early pilot area for an inshore fisheries group. In the near future, I will consult on the Scottish Government's proposals for aid to the fishing  industry in Scotland through the European fisheries fund along with formal consultation on the draft United Kingdom operational programme. Later this month, I will convene the Scottish fisheries council as a successor to the sea fisheries advisory group initiative to secure the long-term future of the fishing industry in Berwickshire and throughout Scotland.

The member has made many representations to me on the issue, as have others from the south of Scotland. The draft operational programme will be published for consultation in the next month or two, with a view to implementing the final programme before the end of 2008. Once that consultation document is published, the member and any others with interests will be able to make submissions. We are finalising the details of that document.

I acknowledge that the member has also made many strong representations on the issue to me. I assure him that, to ensure that expenditure of the fisheries fund reflects local priorities, we will establish local committees to administer it.

Scottish Government officials have held internal discussions about secondary legislation that is to be made under the Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Act 2006. Officials have also held discussions with the Scottish Society for the  Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and other animal welfare organisations.

I know that the member takes an intense interest in animal welfare and that all members recognise that addressing the issue of abandoned or lost dogs is important. Secondary legislation could be introduced to require dogs to be microchipped under the 2006 act, but such secondary legislation is not planned. No legislation requires dogs to be microchipped, but the Control of Dogs Order 1992 requires every dog in a public area to wear attached to its collar an identity disc that gives the name and address of its owner. If we introduced the secondary legislation that the member describes, a range of factors would have to be taken into account. If she wishes to write to me to put her case, I will consider the issues.

I have a question on public opinion. According to Wendy Alexander's speech, the constitutional commission could be set up and report in a matter of months. If Annabel Goldie's view is that the people of Scotland should not thereafter be asked for their view via a referendum, what should happen to the report's conclusions?

That is not bad.

I can reassure the member that we are pursuing the matter. Indeed, I will meet the Danish Government on Monday, when I hope to obtain its support for voluntary real-time closures, which are having a positive impact.

I thank the member for his vindication of the positive difference that the SNP Government has made since it came to power. On the issue of leading for the UK at the EU negotiations, the distinction that I was drawing in the statement that he quoted was that officially leading the UK negotiation team involves not only sitting at the top table but having access to and leadership of the UK negotiating machinery, which is important because a lot of work is done behind the scenes.

I am delighted to open this important debate on this year's vital fisheries negotiations. Suffice it to say that with a First Minister who for more than 20 years has represented Scotland's most fishing-dependent constituency and a Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment who represents Moray fishing communities, Scotland can rest assured that this Government will always treat our fishing industry as a priority. I am sure that the whole chamber attaches great value to our fishing industry. It is certainly valued by the people of Scotland, as demonstrated by the success of the television series "The Trawlermen". In its focus on Jimmy Buchan of the Amity, his crew and the crews of the other vessels that featured, all of whom illustrated the qualities of this unique industry, the series brought home to all of us the harsh conditions at sea. Today's debate gives us an important opportunity to reflect on the fact that over the past year many men have made the ultimate sacrifice to bring fish to our tables and to follow a way of life that is in their blood. I am aware of the pain our fleet has borne over the past few years. People still remember decommissioning, when the bells tolled for 165 Scottish white-fish vessels. However, it is time to steer our industry into calmer waters. Our fishing communities and seafood sector continue to play a central role in our nation, in our culture and heritage, in our economy, in our environment and in our health. Fishermen, the associated processing sectors, the chandlers, the engineers, the painters and the other small businesses that congregate around our harbours are the lifeblood of communities all along our coast. The industry is a key part not only of our maritime history but of Scotland's future, and achieving sustainable fisheries in Scotland's waters will help to preserve the birthright of our  fishing communities and provide opportunities for future generations of fishermen. I am delighted that the next generation of fishermen is represented in the gallery for at least part of this morning's debate by 10 aspiring skippers from all over Scotland who are currently training at Banff and Buchan College. They have met the First Minister this morning and I look forward to meeting them later on. It is our responsibility to ensure that these young men join a sector with a bright future. Scotland is surrounded by some of the most productive fishing waters in the world; moreover, as the increase in prices in recent years has demonstrated, it produces a product that is in world-wide demand. This Government will help the sector to make the very most of that future by, among many things, replacing year-to-year crisis management with long-term planning; prioritising the needs of fishing communities from Stornoway to Shetland and from Peterhead to Pittenweem—I must not, of course, miss out Mallaig, given that Fergus Ewing, our fishing champion, is sitting next to me; protecting Scottish quota as the birthright of those communities and especially for new entrants; and safeguarding Scotland's priceless marine environment for this and future generations.

I share the member's concerns about the EU's deliberations on state aid in relation to Shetland. One of our priorities will be to pursue a level playing field throughout the EU. We will support dynamic local initiatives in the inshore waters of the west coast and beyond; tirelessly promote Scotland's key food sectors, including fishing; and, crucially, secure the best possible outcome from the annual international negotiations. The Government is putting enormous energy into those negotiations. In our approach over the coming weeks, we will have two overarching aims, the first of which is to secure not just a fair and just deal for Scottish fisheries, but fishing opportunities that will ensure the fleet's continuing profitability and allow it to plan for the future. Our second aim is to secure a deal that promotes sustainability.  Scotland today stands at the forefront of a new era of sustainable fisheries, and we should take pride in the leadership that is being shown by the Scottish fleet. Members should not only take my word for it; they might well have seen recent headlines in The Scotsman that hailed our fishermen as "the greenest in Europe". That is another sign of Scotland's progress. This year, Scottish fishermen introduced a European first with their voluntary real-time closures to protect young cod. Many other member states and the Commission have shown interest in following our lead. Although tackling discards in mixed fisheries like ours is a huge challenge, schemes such as voluntary real-time closure and the use of innovative new gears show that our industry is leading the way in finding solutions. In that task, they are working with Scotland's world-class scientists. We share the view that is expressed in the Labour amendment on the importance of that dialogue, which is why we have invested in an enhanced partnership between the industry and science. I am delighted to inform colleagues of another important development. The Scottish North Sea haddock and langoustine fleets will shortly apply for Marine Stewardship Council certification as sustainable fisheries, joining the pelagic fleet and the Clyde, Torridon and Stornoway langoustine fisheries, all of which are at various stages of that journey. That means that with regard to our top three commercial stocks—mackerel, langoustine and haddock—about half of the total Scottish fleet will be committed to ensuring that its product is, as consumers demand, not only top quality but truly sustainable. I believe that such a move might well be unprecedented in the world and illustrates our fishermen's commitment to sustainability. Over the coming weeks, I will continue to fight for a deal that recognises and rewards that commitment. On the specifics of the negotiations, we have already made progress towards meeting many of our aims. The 9 per cent cut that was agreed on mackerel not only respected the mackerel management plan but, given the strong international demand for that high-quality product, maximised opportunities for our fleet with minimal impact on income. Haddock is in good biological shape and we will want to respect the current management plan that has, up to now, allowed us to make the most of the 1999 year class. To give stability to a notoriously volatile fishery, we will press hard for banking and borrowing provisions to ensure that skippers have more flexibility in managing their quota in future years. The good state of Rockall haddock and new evidence of the abundance of North Sea megrim mean that there are real prospects of increases in  the quotas for those stocks. As for west of Scotland herring, we will argue strongly that, although the stock appears to be in decline, the recommended cut has more to do with artificial trigger points than with scientific need. Of course, much of the attention will focus on cod. I am sure that we have all been encouraged by the scientific advice that has pointed to much-improved prospects for North Sea stocks. There is a clear case for a substantial increase in the quota, partly as a tangible reward to our fishermen for their sacrifices and commitment, and partly because such a move is the right response to what is happening in our fishing grounds. Commissioner Borg has publicly denounced discards. However, I am clear that unless he increases this quota we will be condemned to yet another year of unacceptable slaughter. There is no greater indictment of the common fisheries policy than the huge waste of good-quality and valuable fish that are thrown overboard dead. We believe that an increase in quota of up to 15 per cent would be entirely justified in its own right, but it must not come with draconian strings attached. We need to continue the trend of reducing mortality, but we must focus on measures other than the blunt instrument of making across-the-board cuts in days at sea. Such a move would have a devastating impact on many of our key fisheries and would prevent our fleet from prosecuting their legitimate quota in other fisheries. It is utterly pointless to grant quotas and then to grant no time to catch them. In Scotland, we have developed a range of very promising measures. We want to focus on giving our fleet incentives, not penalties, and on going with—not against—the grain. We can, of course, expect from the Commission the usual provocation in the proposals that it will set out next Wednesday. However, we should not be fooled. If the Commission is serious about following the scientific and socioeconomic advice, it must move on from cutting days and build constructively on what we have put on the table. How will we meet our aims? As Scotland knows to its cost, achieving a fair and just deal in Brussels is often an uphill struggle. However, this Scottish National Party Government promised a fresh start for fisheries, and that is exactly what we are delivering. We are doing things differently and better, and I believe that such an approach will pay dividends. There are challenges to face. Our efforts are often hampered by the distraction of having to sell our case first to the United Kingdom Government and then to the European Commission. We are several steps removed from the real decision-making processes over our fisheries management and too often our industry's experience and  knowledge are utterly sidelined. That is clearly demonstrated by the requirement to operate within the centralised common fisheries policy. While 27 countries sit round the top table deciding the fate of our fishing communities, Scotland's Government is left to fight for a seat with the UK's civil servants in the back row. That is not good enough for Scotland.

I am delighted to say that I am coming on to that shortly. In the new year, we will establish a task force to explore alternatives to the current CFP, to build on the new initiatives that we have put in place—which, I remind Mr Rumbles, I have already spoken about—and to develop appropriate sustainable fisheries management solutions for the circumstances in Scotland's waters. In the meantime, we are firmly committed to achieving the best possible outcome for the Scottish sector this year, and until we have the constitutional power to return control of our waters to Scotland, we will use every opportunity to bring decision making closer to home. To secure the best possible deal, we continue to argue strongly that Scotland should officially lead for the UK in the fisheries negotiations. Our case is overwhelming, given that we have the lion's share of the interest and therefore the biggest stake in the outcome of the annual talks. We have 70 per cent of UK quota, two thirds of UK landings and well over 70 per cent of the effort that is covered by the cod recovery plan; our industry's socioeconomic importance is 10 per cent greater than that of the fishing industry south of the border. We also have one of the biggest slices of fishing waters in the whole of the EU. The UK Government has so far refused to allow Scotland to take the lead role. In fact, the UK Government has, to date, refused even to enter into a discussion about the possibility of Scotland taking the lead role. However, I was delighted when Bertie Armstrong, chief executive of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, told the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee on 7 November that his access to Westminster ministers has never been so good—yet another sign that the UK Government now recognises that, north of the border, we have a Government that means business. That is a testament to the improvements in practice surrounding the negotiations that we have been able to make so far. There is no question but  that the existing arrangements need to be improved, and I have made available to MSPs the list of 20 key improvements that we have put to the UK Government. I am pleased to tell Mike Rumbles and the rest of the chamber that the UK Government has accepted nearly all those recommendations. However, the Scottish Government has not been waiting for permission. As I indicated, we have been actively improving the processes. We have been active on the international scene. For example, we composed an authoritative statement of Scotland's views on cod recovery, which was adopted by the UK. We have been proactive in developing Scottish schemes and are energetically identifying and cultivating allies in Europe. We have transformed the processes for setting and implementing priorities, starting with the meeting of the four UK fisheries ministers, at my invitation, here in Scotland at the fishing port of Peterhead. We have made a step change in stakeholder dialogue, and I look forward to further discussions with west coast fishermen on 3 December. We are bringing the industry into our confidence, more than ever before, to ensure that we never again find ourselves signed up to ill-prepared technical measures, foisted on us by Brussels without any real sense of the damage caused by unintended consequences. Today we are discussing the future of a strategically important sector in Scotland and a strategically important set of negotiations. It is crucial to Scotland's national interest that we secure an outcome that is fair and just, and which promotes sustainability. All of Scotland has its part to play, including this Parliament. I ask everyone in the chamber to join the rest of Scotland and to unite behind the cause of our fishing communities by supporting the motion, and indeed the amendments. Let us all work together in the years ahead to ensure that we are able to steer our industry into calmer waters. I move, That the Parliament supports the Scottish Government in negotiating a deal which is fair and just for Scotland's fishing communities and which reflects in full the leadership which Scotland's fishermen are showing the rest of Europe on sustainable fisheries.

Given that European Commission regulations do not permit single farm payments to be made in full before 1 December, the Scottish Government has been working towards paying as many eligible claims as possible from the first possible banking day, which will be 3 December. That approach will ensure that the greatest possible number of producers both within and outwith less favoured areas will be paid in full at the earliest opportunity. I am advised that that will mean paying at least £300 million in single farm payments in December.

I have every reason to believe that there will be no delay whatsoever. As I said, £300 million of a total payment of £406 million will be paid from 3 December onwards, which is—I believe—earlier than in previous years. My officials in the Scottish Government are pulling out all the stops to get the payments out to farmers and crofters the length and breadth of Scotland as soon as possible, especially given the difficult situation that the industry faces at present, to which the member alluded.

It remains the Scottish Government's position that the UK Government has a moral responsibility to compensate Scotland's farmers and crofters and the industry for losses that have resulted from events that are outwith their control. That continues to be the subject of negotiation between the Scottish Government and the UK Government. As members from throughout the chamber are well aware, we are facing a lot of resistance from the UK Government on the issue, which has incurred the anger of Scotland's rural communities and will, no doubt, continue to do so. However, we also continue to work closely with NFU Scotland and other organisations in Scotland on the matter.

I am sure that the Presiding Officer will be aware that I do not want to pre-empt the oral question that will be asked in a few minutes, but I say to Peter Peacock that we are well aware of the difficult challenges that the pig industry in Scotland faces. He alluded to the fact that the difficulties are not simply due to fallout from the foot-and-mouth crisis—the industry was facing financial problems because of high cereal prices before the foot-and-mouth crisis. We are engaging with pig industry leaders in Scotland. I  met them a couple of weeks ago and my officials continue to have regular meetings so that we can work up a plan of action to help the sector, if that is possible.

The vast majority of animal waste generated by our livestock industry is ultimately processed by the two main rendering facilities in Scotland, which are located in Dumfries and in Newarthill near Motherwell.

As the member quite rightly suggests, the issues are largely for the Scottish Environment Protection Agency, especially in its role as the enforcement agency for the relevant regulations. I wrote to William Forrest and Son on 14 November after receiving representations from a wide range of interests on both sides of the argument. As the members suggested, SEPA has invited the company to submit representations concerning the agency's intention to revoke the air pollution control authorisation. SEPA has a clear duty to ensure that industrial plants comply with relevant environmental legislation. In this instance, SEPA is clearly taking its responsibilities seriously. I understand that SEPA is looking for a clear programme of action—the intention being that the plant should come into compliance with existing legislation. On the plant's overall role, it is fair to say that there may be disruption to the livestock sector in Scotland were the plant not to fulfil its role. It is not really my place to say whether that would be short-term or longer-term disruption—that is for the market to decide. The issues that have been raised by Michael McMahon are being taken seriously by SEPA—I trust that the member has also taken them up directly with SEPA.

We are working with representatives of the pig sector to identify appropriate support measures. An options paper is being developed and we expect to take decisions soon.

I reiterated many of the Government's concerns in an answer that I gave earlier. I assure Nanette Milne that we have made vigorous representations to the retail sector. The First Minister has written to the chief executives of all the UK supermarkets and I have written to the public sector bodies in Scotland. We have been  doing our utmost to encourage more orders and greater consumption of the fantastic product that is Scottish pork. On direct assistance to the sector, I explained that we are working up an options paper. I am sure that we will not be able to deliver everything that the sector would like. If we were to transfer funds from any underspend on the sheep welfare scheme to help the pig industry, the implementation of a scheme that involved a similar payment to the headage payment that has been used for the sheep sector could present significant difficulties under state-aid rules, so that is potentially an extremely difficult road to go down. However, there are other ways of helping the sector and we are exploring them in detail.

The Scottish Government supports farmers markets through the Scottish Agricultural Organisation Society, which provides advisory services to the Scottish Association of Farmers Markets.

I assure Sandra White that the role and future of farmers markets will certainly be part of the national food policy, on which there will be consultation with the people of Scotland and with all relevant parties, so that they will be able to have a great say in the contents of the policy. Farmers markets are very popular in Glasgow and elsewhere in Scotland. More than 60 are now up and running, and they provide a fantastic opportunity for a link between the primary producers and the consumers. The Scottish Government will give them all the support that it can.

Yes, I certainly agree with the sentiments that John Scott outlines. We would certainly support maximum co-operation along the supply chain—from farmer to markets to the consumer. Indeed, one of the primary purposes of developing a national food policy for Scotland—which I know that John Scott supports—is to bring everyone together to work towards the best possible policy.

The Competition Commission has published the initial findings of its review of the groceries market. We need to digest that comprehensive report in detail. Nonetheless, I welcome the commission's  recognition that the supermarket code of practice could and should be improved. The Scottish Government will seek to influence its further development or, indeed, replacement.

I recall Professor Donald MacRae of Lloyds TSB Scotland telling the Parliament a few years ago that primary producers receive only 13p of every £1 that is spent on groceries in Scotland. I assure Robin Harper that the Scottish Government takes the issue seriously and will act on it. Indeed, in our first few months of government, we have had many meetings with the chief executives of the supermarkets at which we have asked for action to be taken. We will pursue that point, but it would make sense to await the outcome of the Competition Commission's final report so that we can ascertain exactly what the situation is at the moment and take appropriate action.

I ask the member to repeat that remark.

I had an informal meeting with representatives of Mey Selections and have agreed to have a formal meeting with them in due course. I pay tribute to the success both of Mey Selections and of the north Highland initiative. I agree with the member that we should learn lessons from the initiative's success and spread them elsewhere.

Since my appointment, I have been struck by the food revolution that is taking place the length and breadth of Scotland. The Government thinks that it is in the interests of consumers and in our national interest that the Parliament should support a joined-up, national food policy that promotes our economy, health, environment and culture. The time is right for such an approach, for which there is cross-party support in the Parliament. Indeed, the Government is pleased to support all the amendments that have been selected for debate. We can all agree that our food policy should make our nation healthier, fairer, wealthier and more sustainable. During the summer, I visited many excellent food businesses and primary producers around Scotland, including farmers, crofters and fishermen. I was struck by the quality and variety of the Scottish produce that is being developed on our doorstep and by the dedication, passion and innovation of the people whom I met. As a nation we can celebrate the wealth of high-quality and internationally trusted produce from Scotland's farms, seas and food manufacturers. It is no wonder that communities throughout Scotland celebrate local food at fairs and festivals. Scotland has a reputation for quality. In Orkney, I was told that a number of butchers in England sell only Orkney Island Gold beef, because of the consistently high quality of the meat. I often hear similar messages about the beef that we produce in Scotland. The campaign to support local, sustainable food is gathering momentum, as I keep finding out at fairs such as the living food event in Cawdor castle, which celebrated Scottish and Highland organic food and promoted slow—rather than fast—food. It is clear that there is a growing trend for organic food. The United Kingdom market was estimated to be worth nearly £2 billion in 2006, and it is growing. Scotland is well placed to exploit that massive potential. In Shetland, I met a young family who run a growing aquaculture business, producing organic mussels—that was one of many such enterprises that I visited during the summer. Many food and drink businesses are household names in Scotland. In my Moray constituency, we have Baxters Food Group and Walkers  Shortbread, as well as a number of international whisky brands. We should remember that our bigger food businesses started out as small food businesses. When I visited the Black Isle show this year, I was informed that the food hall was double the size of last year's food hall and that many exciting and innovative new food businesses had taken stands for the first time. Likewise, the Royal Highland Show's food hall goes from strength to strength with each year that passes. Producers are tapping into the increasing demand for local food in Scotland. I am sure that all members acknowledge the growing number of farm shops and farmers markets throughout Scotland. The first farmers market was held in 1999 and in Scotland there are now more than 60 active farmers markets, which bring consumers into direct contact with primary producers and help that vital sector's income.

A local food policy would certainly bring primary producers extra income. The food that is produced on our doorstep is of the best quality and if we can persuade more consumers to buy it, we will help the lamb and other livestock sectors in Scotland, which face challenging times, as the member rightly says. The number of farm shops has also increased in recent years. There are more than 70 fully established farm shops in Scotland, which sell Scotch lamb and other fantastic meat produce. On Monday, I visited Loch Leven's Larder—which is run by the Nivens, a farming family—on the Loch Leven heritage trail. I was impressed by the links that the Nivens have made between local food production, tourism and health. They have put notice boards in their fields alongside the shop and the heritage trail, extolling the nutritional benefits of the crops that are growing there. There is a feeling of anticipation that we are on the verge of transforming how we regard the food on our plates. Consumers are taking a far more ethical approach at home, in restaurants and in canteens. Ethical issues raise questions for us all. What is the carbon footprint of the food that we buy? Where did the primary ingredients come from? Given the growing demand to know the provenance of food, how do we know which products are truly Scottish? How much processing has taken place? Have ingredients been added? How much energy was needed to process the food? Where does the food in our children's  school meals come from? What about the food that is served in our hospitals and public sector canteens? How much of it is locally sourced? How far have the ingredients travelled to get on to our plates? Who is getting the largest profit in the trading arrangements? Are our producers and suppliers in Scotland and those further afield getting a fair deal? What impact does food waste and packaging have on Scotland's unique landscape and environment? More and more of us in Scotland are asking those questions.

The point is a good one. It is part of the reason why we want a national food policy. We welcome the contributions that members make to highlight such issues. One thing for certain is that our expectations of food producers and manufacturers are growing and demands on them are mounting. The public sector should have more of a key role in supporting Scottish food and in achieving our economic and social objectives. In Government, we are keen for children in our schools, patients in our hospitals and inmates in our prisons to be served with local, nutritious food. A major challenge for our food industry is the capacity building that will enable it to respond to public tenders for the supply of food. I am well aware of the views that members around the chamber hold on the matter. Given those views, I agree to look at the way in which public bodies procure food and whether we can do anything to improve the process. However, we must equally accept the need to do more to help our food producers and manufacturers become more skilled and competent in meeting the growing needs of the public sector.

The member makes a fair point. Our food policy must identify any obstacles to our objectives and find ways to knock them down. We all recognise that food is fundamental to each and every one of us as a source of energy, and that our choice of diet has a long-term impact on our health and well-being. Nutrition affects brain development, behaviour and people's life chances. Scotland's health is improving, but not  fast enough, particularly in our most deprived communities. This morning's launch by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and Glasgow City Council of a new curriculum pack to aid primary school pupils' understanding of diet, nutrition, and physical activity is an excellent example of the links that can be made across health, education, the environment and the economy. Obesity rates are higher in Scotland than anywhere else in Europe. Obesity is set to overtake smoking as the most frequent cause of premature death. A healthy diet affects positively our development and behaviour. Of course, food education has a key role to play in that regard. We are already supporting initiatives to help explain to consumers and our schools the various stages of the food chain. Those initiatives are crucially important in urban Scotland in ensuring that knowledge about healthy, local food is not simply a countryside issue. In order to understand the impact of food on health, we need to underpin our policies with the best science. Yesterday, I met the Rowett Research Institute and the University of Aberdeen to discuss their merger plans. That exciting proposal will lead to the creation of a new institute of nutrition and health that targets the prevention of disease through good food science. The new centre of excellence will eventually relocate to the Aberdeen Royal infirmary site at Foresterhill, which will cement the link between food science and health. We already have a plethora of good, successful strategies and action plans covering agriculture, fisheries, waste, sustainable development, healthy eating, transportation, education and tourism. Since coming into Government, I have launched Scotland food and drink, the Scottish food fortnight and, as recently as last week, Waste Aware Scotland's love food, hate waste campaign. Many in the chamber have endorsed the NFU Scotland campaign to encourage more Scots to ask, "What's on your plate?" I firmly believe that, wherever we chose to eat—in our homes or in restaurants or canteens—we should know where the primary ingredients come from. I am well aware of the complex legal and practical issues that are attached to the labelling of food items, but I am equally resolute on the need to work with industry to find a practical and workable solution to increase the number of outlets where customers know with confidence where their meat and fish come from. The complex and constantly evolving set of issues that face Scottish food production and consumption require us—indeed, they compel  us—to ensure that all our various policy goals are made clear, coherent and consistent. I asked for an initial road test of the idea that Scotland should have a national food policy. As a result, we organised the well-attended open space event that took place on 8 October in Dundee. Yesterday, I sent members a copy of the report, which outlines the topics of discussion. Those who attended the event acknowledged that much was already being done across Government to support the food industry, but that much more needs to be done. Food issues sit well with the Government's approach, which is that all our policies should point to our five strategic objectives and that ministers should work together. That is why the Minister for Public Health will close the debate. Enterprise, health, rural affairs and other policy areas all have food dimensions and we must now act to ensure that they point in the same direction. The development of a national food policy will do just that. I want the process of developing the policy to be inclusive. To that end, I want to embark on a series of discussions and debates, including a food summit to be held in the early part of 2008. We will also appoint a short-life expert group to take us toward the Royal Highland Show, when we will publish our policy. I hope that we will all be able to sign up to it and that the Government will be able to implement it. We need a national food policy for Scotland that covers all aspects of food production and consumption, identifies a direction of travel and sets out what we need to change to achieve a long-term vision for Scotland that will benefit our economy, health and environment. I commend the motion to Parliament. I move, That the Parliament believes that Scotland should have a national food policy and would benefit greatly by having a clear, consistent and coherent approach to food covering health, environmental, social, cultural and economic factors and welcomes the Scottish Government's commitment to launch a national debate and consultation on a food policy for Scotland that takes into account the views of the Parliament, industry and wider society.

We recognise the difficulties for the livestock industry, especially the sheep sector, which has been particularly badly hit by foot-and-mouth disease. The package that I announced yesterday will assist the industry, both in the short and in the longer term.

I agree with everything that the member said, and that is why the Scottish Government is determined to take forward the concept of a Scottish food policy, which is attracting widespread support throughout Scotland. The foot-and-mouth crisis over the past two or three months has highlighted a number of issues that should be taken into account by a food policy to help to localise food production in Scotland.

We are extremely keen to take forward the issues to which the member referred and to debate them in the chamber, while also taking into account the industry's interests. The package that was announced yesterday is partly intended to instil confidence in the livestock sector that the Scottish Government cares about the future and believes that there is a bright, prosperous future for the sector in Scotland. That is why we brought forward the £25 million investment. With CAP reform around the corner, I agree that it is important that we look at ways to maintain livestock numbers in Scotland, both for our food policy and for our rural economy. I hope that we can work together to achieve that objective.

The short answer is yes. Professor Scudamore's review of Scotland's response to the foot-and-mouth crisis will take into account the issues to which Alasdair Allan referred. I urge him and other members to contribute to the review. The islands, of course, had special treatment during the recent outbreak, because we were able to relax some restrictions there earlier than on the mainland. However, there are more lessons to be learned, and we must have a different response next time to give even more favourable attention to the islands.

We continue to have virtually daily contact with all the livestock sectors in Scotland, given that there have been ramifications for cattle, pigs and sheep. The purpose of the package that was announced yesterday is to target assistance where, given the circumstances, it is most desperately needed, which is the sheep sector. There is widespread  support for targeting the package at that sector. However, we are maintaining a close dialogue with the cattle and pig sectors. I have already agreed to meet the pig industry leaders next week to see how we can assist it.

After careful consideration of all possible solutions, it was clear that an absence of applicable European Union and domestic legal powers meant that any extension of the agreements would not be legally competent.

We agree that this is a serious issue. Our farmers have a key role to play in protecting and enhancing our environment. The agri-environment schemes that have so far been introduced have been popular and effective, which is why the new rural development programme will contain considerable resources for successor schemes. Notwithstanding my initial answer, I assure Karen Gillon that we continue to explore all the options with the European Commission. We hope that the new programme will be in place as early as November, but December is more likely. Should it be delayed further, we might have to implement contingency plans, depending on the timescale of the new successor programme. We are exploring all the options.

We must be certain of two things. First, we would need a legal basis if we were to extend existing programmes and, as I said in my initial answer, we do not have that at the moment. Secondly, we must take into account the huge diversion of resources that would occur within the Scottish Government if we continued some of the schemes and reopened the existing agri-environment schemes for one-year extensions. My officials and their resources are currently dedicated to ensuring that the new rural development programme comes into play as soon as possible, and we do not want it to be delayed further. We also have single farm payments and less favoured area support scheme payments to arrange and, of course, we now have the emergency aid package for the sheep sector to implement. We must take a range of factors into account, but we are well aware that the schemes are important. We want them to continue and to get back in train again as soon as possible.

John Scott will be aware that we inherited a situation in which the delay was occurring anyway due to the European Parliament not agreeing the voluntary modulation package. The situation has been unavoidable for the Scottish Government, but we are keen to explore all avenues to avoid any more inconvenience for farmers who are affected by any potential delay in getting the schemes up and running again. We will continue to explore the options.

The existing target in the national waste plan, which we inherited, is to recycle or compost 55 per cent of waste by 2020. We are considering the way forward on waste management as part of the spending review and in light of the recent waste summit. We are committed to increasing recycling and to waste prevention.

I welcome the ambitious target set by the City of Edinburgh Council and I hope that other local authorities in Scotland will follow suit. We will continue to work closely with local authorities in Scotland. It is in all our interests and the interest of the environment that we increase recycling as soon as possible to preserve our precious resources. Many local authorities in Scotland attended the waste summit. As far as I can tell, the feedback from all those who attended—there were councillors from throughout Scotland—was extremely positive. We hope to maintain that positive partnership with local authorities. Of  course, the provision of future assistance to local authorities for recycling will depend on the outcome of the spending review, but we must recognise that there is a funding issue.

I agree that we need to give greater prominence to the carbon footprints of each local authority in Scotland. The Scottish Government has to work in partnership with local authorities to do what we can locally to reduce our national carbon footprint. If there are specific issues in relation to the local authorities that the member mentioned, I would appreciate it if he wrote to me with the details, because I am not wholly familiar with where he is coming from. However, I agree with the sentiments of what he said.

I am extremely concerned about the serious financial difficulties that the livestock sector is experiencing as a result of foot-and-mouth disease in Surrey, which is why I announced yesterday a package of measures that is designed to support the industry through these difficult times and beyond.

The member has raised the issue with me several times. The farmers on Shetland are making strong representations to him and, indeed, to me as cabinet secretary. I reflect daily on the situation that faces our livestock in Scotland and its welfare implications. I am sure that the member and the Parliament appreciate that livestock welfare schemes are a last resort. The introduction of the light lambs scheme is an exceptional event. The light lambs were reared for an export market that was closed, and they faced starving to death on our hills due to a lack of feed. I have to take the professional advice of the chief veterinary officer in Scotland, who tells me that many of the cases that are being made for extending the welfare scheme to include other animals are based on economic issues. If the situation changes, we will react to it. I am keen to maintain dialogue with the member for Shetland and I am happy to have my chief veterinary officer discuss the issue with him directly.

That is an important point. I am well aware of the crofters' representations on the issue. The scheme that we are introducing provides a headage payment of £6 per breeding ewe and gimmer. That is a flat rate—there is no banding. We decided on that approach because it is an emergency scheme and we had to opt for the scheme that we could put in place most quickly. We had many representations from different sectors of the livestock industry, and I am afraid that it was not easy to keep everyone happy. I am sure that the member understands the pressures that we are under, given the background to the foot-and-mouth crisis in Scotland. We believe that we put forward the best, most effective scheme in the time that was available.

I am extremely concerned about the serious financial difficulties that the sheep sector is experiencing as a result of foot-and-mouth disease. I will leave it at that.

I thank the member for those two questions. The first related to compensation. I make it clear to the chamber that we are making the strongest possible representations to the United Kingdom Government—yet again—to persuade it of its moral and financial responsibility to compensate Scotland's farmers for this crisis. The crisis is having a huge and devastating impact, and is, of course, outwith the control of the farmers. We are making representations, not only that Scotland should be reimbursed for the emergency schemes that we introduced yesterday, but that the compensation case put forward by Scotland's farmers should be addressed. The member's second question related to another development elsewhere in Great Britain—the outbreak of bluetongue disease. There is no immediate threat to Scotland, but we all acknowledge that south of the border the disease is developing and appears to be spreading. We have to be realistic about the situation and make the best possible preparations. There is a contingency plan in Scotland for responding to any potential outbreak of bluetongue in Scotland. I am sure that we all agree that it is in all our interests that a vaccine should be made available as soon as possible. We do not have a precise date, but the current timescale suggests that it will happen next year. We are closely monitoring the  development of the vaccine. The sooner it is available the better.

There is a new coalition.

I want to clarify something for the member's benefit. DEFRA funded the welfare scheme that was announced in 2001. We do not have a similar scheme to implement in Scotland, so we had to implement our own scheme, which we did in early October. I ask the  member to bear it in mind that she is not comparing like with like.

Will the member give way?

Of course it is.

I clarify for the member's benefit that the £900 million that John Swinney has secured from the UK Government is for the next three years, not just for now. The aid that was available in 2001 resulted from consequentials that came from the UK Government and that we do not have this time.

Will the member give way?

I thank the member, who is getting a bit more cynical in his old age, for giving way. I remind the member that we delivered an emergency scheme—the sheep welfare scheme—in early October, before the incident that he spoke about. I also remind him that NFU Scotland wrote to me last week asking for an emergency aid package. I met it on Monday, and today I announced an aid package for the industry. That shows greater urgency than has been shown elsewhere.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I thank the member for giving way. I clarify for her benefit that I have lost count of the number of telephone conferences and face-to-face meetings that I have had with Hilary Benn, the UK Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, during which I raised the issue to which Sarah Boyack refers. However, I have had no joy whatsoever in getting the UK Government to meet its moral and financial responsibility for what is an important scheme.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

It gives me pleasure to open this important debate. Our farmers and crofters help to provide the nation with food and to care for our precious environment. Agriculture is, of course, a mainstay of our rural economy in Scotland. In the medium to longer term, the outlook for Scottish agriculture is bright. The world's population faces the prospect of food shortages, arable farmers enjoy high cereal prices and consumers are increasingly demanding sustainable and local food. Scottish agriculture is well placed to benefit greatly from such opportunities in the years ahead. Of course, we are also looking forward to Scotland's £1.6 billion rural development programme kicking in early next year, to the development of a Scottish food policy and to ensuring that future reform of the common agriculture policy reflects Scotland's interests. However, as members are aware, many livestock farmers and crofters are in turmoil following the unwelcome events of the past few months. Although Scotland remains free of foot-and-mouth disease, thousands of families in our rural communities and the islands are counting the costs of the foot-and-mouth outbreaks south of the border. Given that Great Britain is currently a single epidemiological unit and that there was considerable uncertainty about the level of the disease spread, movement restrictions were imposed in Scotland to protect our interests. The potential consequences of failing to do so are too horrendous to contemplate. We aimed to minimise disruption by lifting restrictions as soon as it was safe to do so. I am pleased—and I know that members are pleased—that we were able to lift all domestic restrictions a week ago today. The timing of the outbreak could not have been worse, particularly for the sheep sector. Normally, more than a million sheep move from the hills and islands to markets and lower ground in September  and October. Europe's export ban on meat and live animals also caused significant difficulties. On top of a wet summer, poor commodity prices and higher feeding costs, the impact of the outbreak has pushed many livestock farmers close to the edge. We were able to find early relief for part of the industry through the introduction of a sheep welfare scheme, which was needed to alleviate the emerging welfare catastrophe. Light lambs were stuck on the hills with a shortage of grazing, exports were closed and there were no realistic markets. We took our case directly to Europe, which allowed us quickly to address state aid issues and introduce a targeted animal welfare scheme on 9 October. We also met European officials to discuss the export situation. They were impressed by how Scotland had responded to the outbreaks in the south of England, which had a great impact here. The Scottish Government supported the industry's case for a sheep welfare scheme. We did not want to see lambs without a market starving to death on our hills. However, we were disappointed by the United Kingdom Government's unwillingness to accept that there was a problem on Scotland's hills and its refusal to accept responsibility for funding the necessary welfare scheme. Let me be clear: irrespective of the source of the outbreak, the funding responsibility for such schemes lies with Westminster. That is the view of our livestock sector and the Scottish Government; more important, it is also in the spirit of the devolution agreement on funding for animal disease control costs. One of the reasons for retaining the budget on a GB basis back in 1999 was that the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs had direct access to the Treasury. It is bizarre to suggest that the costs of the outbreak are too small to justify opening up the Treasury reserves, as happened when we had the 2001 outbreak. The UK's reluctance to support our animal health and welfare costs as a result of the outbreak is perplexing. The concordat outlines DEFRA's responsibilities and, in that context, the recent statement on approaches being made by the devolved Government direct to the Treasury is difficult to understand. If Hilary Benn or Gordon Brown can spare the time to visit Scotland's hill farms or islands, they will see for themselves that the impact of the outbreak on rural Scotland is anything but small. It has certainly never been, to use the words of a UK minister, a "short-term local problem". For our sheep sector in particular, the crisis is enormous. Given the circumstances of the outbreak, we share the Scottish industry's firm view that the UK Government has the financial  and moral responsibility to reimburse Scotland for our losses.

Our view is that the UK Government has a moral responsibility and a responsibility under the devolution settlement to pay for the consequences in Scotland of the foot-and-mouth outbreak. Of course, it is not just our sheep farmers who have paid a heavy price. Everyone in the sector, from the primary producers to the hauliers to those involved with the abattoirs, has suffered. However, the Scottish Government will not allow a debate over funding routes to get in the way of what really matters—the need to support a sustainable livestock industry in Scotland. Therefore, today I want to outline an aid package for Scotland's sheep sector and other measures to support the wider industry. The sheep sector, which has been the most severely affected, needs real support to maintain itself into the next breeding season. I can tell the Parliament that the Scottish Government is to invest £19.2 million in breeding ewes to support the breeding flock. That is equivalent to a headage payment of £6 per breeding ewe and gimmer. The money should be in producers' bank accounts by mid-November. We recognise that the sheep sector was already experiencing challenges prior to the foot-and-mouth outbreak, but we hope to offset some of the losses that have made matters worse. In addition, we must continue our efforts to promote Scotch lamb—a top-quality product—as well as Scotch beef and pork. We have already provided £100,000 to Quality Meat Scotland to support lamb promotion. In the light of recent developments, we will discuss with QMS the potential for further measures. Initially, I am willing to provide a further £1 million. I will ask QMS to consult the industry on how that investment can be used to best effect over the next year, not only for the promotion of red meat but, importantly, to enhance supply chain development for the longer term. In addition to that direct support, the First Minister is writing to each of the major food retailers to ask them to support the meat industry by ensuring that a fair price is paid to Scottish farmers. In his letter, he will highlight the recent announcement by McDonalds about raising the prices that it pays to its producers. I know that all members will welcome that decision and will share  the hope that others will follow the example of McDonalds.

There certainly will be. A representative of the Prince of Wales has been in touch with me about that initiative and I have offered him a meeting in the very near future, to which I look forward. We are all aware that our rural communities have suffered financially but, on top of that, individuals have suffered personal hardship. We are therefore offering £200,000 to the Royal Scottish Agricultural Benevolent Institute to help people who are in need of personal support. In addition, £60,000 will be made available to the Royal Highland Education Trust to help raise the profile of Scottish food and farming in the wider community.

Crofters have also been affected by the foot-and-mouth outbreak and we look forward to discussing with them their initiative to develop a crofting brand, which is in the pipeline. We are exploring other smaller initiatives, too. We believe that our package balances the need to provide immediate relief with the need to look ahead and support a sustainable red meat sector. In total, our package, combined with actions that have already been taken—for example, through the sheep welfare scheme—will provide more than £25 million, £20 million of which will be for the new measures that we have announced today. Today my colleague John Swinney is writing to the UK Government to ask it to reimburse Scotland for those measures and to respond to the industry's case for compensation. The reinstatement of the £8.1 million that was originally earmarked for Scotland and then withdrawn would, of course, be a good start.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I thought that you had cut it by five minutes.

I can reveal that, after some difficult searching, the money will come from the central unallocated provision; it will not be taken from other budgets that have already been allocated under my portfolios. I know that many people have called for additional welfare schemes. We have considered those pleas closely, but many of the issues that have been brought to our attention are economic and we know that the industry would prefer us to concentrate on economic measures. Moreover, my chief veterinary officer is not persuaded of the welfare case that has been put to us in relation to animals that are not covered by the existing scheme. No farmer or crofter—nor any of us—ever wants to experience again the pain that has been inflicted as a result of foot-and-mouth outbreaks hundreds of miles away in the south of England. That is why it is vital that we take steps to protect our rural economy from animal disease outbreaks. The review of our response to foot and mouth that Professor Jim Scudamore is conducting will consider all the relevant issues, including the implications for Scotland of being part of the same disease unit as the rest of Great Britain. The second outbreak delayed that review, but it is now getting under way. It will identify lessons that we can all learn from the outbreaks over the past two or three months. There has been much talk about the new Scottish Government and the UK Government working together for the benefit of the people of Scotland. It is fair to say that the foot-and-mouth crisis has tested our relationship. For much of the past two months, I have worked closely with my UK counterparts, but it is no secret that in recent weeks the industry and the Scottish Government have found the UK Government unsympathetic and unhelpful at times. Co-operation and being constructive are vital in order to help the people of Scotland, but it has to be a two-way process. I hope that everyone in the chamber, irrespective of party, will support the Scottish Government in our efforts to secure natural justice for our farmers at this difficult time. We want to provide all our rural communities with the prosperous future that they deserve. Today, the Scottish Government has shown that we will not let down our farmers and crofters in their hour of need. I commend the motion to the Parliament. I move, That the Parliament notes with concern the impact on our livestock industry, particularly the sheep sector, of the recent outbreaks of foot and mouth disease in England;  calls on the UK Government to recognise its financial and moral responsibility to reimburse Scotland's farmers; acknowledges the work being done in Scotland to support the sustainability of the Scottish livestock industry and the viability of rural communities; welcomes the review, to be led by Professor Jim Scudamore and commissioned by the Scottish Government, into Scotland's response to the outbreaks, and recognises the need to reduce the risk of future outbreaks and minimise the impact of future disruption.

The issue is important for Scotland and Scotland's fishing industry. We will consider raising it with the United Kingdom Government in the context of our discussions on the forthcoming marine legislation.

I certainly agree with many of Christine Grahame's sentiments, as does the Scottish Government. She will recall that, back in 1999 when the issue was huge—which it remains, of course—the SNP in opposition quoted Dr Iain Scobbie, the senior lecturer in international law at the University of Glasgow, who argued that the lines should have been drawn as requested by the Scottish fishing industry, not the UK Government of the time. I have no reason to believe that the legal position has changed since then. The waters were part of Scotland pre-1999 and, as far as the Scottish Government is concerned, they should be Scottish waters post-1999 as well. That is why there was such outrage at the time, and we are determined to raise the issue with the UK Government when an appropriate opportunity arises.

We have been able continuously to relax movement restrictions where veterinary risk assessment has shown it safe to do so. We have also very strongly pressed our case with the United Kingdom Government and obtained on 2 October a relaxation of drivers' hours regulations to address the backlog of livestock movements. We have also lobbied strongly for the resumption of exports of meat from Scotland following the export ban. On 3 October, we achieved that aim, which will take effect from 12 October. Moreover, we are preparing a sheep welfare scheme to address the problem of light lambs that are still on the hills and are facing a shortage of feed, the onset of inclement weather and no viable market. The Scottish Government continues to work with stakeholders and other organisations to provide appropriate support to farmers.

We are putting in place arrangements for the sheep welfare scheme, which, all things being equal, should be up and running at some point early next week. I am sure that there is cross-party support on that important issue. We are also continuing to press the UK Government to fund the scheme, given its moral and political responsibility in that regard. The member raised concerns about exports from the islands. My officials and I are well aware of those concerns—I will get back to the member on that. The expert group of the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health will meet once again next week. Following today's productive meeting with a range of stakeholders in the Parliament, we are aware of several measures with which we want to proceed.

rose—

If it gives the member any comfort, we are considering ways in which each area of Scotland can influence the regional priorities of the rural development programme when those are set. That will take into account the need for flooding support and other aspects, to try to promote our cross-cutting agenda.

The member will of course accept that Moray Council's financial problems have been around for a number of years, including the years under the previous two Administrations in Scotland.

We will all go to Clydebank College.

Mr Rumbles is not listening.

Flooding can devastate lives, communities, property and the environment. Flooding will happen: this debate is about what needs to be done to improve how we manage the risk to Scotland. Floods are natural, but they been exacerbated and made more problematic by human activity. Historically, we have built on flood plains, straightened rivers and forced them into underground culverts, and drained land for agricultural production. In 21 st century Scotland, increasing climate change means greater likelihood of floods. Climate scenarios for Scotland tell us that our climate will, over the course of the century, become wetter and stormier. As evidenced by events such as the 2002 Glasgow flood and the 2005 Western Isles storm, the implications of severe weather events are wide ranging across society, the environment and the economy. The Scottish Government has a role to play in helping to equip Scotland with the tools that it needs to tackle climate change. However, we also know that some degree of change is unavoidable as the impacts of climate change in the next 30 or 40 years have already been determined by past and present emissions. As a result, we can expect an increase in flood risk—for all types of flooding. In some areas of Scotland, the potential risk of flooding could double before the end of the century, and that increase in flood risk could be damaging to both Scotland's economy and society as a whole. Our recently published flood maps highlight that around 100,000 properties are at risk from flooding from rivers and the sea. Scotland needs to adapt to that change if it is to minimise the impacts of costly disruptions, and to safeguard the continued smooth functioning of services and infrastructure. How we manage the risks and events will be one of Parliament's main challenges for the future. It is clear that we have to  leave behind the idea that we act only after a flood; we must instead seek to reduce the risk of significant impacts of flooding through sustainable flood management. As members may be aware, after the recent devastating flooding in England, the Minister for Environment, Michael Russell, wrote to the chairs of the eight Scottish strategic co-ordinating groups, in which local responders co-ordinate the preparation for and response to emergencies in police force areas, seeking assurances that they were satisfied that arrangements were in place to deal with flooding in their areas. All the groups responded positively about their arrangements for dealing with flooding. Many referred to the process of risk assessment, which includes an assessment of various types of flooding in their area, and all have published a community risk register, which describes the risk rating for flooding in their areas. As a Government, we want Scotland to become wealthier, fairer, healthier, safer and stronger. The flooding summit that the Minister for Environment and I hosted in Perth last week demonstrated unanimous support for a fresh approach to flood management. Key to such a fresh approach are the desire to de-clutter the process and the establishment of a framework to enable all organisations to work together effectively to deliver flood risk management for the 21 st century. I asked for frank and productive discussion at the flooding summit, and I am delighted to say that that is exactly what we got. The outcomes of the summit will be used to develop further our proposals for amending the current flooding legislation, as will contributions to today's debate. I was pleased that the summit supported the need to take a more strategic, catchment-based approach to flood risk management. It was obvious from those who were present that although we already have the expertise in Scotland to meet the challenge, we need clear leadership to manage the process and ensure that all the organisations involved work in partnership to achieve a collective goal. The aim is to join up processes wherever possible so that they complement, rather than conflict with, each other and so that they are seamless rather than encourage duplication. I will take the opportunity to talk in more detail about that partnership approach, because the Government believes that it is the key to successful implementation of sustainable flood management in Scotland. At the moment, a wide range of organisations in Scotland deal with flooding. It is therefore essential that we find some way to co-ordinate those organisations to obtain the best possible solution to our flooding problems. There is a view that local authorities, which are accountable to local communities, are  best able to judge the needs of their areas and should be responsible for implementing flood alleviation measures. However, in the move to a catchment-based approach, individual local authorities cannot operate in isolation. Although we need to debate the case for a national flooding authority, if that route is favoured we have to make it clear that the Scottish Government's preference is to avoid the creation of any new body to fulfil the role. What is certain is that we need some way of co-ordinating catchment-based flood management planning at either regional or national level—in essence, a national approach delivered locally. To achieve that, it makes sense first to consider how the role and responsibilities of existing bodies might be extended to carry out new work. It is essential that in an attempt to co-ordinate flooding-related matters we do not create unnecessary layers of bureaucracy for practitioners. However, if the best way to achieve partnership working involves a reorganisation of current responsibilities, we will not hesitate to bring that about. In the end, people in Scotland who are at risk from flooding matter most in this debate. We must do everything we can to protect them from the worst impacts of flooding. There was a great deal of frustration among delegates at the summit in Perth about the sheer number of processes that local authorities have to go through to develop a flood alleviation scheme. It is also confusing for people who are at risk of flooding to be told that a scheme that has been approved under one regime cannot proceed because applications for other consents have to be made, with further rounds of public consultation. Even for non-contentious schemes such as those in Larkhall or Saltcoats, the statutory processes can take up to six months. For contested schemes, even where objectors withdraw without a public inquiry, such as for the Braid Burn and White Cart schemes, the processes can take nearly two years. The process is much longer when modifications to a scheme have to be considered, possibly involving further reference to the planning authority if there is a material change to the scheme. Preparation can take far longer. Many communities that were devastated by flooding many years ago are still waiting for flood alleviation schemes to be up and running. The provision of flood defences, as with any major infrastructure, impacts on individuals, communities and the environment, and it requires careful and thorough planning. The studies that are needed to identify the right options take time to complete. Nevertheless, we recognise that the present statutory approach is cumbersome and time consuming, so we will consider how we can  streamline the planning, flood alleviation and environmental protection processes to avoid duplication of effort. Legislation dating back to 1961 is simply not fit for purpose in the 21 st century. As many members will know, the flooding issues advisory committee was set up in 2005 to offer advice on how to move forward Scotland's national flooding framework. The committee is an excellent example of stakeholders working together to reach consensus on difficult issues. Like all members, particularly those who were in the previous Administration, I am grateful to the members of the committee and its sub-committees for their work and advice in recent years. The committee's final report is published today. Some of its suggestions—for example, the development of a more sustainable approach to flood management—have already been adopted by the Scottish Government. Other recommendations will require further discussion. We can all agree that a sustainable approach to flood management means our being proactive at strategic level. That will require that stakeholders, including the public, work together from the beginning to share responsibility for final decisions. It is about joined-up thinking among and within organisations when developing strategies, plans and programmes. Practitioners will have to consider how an incremental approach, using a combination of solutions across the catchment, might help in meeting new challenges as we go through the next 100 or 200 years. That approach may well include engineered works, but those will be sympathetic to the environment in which they are built. We must recognise that sustainable flood management is not about soft versus hard engineering: rather, it is about considering a wide range of options, from flood warning schemes to river restoration projects; from flood prevention schemes to how we collect data and assess risk; from campaigns to raise awareness in areas at risk of flooding to reassessing how land is managed; and from considering the role of planning and building standards to sustainable drainage systems. We must ensure that the public has confidence in the benefits that land management changes and natural flood processes can bring to flood alleviation. To do that, we must continue to improve our knowledge through detailed studies and modelling. Given the increased risks that we face, we need to begin now to build such processes into our flood alleviation plans. If we wait 10 or 20 years for scientific studies to be completed, we may well be too late for many communities. We must consider all sustainable flood management options if we are  to meet the challenges in a way that will satisfy the economic, environmental and social aspects of sustainability now and for future generations. That means that we need to make available flexible funding and to join up different funding streams—including, for example, the rural development programme—to make it possible to consider a wider range of flood management options.

The advisory committee suggested that communities could be more aware of, and better prepared for, flooding. It highlighted the importance of improved risk assessment, flood warning schemes and awareness-raising in communities that have been identified as being at risk from flooding. All those allow individuals and communities to take informed decisions about how they can help themselves to manage their own flood risks, for example by ensuring that they have adequate insurance, by storing valuable or sentimental items and important documents upstairs or in a high cupboard, and by making up a flood emergency kit.

I thought so. I was watching the clock on my right. I wondered why it was different from the clocks elsewhere. We must also consider how the planning and building standards systems can complement each other to address flooding issues in Scotland. We must ensure that we strike the right balance on how we use land so that we can avoid inappropriate development on flood plains and other locations that are at risk of flooding. As the representative for the Moray constituency in the Scottish Parliament, I have a personal interest in the impacts of flooding. In July 1997, 150mm of rain fell over two days, resulting in 1,200 people being evacuated from more than 400 homes in the Elgin area. As recently as this July, I visited a young family who had been flooded out of their home in Rothes following flash floods. I am only too aware from my constituents of the distress that such flood events cause, the difficulties that are experienced in repairing damage to property and the despair of losing family treasures, photographs and memories. I know that many members will have come across similar devastation in their constituencies. With that in mind, I am pleased that we are here to debate the issues around flood risk management for the 21 st century. We now have a real opportunity to consider what is best for a safer and greener Scotland. In doing so, we must not abandon existing good management practices that are being taken forward nationally and  internationally, but should instead seek to identify them and learn from them. As all members do, I want Scotland to be more proactive about tackling flooding. The challenges for the future are great, but we must take this opportunity to consider our future responsibilities and roles both individually and collectively. Clearly, no single body can do it all on its own, so we must work together on various levels to ensure that future strategies, programmes, plans, processes and funding streams are not taken forward in isolation. What the flooding summit began and what today's debate is all about is a new start. We should all take this opportunity to consider what is best for the future of flood management policy in Scotland. I move, That the Parliament notes that a Flooding Bill will be introduced during this parliamentary session; acknowledges the need for Scotland to take a more sustainable approach to flood risk management in order to tackle the increased risk of flooding associated with issues such as climate change; recognises the importance of the publication of the final report of the Flooding Issues Advisory Committee, which ran for two years, and considers that similar positive engagement with stakeholders, including those who have suffered the effects of flooding, should continue throughout the development of the draft Flooding Bill.

It is with enormous regret that I make a statement to alert Parliament to a new case of foot-and-mouth disease in Surrey. Today's development comes only days after we were able to lift the few remaining movement restrictions that were implemented following the previous outbreak of disease, which was confirmed on 3 August. That had been an important step for our livestock industry and the red meat sector on their route back to normality. Today's confirmation of disease is a gut-wrenching body blow for the Scottish livestock industry and the red meat sector. I have been in touch with many representatives of the industry throughout the day and will update them again at a stakeholder meeting at 6 pm this evening. Clearly, I and my officials will do everything we can to support the industry during such a devastating time. I must again pay tribute to the industry for its responsible and reasonable response to the latest developments. There is considerable uncertainty as to the origins of the disease. I must stress that at this stage we do not know what strain of the foot-and-mouth disease virus is involved, so our actions must be precautionary. The Animal Health agency and officials from the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs are conducting an immediate investigation into the source and strain of the virus concerned. Given the uncertainty about the source and spread of the disease, I have, from 3 pm today, on veterinary advice, reintroduced a movement ban. Just as last week I indicated how we had learned lessons from the 2001 outbreak, I assure Parliament today that we will continue to learn from the most recent outbreak and, in the difficult days ahead, to apply what we have learned. It is ironic that, today, I was due to meet Professor Scudamore to discuss the scope of the review into the most recent outbreak. Although I met him briefly earlier, our discussion was focused on today's events.  Unlike the movement ban that was imposed as a result of the outbreak of disease in August, the ban that I have announced today will—on the firm basis of the veterinary advice that I have received—allow a number of movements to continue to occur. The movement of dairy cows across public highways for milking, the movement of animals for emergency veterinary treatment and the movement of animals direct to slaughter can, subject to the meeting of specific conditions such as supervision, all continue. Scotland's islands will remain free of restrictions on movements within and between the islands, but no movements will be allowed between the islands and the mainland. All further movement restrictions will be kept under daily review and will be lifted as soon as possible. The latest outbreak is extremely harrowing news and it will have a particular impact on animal gatherings, including markets. We acknowledge that it will have a huge impact on events that have been planned for the next few days and that the impact will be greater than simply the cancellation of those events. For example, the cancellation of the Kelso ram sale could have implications for next year's lamb crop. However, given the risk of disease spread from animals coming from and going to a number of separate locations, we cannot afford to allow such events to go ahead during a period of such uncertainty. I fully recognise the disruption that the measure will cause for the industry, but I know that it understands that it is an essential step. As an immediate task, the Scottish Government's centre of epidemiological excellence at the University of Edinburgh and the Scottish Agricultural College has been commissioned to analyse movements to Scotland from Surrey and the immediate area, which will allow us to establish the likelihood of disease spread to Scotland. At this stage, I must continue to stress the uncertainty surrounding the source and spread of the outbreak. I reiterate that only such analysis can help us safely lift restrictions to maintain the long-term viability of Scotland's industry. The Scottish Government is actively working to protect Scotland's livestock sector and to minimise disruption. My officials have been working with stakeholders throughout the day to keep them informed of developments and to ensure that they are able to take precautions and appropriate steps to protect their interests. At 12.30 this afternoon, the Scottish Government foot-and-mouth helpline was activated, the number for which is 0845 1553366. Regular updates are available on the foot-and-mouth pages of the Scottish Government website. I encourage members to pass those  details on to their constituents so that they can be kept fully up to date. As with any outbreak, there will be increased incidences of reporting of disease due to the increased vigilance of our livestock keepers. All such reports are investigated by our veterinary professionals. Members may be aware of a reported case today at Lanark market. I assure colleagues that that reported case is being investigated and that we will pass on any further information as soon as possible, although I emphasise that a number of cases of foot-and-mouth in Scotland were reported last month and all proved to be negative. We continue to encourage all livestock keepers in Scotland to report any suspicion of disease in their livestock. The Scottish Government's emergency room procedures have again been activated and the Scottish Government continues to work closely in partnership with the other United Kingdom Administrations. I have been in regular contact with DEFRA ministers today and I participated in the 3 pm Cabinet Office briefing room—COBR—call, which was chaired by the Prime Minister. During the call, I alerted the Prime Minister to this statement and outlined our response in Scotland. I thank DEFRA for its prompt response to the most recent outbreak, and particularly for the swiftness of its alert to my officials. I will continue to remain in contact with DEFRA during the coming days. The new outbreak is very unwelcome and of real concern. There is the maximum level of uncertainty about the source and spread of the disease. I assure members that the Scottish Government is treating the matter extremely seriously and will continue to do all that it can to minimise disruption in Scotland. Restrictions will be lifted as soon as it is possible and safe to do so and I will do my best to ensure that members are kept up to date with developments.

I thank Sarah Boyack for her constructive comments and questions. I intend to keep the Parliament informed at every opportunity. I have already raised with my officials the prospect of a briefing for members tomorrow at some point. On the reported case in Lanark, we will ensure that the relevant members are made aware of the results as soon as they become available, which we hope will be later today. I will make every effort to keep all members up to date on developments during the coming days.

We are taking action to ensure that animals at sales can return to their farms or go to the place of their buyers, to minimise disruption. Work on that is in hand as we speak. On the wider impact on the agriculture sector in Scotland, we will meet stakeholders at 6 pm, as I said. Of course we will discuss all the implications that they face in the days and weeks ahead.  If there is one piece of good news, it is perhaps that restrictions south of the border in the Surrey area, in the previous surveillance zone, were lifted only at the weekend, so research on animal movements in that area can at least be restricted to the period from the weekend until today.

I had hoped that the member would appreciate that we felt that it was very important to bring this urgent statement to the Parliament at the current time. The important investigations into the strain of the outbreak are on-going. We all want to be made aware of that fundamental piece of information as soon as possible. I hope that it will come in the next day or two. We need to have that information as soon as possible. Those investigations are, of course, a priority for DEFRA at the current time.

Two issues are involved: first, the ability to announce relaxations as soon as we put the movement ban in place today will mean minimal disruption for some sectors of the industry at least; secondly, the wider review. I had a discussion today with Professor Scudamore, who  is, of course, highly respected. He is determined to take on board issues such as those that Alasdair Morgan raised.

I thank Liam McArthur for his important point. I would be happy to discuss the issue with him after the statement, to see how we can take the matter forward.

I thank Alasdair Allan for his question. Our ability to reduce the restrictions will greatly depend on the veterinary advice that I will, understandably, have to take on board. It will also depend on the outcome of the investigations into the tracing of animals from the area that is currently the subject of the new surveillance zone.

The Scottish Government aims to help rural communities thrive and to enhance rural development. The Scotland rural development programme will inject £1.6 billion into rural areas over the next seven years. It contains specific measures worth £32 million to help provide leisure, recreation, sporting, catering and other rural community services and facilities, including village and community halls.

I am sure that every MSP who represents rural communities wishes to pay tribute to everyone who helps to maintain and run their local village halls and community facilities. I assure the member that not only do we have the £32 million in the programme that I referred to, there is an additional £40 million under the LEADER programme, all of which should be available to our rural communities, including those who run rural halls. In July, I had a productive meeting with the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations to discuss support for village halls. We will discuss a number of issues in the weeks and months ahead, including many of the issues the member has raised.

I would like to make a statement on the response in Scotland to the recent outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in Surrey. I understand that there may have been a delay in some of the other parties receiving copies of the statement. If that was the case, I apologise, and will have it investigated. As members will be aware, August was a turbulent and difficult month for Scotland's livestock and red-meat industries. Disease was confirmed in the early evening of Friday 3 August. That came as a considerable surprise, given that the international surveillance work for exotic diseases suggested that the risk of foot-and-mouth disease to the United Kingdom was low. Clearly, the news was of serious concern to the many rural communities and agricultural businesses whose memories of the devastation caused by the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in 2001 remain painful and whose contribution to the Scottish economy is vital. When the outbreak was confirmed, leave was cancelled for ministers and key officials. On receiving the news, the Scottish Government acted quickly to put its emergency arrangements in place. The Scottish foot-and-mouth disease contingency plan was activated, and the Scottish Government's emergency room arrangements were immediately implemented within Pentland House. My officials and I immediately returned to Edinburgh to participate in key meetings and to direct the precautionary and proportionate response to the events. The Scottish contingency plan incorporates many lessons learned from the 2001 outbreak. One of the key lessons was that confirmation of disease within the single epidemiological unit of Great Britain would lead to a nationwide movement ban on susceptible animals as quickly as possible.  Following confirmation of this serious animal disease, the Scottish and UK Governments took immediate action and the movement ban was implemented at 9 pm on Friday 3 August, just three hours after disease was confirmed in Surrey. That was a necessary, immediate step to protect Scotland's interests, as the disease picture was uncertain, both in terms of its source and in terms of the potential spread of disease. In addition, major agricultural shows were being staged in Scotland over that weekend. Ministers and officials were in close contact with the other Administrations throughout the UK from the outset, and there were several telephone conferences a day between the Administrations. Parallel movement bans were put in place in England and Wales, and the Scottish Government participated in key meetings, including Cabinet Office briefing room meetings chaired by the Prime Minister, which the First Minister and I attended. The scale of that response reflected the serious intent behind our actions. The Scottish Government recognised that the introduction of the movement ban, while fully justified by the uncertainty of the origins of the disease, would have consequences for the entire livestock supply chain. That is why, where justified by science and veterinary risk assessment, relaxations were made as soon as possible. In particular, during the first 48 hours of response we permitted movement of dairy cows across roads for milking; we permitted the movement of animals for emergency veterinary treatment; and, as a temporary measure, we permitted the on-farm burial of fallen stock to protect animal and public health. The rapid introduction of those measures was possible because of the strong and early engagement with Scottish industry and other stakeholders. From an early stage, my officials were in close contact with key stakeholders to spread the message of restrictions imposed and the need for heightened vigilance and biosecurity. That initial communication was supported by the quick establishment of a dedicated area on the Scottish Government's website and the creation of a dedicated foot-and-mouth disease helpline. At its peak, the website took 14,000 hits in one day and the helpline took 1,749 calls over a four-week period. Through those communication channels and regular meetings with stakeholders, we were able to identify the key challenges and issues that needed to be addressed. That allowed us to consider and prioritise work that needed to be done to support the on-going operation of the Scottish livestock industry. Through that approach, from 8 August—only four days into the outbreak—we were able to allow the resumption of  movements direct to slaughter. That was an unprecedented achievement, which was based solely on the available science and risk assessments. Those risk assessments were undertaken by my chief veterinary officer, Charles Milne, and his team, and I take this opportunity to state on the record my sincere thanks to all my officials. Throughout this crisis they have demonstrated the highest levels of commitment and professionalism. They consistently sought solutions and worked round the clock to ensure that the livestock sector, the media and—as often as possible—MSPs were kept fully up to date with the latest information and that restrictions were relaxed as soon as it was prudent to do so. I am proud, and Scotland should be proud, to have such high-calibre professionals working for us, particularly in such difficult circumstances. I know that the many people involved in the livestock sector that I have spoken to would echo my vote of thanks to them. As a result of their efforts, Scotland was able to be the first part of Great Britain back in business. Similar risk assessments allowed Scotland to move early to open up collection centres on 22 August; movement between farms on 24 August; and—a significant achievement—to allow markets to resume operation on 27 August, a whole week earlier than other parts of the UK were able to achieve. The Scottish Government's activities were not solely related to the livestock sector. We worked with the media and others to send out a message of reassurance to Scotland and the wider world. In particular, we wanted to ensure that everyone understood that Scotland's countryside remained open for business. We were aware that a significant number of agricultural shows were planned for August. I ensured that the organisers of each show that was planned for the weekend on which disease was confirmed were contacted and provided with advice on how their shows could continue, albeit without livestock. I personally spoke to a number of show organisers and was privileged to be able to attend the Turriff show on 5 August with the First Minister. I later also attended the Keith show. Indeed, ministers from across the Government attended many shows throughout Scotland over that four-week period. As the disease situation became clearer, further restrictions were relaxed. In particular, the islands were removed from the restricted zone on 12 August, allowing them to return to pre-3 August activities. From an early stage, the Scottish Government worked to consider how Scotland could roll back from the restrictions. In doing so, we have been ably supported by the Scottish science base, and in particular the centre of excellence in epidemiology, known as EPIC, which  is funded by the Scottish Government. As part of that, a team of scientists, lead by Edinburgh University, were commissioned to analyse known movements of livestock from Surrey to Scotland. That work considered both direct movements and indirect contacts between livestock within 20km of the infected premises in Surrey and animals that moved to Scotland between 16 July and 3 August. Not only did that work provide important evidence, enabling restrictions in Scotland to be relaxed, but it provided a significant contribution to the wider debate. I record my thanks to the EPIC team for its efforts. Discussions with other Administrations were vital in making a successful approach to Europe for a return to full European Union trade. Exports to the EU had been suspended on 3 August. For Scotland, early resumption was critical, given the value of exports to the industry and the Scottish economy. The Government considered all available opportunities for regaining access to export markets. Regionalisation was one option that was given serious consideration. I had early discussions with a wide range of industry representatives to consider the desirability of such an approach. The conclusion from those discussions was that regionalisation would be difficult, particularly given the significance of trade with other parts of the UK. It was an option, but not the preferred option under the circumstances of the August outbreak. Fortunately, it did not come to that. On 23 August, Europe's Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health unanimously agreed to allow the resumption of export trade in live animals and animal products from Great Britain, with the exception of the Surrey surveillance zone. The value and volume of trade with England and Wales meant that that was a particularly good result for Scotland. To the industry's enormous relief, the export ban was lifted three weeks after the outbreak rather than the potential three months. I express the Scottish Government's appreciation for the efforts of the European Commission officials and the UK's negotiating team in achieving that result. Once again, the speed and scale of the result was unprecedented. It is worth noting that an important factor in allowing exports to resume so early was the robust response taken throughout Great Britain. A core part of that was the national movement ban. However, there is still work to be done. We have been successful in securing EU trade, but third-country exports remain an issue and we continue to engage with the UK Government to support negotiations with the OIE, the World Organisation for Animal Health.  When I announced the lifting of movement restrictions in Scotland, the Scottish Government put in place some temporary safeguards: the 20-day movement standstill, the suspension of separation agreements and the requirement for a veterinary presence at markets. That was a temporary measure recommended by my chief veterinary officer until the risk levels returned to those of before 3 August. I have already announced that the temporary safeguards will be lifted in parallel with the lifting of the surveillance zone in Surrey. That is currently scheduled for Saturday and will mean in practice that the additional standstill restriction amounts to only an additional two days beyond the normal 13 days. By Sunday, Scotland will have returned to the normal movement regime. Overall, Scotland has achieved much over the past month. This was a team effort of the highest order, with industry and Government working together with a common goal. I would also like to record the good support that we have received from other agencies, particularly the Meat Hygiene Service, local authorities and Animal Health. In particular, this event was an early test of the new co-ordination arrangements between the Scottish Government and Animal Health, which saw a senior agency official embedded within the Edinburgh strategy team for the first time. This was invaluable in ensuring close co-ordination with the vets in the field and helped to address emerging issues quickly. Although there have been successes we must not be complacent. It is our intention to learn from these events and to be even more prepared in the future. Today, I can announce that the Scottish Government is commissioning an independent review into the Scottish response to foot-and-mouth disease. The review will led by Professor Jim Scudamore, who has extensive experience in the animal health field, having held the post of chief veterinary officer to the United Kingdom Government, including during the 2001 outbreak, and also having served as assistant chief veterinary officer for Scotland. I will meet Professor Scudamore next week to discuss in detail the scope and timescales for the review. I intend the review to inform our contingency plan and to reflect on our experience in relation to this outbreak. I will keep Parliament appraised as this review progresses. I am also commissioning research into the economic impacts of the movement ban and the relaxations that we were able to introduce. This is important in guiding our future response and ensuring that our actions are proportionate. We understand that the industry and the rural economy have been disrupted. The livestock  sector before the outbreak was already facing pressures, particularly due to the effects of cereal prices. With that in mind, I wish to say a final vote of thanks to those who were most adversely affected by this outbreak: the farmers, auctioneers, hauliers, processors and people who form every link in the livestock supply chain and whose resilience, understanding and co-operation in the face of this crisis has been truly magnificent. They have responded to the restrictions with patience and understanding and I assure them that the Scottish Government will do everything that it can to support them at this challenging time. We have acted quickly to respond. We have committed £100,000 to support a Quality Meat Scotland lamb promotion campaign. This is a practical step to aid speedy recovery and we will continue to offer practical support. The demand for quality Scottish produce in export markets and the premium price that this produce can command will bring huge benefits to the industry in Scotland. We will continue to work across the sector to maximise Scotland's opportunities. I know that we all agree that it is vital that every effort is made to identify the source of the outbreak. We await the official outcome of the investigations by the Health and Safety Executive and Professor Spratt, who are concentrating their efforts at the Institute for Animal Health and the Merial facility at Pirbright. Whatever the source, it is absolutely vital that every step is taken to prevent any lapses of biosecurity in future. In concluding, I reiterate my thanks to all involved in achieving what has been a positive outcome for Scotland. Within the space of three weeks, we responded to a significant outbreak of a notifiable disease. Furthermore, within those three weeks we were able to relax movement restrictions and restore export markets. Scotland set the pace and was able to lift many of the restrictions ahead of the rest of Great Britain, when it was safe to do so. Although there is a need to maintain the highest standards of biosecurity and to remain vigilant and alert to the threat of animal disease, there is no question but that in the handling of this outbreak the Scottish Government has delivered the best outcome for the Scottish people.

We have considered regionalisation over the past few weeks and many of those issues have been highlighted. Those are the kinds of issues that it is important for Professor Scudamore to analyse. However, we must recognise that the reason why Great Britain is identified as one epidemiological unit is because of the integrated industry and the fact that there are no natural boundaries.

I thank Rhona Brankin for echoing the thanks that I paid to our officials. I was interested in her comment about making political capital out of this issue. With regard to the independent review, it is imperative that we keep both Parliaments and the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee up to date with Professor Scudamore's work.  Throughout the crisis, all our decisions were made with regard to the advice of the chief veterinary officer in Scotland. However, as I explained in my statement, at the beginning of the crisis the chief veterinary officer, I, other officials, the First Minister and the Government decided that we had to go forward when the chief veterinary officer's advice allowed us to do so, but that we should accept that we wanted to lift the relaxations as soon as possible because of the impact on the industry. That twin-pronged approach was essential if we were to get through the crisis as quickly as possible. Of course, the fact that we did not have a disease outbreak in Scotland helped us move at a quick pace. I assure Rhona Brankin that all decisions were taken in the light of the scientific advice. I have already paid tribute in my statement to the co-operation between the Scottish Government and the UK Government. From the beginning of the crisis, I had daily conversations with Lord Rooker; or Hilary Benn, the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs; or Jonathan Shaw, a minister in the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. The First Minister was involved in conversations with the Prime Minister. There was a good team effort across Great Britain and it produced the results that we wanted in Scotland.

I thank John Scott for his initial comments and three questions. Transport is a serious issue for hauliers and the livestock sector in Scotland. The current situation is unusual because the movement restrictions have caused a backlog of livestock on farms and, potentially, in markets. We need to relax temporarily some of the restrictions on drivers' hours and the industry and the Scottish Government have conveyed that message to the UK Government. The day before yesterday, I wrote to Ruth Kelly, the Secretary of State for Transport, to ask her for a change of heart and to allow a relaxation of the restrictions for a short time so that we can deal with the livestock backlog. That would be of enormous benefit to the livestock sector in Scotland. In the aftermath of an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease there are unusual circumstances. There was a similar relaxation of the restrictions on drivers' hours in 2001, so I think we have a strong case for that to be repeated. As I indicated in my statement, the plan is to remove the 20-day standstill period on Saturday if all goes well. So by Monday, we will be back to the situation as it stood before 3 August—a 13-day standstill. As members can imagine, I have spoken to many farmers during the past few weeks and they are understanding about the situation. I am hopeful that, by Monday, the industry in Scotland will be back to the pre-3 August situation. On Pirbright and the source of the outbreak, it is important that the chamber, and I as cabinet secretary, await the outcome of the investigations that are being conducted by the Health and Safety Executive and Professor Spratt. Once we have the reports—which I hope to receive as soon as they are made available—we can reflect on their contents.

I do not want to speculate on the investigations at Pirbright. We should await the publication of the reports and then reflect on the findings. I assure Mike Rumbles that I am engaged in regular discussions with farmers' representatives and the livestock industry, and I will continue with those in the coming days. No doubt our discussions will reflect on the contents of the forthcoming reports as they become available. My response to Mike Rumbles's second question is that that is simply not the case. I am not sure where he got his information from. Under no circumstance did I, as cabinet secretary, reject advice from the chief veterinary officer. That did not occur during those four weeks. I would be interested to find out Mike Rumbles's source for that information.

Peter Peacock's initial statement was incorrect. The option of regionalisation was not rejected outright; there was simply a preferred option of the surveillance area being exempted from the lifting of the restrictions in the rest of GB because that was in Scotland's interests. Peter Peacock's initial comment was, therefore, inaccurate; it was a case of there being a preferred option, which I accepted completely. We adopted a Scottish approach; we did not reject such an approach and it would have been foolish to do so. Because we took that approach and reflected Scottish circumstances in Scotland, we were able to relax the restrictions in the islands as soon as possible and Scotland was able to relax a number of other important restrictions before the rest of GB. That was the right thing to do.

I did my best to contact many of the Opposition spokespeople and representatives of the areas in which some of the key agricultural shows were taking place during the weekend of the outbreak. I contacted some of them in lovely overseas countries and they were clearly enjoying their holidays at the time. Roseanna Cunningham's questions raise an important point about ensuring that adequate safeguards are in place at ports of entry throughout Great Britain and Scotland to prevent  illegal imports from entering the country, especially given the threat that that can pose. The issue has been raised previously in committee reports, in both the Scottish Parliament and the House of Commons, and it continues to be a concern. In the weeks ahead, I intend to meet the other devolved Administrations and the UK Government to reflect on the foot-and-mouth outbreak and I will seek reassurance from the UK Government on the matter at that meeting.

I and my officials very much appreciated the contacts that we had with constituency members the length and breadth of Scotland who made representations on behalf of their local farmers. Those representations were fed into discussions involving me and my officials and were helpful in determining our way forward, so I thank all the members who made them during the four-week period. I will meet Professor Scudamore shortly to discuss the precise terms of reference of the review and will take on board many of the good points that have been made this morning. Alex Johnstone makes an important point. We must bear in mind that the current contingency plan was drawn up in response to the 2001 outbreak. It  makes sense to recognise that the 2007 outbreak was different from the 2001 outbreak, to reflect on the existing contingency plan, which relates to 2001, and to examine the specific circumstances of the most recent outbreak so that we can update the contingency plan to take into account all the factors that Alex Johnstone mentioned.

Many of the criticisms that were expressed after the 2001 outbreak were reflected in the new contingency plan, from which I and my officials benefited greatly. If the member is suggesting that I should pay tribute to the previous Administration for taking on board those criticisms and updating the contingency plan, I am happy to do that. The outbreak in 2001 was extremely serious and I would have been amazed if we had not learned lessons from it. We learned important lessons, the main one of which was, as I explained in my statement, the need for a rapid response and the imposition, as soon as is practical, of restrictions on the movement of animals. At this stage, we have an open mind on the precise terms of reference of the review. As I said to Alex Johnstone, we will take into account many of the points that members have made today. If there are specific issues that members are keen for the review to include, they should write to me and I will ensure that their suggestions are passed on to Professor Scudamore. I am sure that he will take the opportunity to speak directly to members in the Parliament in the weeks and months ahead.

The member's question is reasonable, given that promoting Scottish food will help farmers to obtain a better return for their top-quality produce at a difficult time. The £100,000 that we have given to Quality Meat Scotland is aimed at promoting Scotch lamb, given the specific pressures that the lamb sector in Scotland faces. I know that that has been warmly welcomed. I remind members that the on-going Scottish food fortnight provides us with an excellent opportunity to spread the message of encouraging Scottish consumers to get behind our farmers and food producers at this difficult time by purchasing Scottish food. It would be an enormous help if they would do so. This morning I had a bacon roll for breakfast, as I did yesterday. I am sure that other members have been doing the same.

Throughout the outbreak, we were highly conscious that not just farmers, but hauliers, abattoirs and other sectors connected with the red meat industry were affected. We will learn lessons from the past few weeks. It would be arrogant of us to say that everything was done correctly. We want to learn any lessons that can be learned. That is one of the purposes of the review that we will undertake. As regards support for the red meat sector, I reiterate what I said to Jim Hume. We have scheduled meetings with the NFUS and other organisations for the days ahead, starting this afternoon, at which we will discuss the pressures that the red meat sector in Scotland faces. Those pressures are due to a wide range of factors,  some of which have arisen as a result of the foot-and-mouth outbreak, but many of which were already causing severe difficulties for livestock farmers in Scotland.

Richard Baker is right to say that across Great Britain the response to the outbreak was first class. Our response was part of a joint team effort involving Scotland and the UK. As I explained in my statement, my general approach is that we want the review to inform the contingency plan for responding to foot-and-mouth disease and to reflect on the experiences of the past four weeks. In broad-brush terms, that is our approach to the review. However, the precise terms of reference will reflect many of the points that have been made this morning. We will report to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee and the Parliament as soon as possible.

I point out that we have allocated only £100,000, not £100 million, for the promotion of lamb. Had we allocated £100 million, that may have scuppered yesterday's legislative announcements. I thank Liam McArthur for the cup of tea that he gave me in his constituency office last week, when I was in Kirkwall. I received such a warm response in Kirkwall that I thought I was about to be given the freedom of the community, which I am sure would have worried Liam McArthur. Yesterday, I had the great privilege of attending the Lairg sales prior to coming down to the Parliament. I spoke to many sheep farmers from the Highlands, as well as from throughout Scotland, who were there to buy lambs. The prices are down on those of previous times, which is a worry; however, thankfully, yesterday's prices at Lairg appeared not to be as bad as expected. Some of the early sale prices were very encouraging. I therefore hope that the sheep farming sector, which is crucial to the Highlands and Islands and elsewhere, will recover from some of the pressures that we are witnessing currently. I reiterate that the First Minister and I will meet farmers' representatives this afternoon and that such meetings will continue over the next few days and weeks. We are keen to do everything in our power to help the red meat sector to get through these difficult times.

My colleague, Michael Russell, has visited the Western Isles in the past few weeks, and I have had the privilege of visiting the Shetland and Orkney islands as well. We have, therefore, had the opportunity to speak to many crofters and farmers on all those islands and we are well aware of the specific nature of the livestock sector on the islands. We will have an opportunity to consider that area in the review. The islands face specific circumstances—a fact that, to a certain extent, we were able to reflect in our response over the past four weeks. The islands were the first communities to have the restrictions relaxed, because of their geographical nature and their links with the mainland trade. I feel that there is an opportunity there. We are willing to learn the lessons to ensure that the specific needs of the islands are taken into account in the future contingency plan.

The member mentions the dilemma that ministers face. I will clarify a point for members. Ship-to-ship oil transfer is a reserved matter so, under the new regulations, the Parliament can act only within the competence of devolved powers. That is an important point for members to bear in mind when referring to the Parliament's powers over the Forth Ports proposal. Of course, the Forth Ports proposal has not proceeded to a decision yet.

On 24 May, I made a statement in the Parliament on proposals for ship-to-ship oil transfer in the Firth of Forth. It was evident that there was cross-party concern about the proposals. The controversy over proposed ship-to-ship oil transfer in the Forth has highlighted two key issues. First, there are gaps in the Scottish ministers' locus to secure compliance with the habitats directive under our devolved powers. Secondly, there is a need for better controls on ship-to-ship transfers of the type that is proposed, in sensitive places around our coast. Concerns have been expressed not only in the Parliament but by local authorities, environmental organisations, community councils and other stakeholders. Following my statement, I told members that I would commit to indicating to Parliament, prior to the summer recess, the shorter-term measures that are within the powers of this Parliament. I will do that and, I hope, a little more. My officials have been working flat out to investigate the options that I mentioned. Immediately following my statement, I wrote to the then Secretary of State for Transport to seek a meeting to discuss what action he would be prepared to take. There have been subsequent discussions between officials, and I finally received a response to my letter on Monday. Although United Kingdom ministers are neither ruling action in nor ruling it out, I was disappointed that the minister was not proposing to take any immediate action to resolve the particular issue of the Forth. Perhaps other matters have been occupying his mind over the past few weeks. I will, of course, now write to congratulate Ruth Kelly on her appointment as the new Secretary of State for Transport in the UK Government. I hope to be able to present her with a strong message from this chamber that she must act. In addition, I have strived to ensure that parliamentary colleagues across the chamber have been kept  informed and kept engaged in this work as it has progressed. Today's debate will address what can be done here and in Westminster. To that end, I am grateful to David McLetchie MSP for his useful contribution on this issue during the first ministerial statement. I will therefore be delighted to accept the amendment in his name, and I urge all parties to do likewise. As I will explain, the amendment touches on the fundamental issue of where we go from here. Three key options are open to the UK Government: it could make regulations under the Merchant Shipping Act 1995 to prohibit ship-to-ship transfers under certain circumstances; it could agree to devolve appropriate powers to the Scottish ministers to allow us to regulate ship-to-ship oil transfers in particular circumstances that we choose; it could implement amendments to the British habitats regulations that are analogous to those before us today. The power to regulate or stop ship-to-ship oil cargo transfer lies very clearly in section 130 of the Merchant Shipping Act 1995, which is a UK act. The power can protect sensitive sites from hazards arising from transfers. I believe that the power needs to be transferred to the Scottish ministers; however, for the case that many of us will address today, we can rightly call on the Westminster Government to exercise its power now. I hope that the whole chamber will echo my call. The option of analogous amendment of the British habitats regulations by the UK Government is a further complementary measure that could be taken to protect environmentally sensitive sites such as the Forth. The Great Britain regulations currently have the same vulnerability in relation to plans or projects that are not currently covered by part IV of the regulations. I understand that Whitehall is considering new legislation to improve the implementation of the habitats directive in the UK. Therefore, in my further discussions with Whitehall, I will urge it to consider legislation analogous to that which is before us today. This case has thrown up gaps in our powers that the regulations are intended to correct. If we pass the regulations, we will no longer be vulnerable to hazardous activities that fall within the powers of this Parliament but, as I have said, even with them, the power to stop the proposal for ship-to-ship transfer in the Forth lies with Westminster. Today, we are calling for that power to be used. Taken together, our actions will amount to securing an important piece of environmental legislation and providing the spur for essential action elsewhere. Many of us, across the whole chamber, believe that that action is long overdue.  I will summarise how the regulations would improve articles 6.3 and 6.4 of the habitats directive in Scotland. Those provisions relate to Natura sites, which are a cornerstone of the habitats directive. They require an appropriate assessment to be undertaken for all plans and projects that are likely to have a significant effect on a Natura 2000 site, and that such plans or projects should be allowed to proceed only when it can be shown that they will not adversely affect site integrity—unless there are no alternatives and approval needs to be given for overriding reasons of public interest.

I recognise the close interest Tavish Scott and Liam McArthur are taking in this important issue, given the industries in their constituencies. Our concern is to ensure compliance with the habitats directive in Scotland as far as the devolved powers will allow. We hope that our representations to the United Kingdom Government on ship-to-ship oil transfers will be taken in the context of the habitats directive and environmentally sensitive areas. I can therefore give the members the reassurance they seek. The protection that is afforded to Natura sites under article 6 of the habitats directive is implemented in domestic legislation through regulation 3 and part IV of the habitats regulations. The regulations fill the gaps in the Scottish ministers' capability to protect Natura sites to the full extent of our devolved powers. They improve implementation of article 6 of the directive by ensuring that part IV of the regulations is applied generally to all such authorisations. They also provide new powers for the Scottish ministers to ensure that competent authorities follow the requirements of the directive when they consider authorisations. The regulations are an important piece of legislation that will benefit the environment of Scotland. They will improve the implementation of the habitats directive in Scotland by ensuring that the principles of sustainable development in article 6 of the directive are applied generally to all  decisions within devolved competence. They will also provide ministers with new powers to ensure compliance with the directive. The proposals by Forth Ports and the subsequent public concern has highlighted gaps in existing devolved legislation and the shortcomings of the Parliament's powers. Today, we are putting our house in order to address the first of those issues, and we require the co-operation of the UK Government to address the second. The regulations will enable me to advance discussions with Whitehall from a position of strength and to apply pressure to the UK Government to make immediate use of its powers to control ship-to-ship transfers in the Firth of Forth and to safeguard our precious marine environment. I urge Parliament to approve the motion and, indeed, the amendment. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the draft Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c.) Amendment (No. 2) (Scotland) Regulations 2007 be approved.

There is regular dialogue between the Scottish Executive and representatives of the Fife fishing community. My officials met Fife Fishermen's Association on 1 December to discuss quota management issues, and on 11 May Fife Fish Producers Organisation was represented at a Scottish Association of Fish Producers Organisation meeting. In addition, Fife Fishermen's Association is a member of the Scottish inshore fisheries advisory group, which last met in March. I am looking forward—as are my officials—to the open meeting with Fife fishermen on Monday 9 July, at Anstruther, to discuss further the management of inshore fishing.

First, I recognise how crucial the nephrops quota is to Fife fishing communities and to communities in the member's constituency. I clearly want to be careful before swapping quota from the producers' organisations to the under-10 metre sector and non-sector fleet. However, we have secured swaps from elsewhere, which have provided more quota for the rest of the year. I am sure that the member will welcome that. We accept the need to provide stability to those sectors in the Fife fishing communities and to have long-term planning. I am happy to consider a trial reopening of the sprat fishery and will get back to the member on that. If he wishes to write to me with more details on why that should go ahead, I will be grateful to hear his views. On the south-east Scotland inshore fisheries group co-ordinator, I am reviewing the way forward and taking stock. I certainly support the principle and want the inshore fisheries groups to go ahead, but at this stage we are taking stock  because groups' being set up has been slower than expected.

Some support was expressed during the coastal and marine national park consultation exercise, as well as a number of concerns. I am clear that we need to consider how a coastal and marine national park would sit in the broader context of the management of our marine resources. Although I am not opposed to the principle of a coastal and marine national park if there is local support, there are a number of other priorities facing Scotland's coastal communities and seas that I wish to address first.

As I explained to the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee only yesterday morning, I am in favour of a Scottish marine bill. I know that there is widespread support for that among all the parties in Parliament and beyond, in the nation, for going down that road. I cannot comment on the timetable for future legislation—that timetable will be made available after the summer recess. However, I am clear that we should first tidy up the bureaucracy and the governance of Scotland's marine waters. After all,  Scotland has the biggest share of European Union waters. There are increasing and competing demands on our waters, including the demands of renewable energy, marine wildlife and tourism. We must first sort out the existing governance before we consider adding new layers of governance, such as a coastal and marine national park.

I certainly agree on that last point. On the timetable, I can only reiterate that after the recess the Government will produce its timetable for future legislation. I acknowledge that there are real concerns in some communities and that there is opposition to the creation of a marine park, but there is also much support in other communities, so we must strike a balance. I agree that, when we decide to make progress, it will be absolutely essential that we get the consultation right. I am aware of criticisms of the previous round of consultation and am keen to examine it closely. We must get the process spot on next time.

I am preparing to make my position clear on the previous Administration's commitment to set up a working group involving stakeholders and officials to consider marine national parks and on the previous  Administration's request to the enterprise companies to consider the economic impact of setting up parks, as was their remit. I have not taken a decision on the exact status and how we will make progress in relation to those bodies. However, I am conscious that we have limited resources and that, if we are to make progress with a Scottish marine bill, that will place demands on parliamentary and Government time and on resources. I must strike a balance in taking that decision.

Data addressing the specific incidence of thefts of machinery, fencing, fuel and quad bikes from farms are not held centrally by the Scottish Executive. Information on farm crime was published in 1998 in the Scottish farm crime survey and there are no plans to repeat this survey or to undertake an economic impact assessment.

I thank the member for her question, although I am not sure whether she is seeking moral or financial support. I am certainly prepared to give moral support at this point and am keen to learn more about the success of the initiative to which she referred; it sounds extremely worthwhile. It is worth pointing out that the 1998 survey found that the majority of farmers in Scotland enjoy a crime-free working environment. It is important to keep that in mind. Of course, security issues in 2007, to which the member refers, are  important and I am keen to find out more about what the Government can do to help.

We are committed to moving towards a zero waste Scotland, which would include higher levels of recycling, greater emphasis on waste prevention and learning from other countries that have successfully moved in that direction.

I am currently looking at the position. My thinking will of course be influenced by the forthcoming spending review, which will be very influential in this context. The local authorities in the member's region have an excellent record in household recycling. The national average is 25 per cent, but Fife Council has managed to recycle and compost 29.7 per  cent of waste, Perth and Kinross Council has managed 33.3 per cent, Stirling Council has managed 32.5 per cent and Clackmannanshire Council has managed 40.2 per cent. I am sure that we all want to pay tribute to the member's local authorities, which are doing an extremely good job in the current circumstances.

I agree that reaching that position would greatly help our recycling rates. We are committed to undertaking trials in the collection of food waste from households. Many local authorities in Scotland do not collect plastics. We must examine all such issues to identify how we can intervene to help councils make progress in that area.

rose—

I realise that charm and persuasiveness are a couple of issues that may divide us, but perhaps we can be united on another issue. Does the member support Scotland's having the lead role for the UK in the fisheries negotiations, which are vital for Scotland's coastal communities?

The member said that I, in particular, am opposed to land-based renewables. Can he name one such project that I have opposed?

Scotland's environment is vital if we are to have a healthy and sustainable existence. Today's debate is therefore about how we can create a greener Scotland and deal with the fact that we are living beyond our environmental means, and about the fact that we need a greener Scotland so that we can become a wealthier, fairer, healthier, safer and stronger Scotland. The debate is about how we in Government can use the levers that are at our disposal—funding, guidance, legislation and example—to support and build on the efforts of the many people in Scotland who care about our environment and who are taking early action to protect it; for example by volunteering, recycling or buying locally. We want to create a Scotland in which there is economic stability and social justice; a Scotland that has a cohesive co-operative society in which people live fulfilling lives; a Scotland where protecting our environment is seen as being in the national and global interests; a Scotland where people are committed to contributing to securing the environment for the future; and a Scotland where people know how to engage effectively in decision making. We want to create a Scotland where people enjoy a clean and attractive countryside and healthy and thriving wildlife and habitats; a Scotland where people walk, cycle or use public transport as the norm because they are clean, efficient, safe and accessible forms of transport; a Scotland where people live in well-made, energy-efficient homes, most of whose power comes from renewable sources; and a Scotland where people are mindful of the environmental impacts of the ways in which they spend their money and leisure time. We want to create a Scotland where we recycle as much of our waste as we can; a Scotland where our businesses and industry are highly resource-efficient and competitive; and a Scotland that has a global reputation for innovation involving new greener technologies, minimisation of waste and harnessing of renewables and clean energy technologies. In that Scotland, our people and businesses will have changed their ways and, as a result, our children and grandchildren will also be able to expect to experience that fulfilling way of life.  That is our vision, but where are we now and how will we get there? It is clear that we cannot afford to be complacent. We know that people around the planet are living beyond their natural resources, which creates climate change and other pressures that affect our people, our economy and our environment. There is a lack of due respect for nature, but it is everyone's responsibility to have such respect. The challenge is to translate people's awareness and concern into changed mindsets and action: we need to encourage individuals, businesses, communities, countries and the international community to recognise their duties and obligations. We all need to change our behaviour.

I have many disagreements with the current UK Prime Minister, but we all at least acknowledge his sincerity in trying his best to put climate change on the international agenda. Our job in Scotland is to play our role in that. Since the Scottish Parliament's establishment, Scotland has made good progress, but I call for Scotland to do more from that good base. The Scottish Government will offer leadership and will support others in following it. We have made it clear that Scotland wants no nuclear power stations—a nuclear-free Scotland is an important part of our vision of Scotland's future. We are also committed to taking action to protect our marine environment. As a first step, we will change the law on ship-to-ship oil transfers near environmentally protected sites. Tomorrow, I will provide a briefing for MSPs to outline our progress on that important issue. All members are invited to that briefing. An exploration of how we can use our resources to work better for a greener Scotland will be integral to the next Scottish spending review. We will ask the council of economic advisers to consider how we might measure environmental resource depletion and well-being alongside gross domestic product, so that we will know to what extent our economic performance is sustainable. We intend that the Scottish Government and our partners—including local authorities, public bodies and the national health service—work to become exemplars on environmental issues. I can announce that we will work with those partners to develop and publish a detailed programme to  improve the Scottish public sector's environmental and sustainability performance. The Government acknowledges the good work that is being done throughout the public sector—reductions in energy and water usage and the design of new buildings to high sustainability standards being examples—but we can build on that. I make it clear that we are not doing enough or going forward fast enough. Across the public sector, we need to cut energy and water use, reduce waste, reduce travel emissions and support biodiversity. We need to support green innovation in matters such as renewables and the hydrogen economy. Alongside that programme, the Government will produce guidance for the public sector on how to build into procurement corporate social responsibility as part of a green procurement action plan, which we will publish later this year. The action plan will guide public bodies on how to assess and improve sustainability in their procurement while delivering value for money. The Scottish public sector must show leadership through not just steady improvement, but a transformation in performance. Cultural change and behavioural change are also critical—education is the key to achieving them. We will drive forward in our schools, colleges and universities the action plan for the United Nations decade of education for sustainable development. We will build on the it's our future campaign by recruiting ambassadors for change, including leaders from the voluntary sector, business and politics. We will develop and implement a training programme to equip the public sector and its partners with the capacity to deliver greener policies and services. We will learn from best practice in countries such as Denmark, Norway, Finland, England, Wales and Northern Ireland. The public sector in Scotland has the opportunity to take a lead on environmental issues, so we must seize it. We have identified a programme for a greener Scotland over the life of this session that will focus on five key themes. The first theme is climate change. Unchecked climate change will have serious direct consequences not just for Scotland's environment, including its biodiversity, but for our economy and our people. For instance, we know to our cost the impact of extreme weather patterns on our communities. That is why we have placed climate change at the heart of our economic decision making and why we will ask Parliament to support a climate change bill that will set ambitious targets to reduce emissions. Next week, we will announce to Parliament our objectives for the bill and we will discuss its detailed content with parliamentary representatives and others in the coming months.  Our second theme is sustainable places. Healthy communities need healthy places—they need clean air, green spaces and they need places where people want to live and work. We will work with partners and communities to build on the many good projects around Scotland, in order to support more sustainable places, especially in our most deprived neighbourhoods. The third theme is people and nature. The importance of our relationship with the natural world is at the heart of our concern for a greener Scotland, so by spring 2008 we will have developed plans to deliver the next phase of the Scottish biodiversity strategy, and we will look closely at how we should best approach the commitment to halt biodiversity loss by 2010. Environmental volunteering is central to the theme of people and nature. Such volunteering has an important part to play in building connections between people and nature. It offers benefits not only to those who volunteer, but to key priorities such as community participation, social justice, regeneration, health, biodiversity and good citizenship. An implementation group including representatives from public environmental bodies, local authorities, non-governmental organisations and business has been considering how the Government can assist the environmental volunteering sector. I am grateful to those representatives for their contributions.

I agree that the voluntary sector is key and I assure the member that that is at the heart of our thinking. I will deal with that matter in more detail. We accept the implementation group's recommendations to increase the quality and quantity of the volunteering experience in order to deliver even greater benefits by assisting volunteer managers to become better equipped to handle the range of responsibilities that are placed on them, by removing logistical barriers that small voluntary organisations face, and by helping to raise general standards. To answer the question that Cathy Peattie asked, we will appoint a voluntary sector based project officer to co-ordinate much of that work. Earlier today—during a visit to Tay house care unit at Murraypark nursing home at Corstorphine hospital—the Minister for Environment and I witnessed at first hand the benefits of  volunteering. We pay tribute, as all members will want to do, to the work of those volunteers, who are improving access for residents to the unit's garden. The project's environmental, health and social benefits were clear for all to see. Our fourth theme is consumption and production. We must tackle overconsumption and the throwaway society, which means that we must tackle both what we buy and what we use. Our fifth theme is people and landscape. Our landscape and our environment have made us what we are as a nation and a people. We cannot have landscapes without people. Communities are rooted in the land on which they live and work. Therefore, everything that we do must focus on sustaining living and vibrant communities. The concept of landscape and people will be central to our approach. In conclusion, we are depleting our natural resources faster than we can replenish them—we would need three planets to continue to meet our current demands. Our challenge is to move towards one-planet living and a one-planet economy, and to balance what we give and what we take now and for the future. We need to unleash the power of Scotland's people, who rightly demand information and engagement and who wish to make informed choices. The Scottish National Party's five themes will, over the parliamentary session, provide the focus of our efforts to deliver a greener Scotland.

On 31 December 2006, there were 706 Scottish fishing vessels of more than 10m in length. The comparable figure for 1993 was 1,333.

The first thing that I have done to arrest the rapid decline in the number of fishing vessels in Scotland is to campaign for a Scottish National Party Government which, thankfully, was elected on 3 May. The SNP Government intends to work closely with Scotland's fishing communities and fishing organisations on the agriculture and fisheries council next week and in the run-up to the big council in December. We are looking for new ways in which we can have a good relationship in the run-up to those talks to ensure that we have the best advice available in order to secure the best possible deal for Scotland at those important negotiations.

The SNP Government intends to have a cordial and constructive relationship with the United Kingdom Government to help us to secure the best deal for Scotland's fishing communities in UK and European negotiations. We certainly hope to build on that relationship. I was delighted to receive the invitation from the UK minister to visit him in London yesterday as a precursor to next week's agriculture and fisheries council. That invitation was rarely extended to my predecessor, so we are clearly building on that successful relationship.

The funding that is available to implement the new programme is set out in a summary document, "Scotland Rural Development Programme 2007-13", which was provided to the Scottish Parliament information centre to coincide with the parliamentary debate on the new Scotland rural development programme on 31 May 2007. The summary document includes details of the voluntary modulation rates to be applied and is available in the reference centre. The programme will include several land management measures related to the water environment. The uptake of those measures will help to achieve the objectives of the water framework directive.

I persuaded the Scottish Cabinet to make funding available for the programme, which members should welcome. On the modulation rates proposed by Ross Finnie, the situation that the Scottish Government has inherited is clear: we had a central Government funding figure and the European funding figure and, in order to fund the £1.6 billion programme that was proposed by the previous Administration and adopted by the new Administration, filling the gap would have required a trebling of the modulation rates that were announced by the SNP Government. Therefore, I do not accept the point that the member is making. Our modulation rates are far less detrimental to Scotland's farming communities. There are many measures in the £1.6 billion programme that will enhance Scotland's water environment. I hope that Iain Smith's constituents and all our constituents in rural Scotland will apply for them.

The funding for the programme that was adopted last week amounts to £1.6 billion, which is exactly the same as the figure that was proposed by the previous Administration. What is different is where the funding is sourced. Therefore, the amount of resources being made available for the agri-environment element of that programme is exactly the same as what has been made available from our programme. The member seems to be criticising her own proposals once again. The £1.6 billion is a record investment for rural Scotland. The funding for agri-environment schemes will be much greater than in the previous rural development programme. I hope that members throughout the chamber welcome that.

If the member considers the comments from the agriculture sector since the programme was announced, he will note that it has been warmly welcomed by all sectors in rural Scotland, including our farmers. Our farmers have warmly welcomed this package, which they recognise is a record package that will provide a huge boost to our rural communities and agriculture sector.

That is a good question. At the moment, there is no flexibility over the voluntary modulation rates that are set for the next seven years, other than an article in the rural development regulation that allows member states to reduce the voluntary element by any subsequent increase in the compulsory modulation element imposed by the EU. The answer to the question is that Parliament will indeed have that power.

Or the member's.

I welcome the member to his new portfolio. Will he explain why he is attacking the Government for increasing voluntary modulation by 4 per cent over seven years when his party wanted to treble it?

In the interests of accuracy, will the member recognise that the information that was in the public domain concerned the proposals in the plans of the previous Administration, of which the Liberal Democrats were a part?

I welcome the member's constructive contribution to the debate, which is in sharp contrast to some previous contributions. The member will, I am sure, be willing to work closely with the Government in the months and years ahead to ensure that farmers are able to apply successfully for much of the £1.6 billion programme, to ensure that they are increasing their profitability.

Will the member give way?

Will Rhona Brankin explain why she thinks that the new Government is failing when the plan that we announced today was put together by her Administration?

I very much welcome the opportunity to open this debate—my first as cabinet secretary—on the new Scotland rural development programme for 2007 to 2013. I have no doubt that developing and implementing the Scotland rural development programme will be challenging, but it will open up new and exciting opportunities for Scotland's rural communities. We have a chance to make a difference not only for the people who live and work in rural Scotland but for those who enjoy Scotland's spectacular natural beauty and cultural heritage. The Government hopes to build consensus around the programme and we aim to deliver on our manifesto commitments for rural Scotland on the back of sufficient parliamentary agreement. As members will be aware, the debate will allow me to make announcements about the programme. I know that members and those with a key interest in rural affairs have been eagerly awaiting this information, but I will first reflect for a moment on how we got to this point. The starting point for our deliberations over the past two weeks has been a draft programme that was produced by officials in consultation with rural stakeholders in the two years before we came to power. The cost of the draft programme has been determined by officials with stakeholder engagement. I have thought carefully about how it could be amended within the tight timescale that is available and my conclusion is that spending less than two weeks unravelling a programme that was developed over two years would be unwise and counterproductive. Although there may be a case for amendments, many of the measures in the programme are broadly supported in the chamber and throughout Scotland. Clearly, the new Government would have preferred to have had more time to consider this broad-ranging and complex programme.  Therefore, over the coming months, I propose to do that in consultation with stakeholders and members in order to develop further our ambitions for rural Scotland. As members will be aware, the progress of the Scotland programme was stalled for some considerable time by delays in the passage through the European Parliament of the voluntary modulation regulation. A key issue for Scotland in the negotiation of that regulation was to ensure the flexibility to have regional rates of voluntary modulation. My predecessor, Ross Finnie, worked hard to achieve that flexibility. In doing so, he had cross-party support and the widespread support of our rural communities. It is only right that Scotland has the flexibility to make its own decisions on voluntary modulation rates. Returning to the present, I believe that the new programme will offer wide-ranging opportunities to shape a rural Scotland that delivers business competitiveness as well as environmental and other public benefits. Support will be available for land managers, businesses and communities throughout rural Scotland. We believe that that support will deliver a vibrant rural economy and thriving rural communities over the next seven years. The term "land management contracts" will be familiar to many members. However, in order to reflect better our wider goals for the next programme, we propose that the central delivery vehicle should be rural development contracts. That will mean that the programme will do what it says on the tin—it will deliver rural development in Scotland. The new Government has had little flexibility over the programme, given the deadline for its submission to Europe. However, the one area in which we have flexibility is funding. My officials have costed the draft programme at approximately £1.6 billion over the next seven years. Of that total, just over £1.1 billion will come from the Scottish Government and £227 million will come from the European agricultural fund for rural development, which includes compulsory modulation. Some £47 million of residual moneys from the previous programme will also be used to part-fund existing commitments. The balance of £211 million will come from voluntary modulation receipts. How we spend those resources is not purely a Scottish decision. The European rural development regulation dictates that spending under the programme must be spread over three broad themes or axes. I will outline those axes and their minimum spends. Axis 1 is about improving the competitiveness of the agricultural and forestry sector, to which we must devote a minimum of 10 per cent of resources. Axis 2 is about improving  the environment and the countryside through land management, to which we must devote a minimum of 25 per cent of rural development expenditure. Axis 3 is about improving the quality of life in rural areas and encouraging the diversification of economic activity, to which we must devote a minimum of 10 per cent of expenditure. In addition, a minimum of 5 per cent of rural development expenditure must be delivered through the LEADER programme—a fourth, horizontal axis that is designed to encourage local innovation in our rural communities. I recognise the concerns that have been expressed about the impact of voluntary modulation on farm businesses. The Government has taken into account the comments that were provided by the rural development programme stakeholder group, which ministers met last week. As we set out in our manifesto, we believe that rates of voluntary modulation must be kept as low as possible so as not to disadvantage farm businesses. We have agreed that voluntary modulation should not be a substitute for expenditure by the Government or the European Union but should be additional to those contributions where that is essential for rural Scotland. Farmers must have confidence that they can benefit from the schemes that are funded by modulation. Balanced against that consideration, however, is the need to ensure that we encourage farmers and other land managers to restructure their businesses, to become profitable without subsidy and to play their part in delivering environmental and wider rural benefits.

I say to the member that the programme must be submitted to the United Kingdom Government in time for it to go to Europe. I will address the timescale for that shortly. There will be maximum consultation with members in the chamber and all our rural communities over the content and direction of the programme in the years ahead. Members may be aware that compulsory modulation already sits at 5 per cent a year. Additional voluntary modulation is currently also 5 per cent. To deliver the programme's commitments, I propose that the voluntary  modulation rate for 2007 remain at 5 per cent, rising by 3 per cent next year, to 8 per cent, and reaching 9 per cent in 2010 to 2012—4 per cent above today's rate.

For the reasons that I am laying out, I do not believe that this will disadvantage Scotland's farmers. That is a bit rich coming from Mike Rumbles, whose party, as part of the previous Administration, proposed that modulation rates should treble. In summary, voluntary modulation will be 5 per cent in 2007; 8 per cent in 2008; 8.5 per cent in 2009; and 9 per cent in each year from 2010 to 2012. We must notify those rates to the UK Government tomorrow, so that it can notify them to Brussels by 12 June.

I am sorry, but I must move on. Following formal notification, the rural development regulation does not allow for variation in the rates. Although I am uncomfortable with that, we expect the whole issue of modulation to be examined closely during the forthcoming common agricultural policy health check, which is expected to review modulation rates. It is important to note that existing regulations allow member states to reduce voluntary modulation rates should the EU decide to impose an increase in the compulsory element in the years ahead. We are well aware that some stakeholders have asked for significantly higher rates of voluntary modulation, but I have been able to address their concerns without recourse to higher rates. To do that, the Government proposes to invest a further £10 million each year over the life of the programme—£70 million in total. That significant extra investment in our rural communities will allow the programme to be funded without  undermining confidence in agriculture or jeopardising the sector's viability. As members will be aware, many farmers have faced significant financial pressures in recent years and, following the recent reform of the common agricultural policy, any further change must be handled carefully.

I am sorry, but I have taken two already and I want to move on. I also announce that I have added a new measure to the programme that will deliver a significant commitment in our manifesto. The Government has included a new measure valued at £10 million to fund a new entrants scheme for farmers. The industry needs new blood and Scotland's vital farming skills are in danger of dying out if we do nothing, given that farmers in Scotland are on average in their mid-50s and about half say that they wish to retire. We recognise that a package of measures will be required in the years ahead and I plan to meet representatives of the tenant farming forum to discuss the content of the new entrants scheme. I also intend to canvass the views of members in the chamber on the way forward. I want to spend a few moments considering the other benefits that will derive from the programme. We believe that the programme will contribute to the delivery of the Scottish Government's strategic outcomes in a number of ways. It is essential for the delivery of all other benefits that Scotland's primary land industries of farming and forestry are viable and that we deliver on our promise of a wealthier and fairer Scotland for groups in those industries, too. For that reason, our plans include, in addition to the new entrants scheme, a £31 million budget to aid the restructuring of agricultural businesses and £18 million for the creation and development of microenterprises. In addition, where profitability is not a viable or chosen option, £18 million will be available for diversification into new activities. We want those who are engaged in primary production to gain a share of the value that is added to their products. To that end, I have allocated £70 million in the programme for the processing and marketing of agricultural and forestry products. A healthier Scotland means high-quality food and access to green spaces for leisure and recreation. The programme will offer £3.5 million for membership of quality assurance schemes and more than £30 million for animal health and welfare. It incorporates a challenge fund of £10.5 million to develop woods in and around our towns and a further £3.5 million for the forests for people challenge fund. The programme will support the  provision of leisure, recreation and sporting facilities with up to £32 million and provide a further £12 million for the provision of tourism facilities, including accommodation. Improving access to the countryside for people is an important element of delivering a healthier Scotland, so the programme will provide more than £60 million to create and maintain access to rural Scotland. We also want a safer and stronger Scotland. To achieve that, we aim to encourage co-operation—£16 million will be allocated to that objective. We want to ensure that those who are farming in Scotland's less favoured areas are compensated for the permanent disadvantage that they are at compared with other areas of Europe. The considerable sum of £427 million will be allocated to less favoured area support. I am confident that the LEADER initiative will build the capacity of and strengthen our rural communities. I am therefore allocating £36 million to that initiative, which will allow innovation in our communities around Scotland to be built from the bottom up. For rural Scotland to be smarter, we need to ensure continuing skills development and there are many measures in the programme to achieve that as well. We have allocated a total of £404 million for agri-environment payments, including £45 million for organic production. That means that we have allocated £233 million for new commitments compared with £94 million in the previous programme. Some have said that Scotland's agri-environment programme is the worst funded in Europe. However, we need to compare like with like. Scotland has a great deal of extensive livestock production on poor land and 85 per cent of our agricultural land is classified as less favoured. Our payment of £427 million for less favoured area support must be taken into account. I believe that the moneys allocated for agri-environment, along with less favoured area support and the significant other resources that are going into farm businesses and forestry to deliver improvements in our water environment, for example through support for slurry storage and treatment, to tackle climate change, through such measures as afforestation and support for renewable energy, will contribute enormously to a greener Scotland over the next seven years. All in all, there will be a contribution of more than £700 million for a greener Scotland. I am sure that members are impressed with the benefits that will accrue from the programme. We must do our best to minimise any delay in implementing it that may emanate from Europe in the months ahead.  In this debate a number of members representing rural communities are set to make their first speeches since their election or re-election. I look forward to hearing their contributions and to working with them and others in the years ahead to improve the quality of life in rural Scotland, to safeguard our environment and to generate greater prosperity for rural Scotland and our nation. I commend the programme to Parliament.

I welcome the Presiding Officer to the chair. I am delighted to have the opportunity to deliver my first statement to Parliament since my appointment as Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment. It is fitting that my first statement is on the complex and important issue of ship-to-ship oil transfers in the Forth, which demonstrates the very high priority that the Government attaches to our environment and to this issue in particular. It is only right that I start by paying tribute to my predecessors—or, in this case, my predecessor, as, unlike my colleagues in the new Cabinet, I am following in the footsteps of only one predecessor, Ross Finnie, who held the post of Minister for Environment and Rural Development for eight years during the Parliament's first two sessions. He deserves credit for his role in furthering the causes of Scotland's environment over the past eight years and I look forward to working with him and with colleagues from all parties in the times ahead. I also wish to note the contribution that Sarah Boyack made by initiating a review of the legislation on ship-to-ship oil transfers in the Forth. I turn to the importance of the Firth of Forth. The areas of eastern central Scotland share a remarkable coastline, which includes the beauty of the Bass Rock, the iconic bridges that can be seen from North Queensferry and the fishing villages of the east neuk of Fife. It is a spectacular area that is steeped in history and which must be safeguarded for the future. Such is the quality of the environment that the Firth of Forth has three Natura sites, which are areas that are designated under European legislation as requiring special protection. They are the Isle of May special area of conservation, which was designated for the protection of grey seals under the European Council habitats directive; the Firth of Forth special protection area, which was designated under the birds directive for its rich assemblage of wintering seabirds and other protected species; and the Forth islands special protection area, which was also designated under the birds directive for its range of breeding seabirds.  The status of those areas reflects the importance of their habitats and species. They are sites of international importance. However, although the Firth of Forth is a treasured environment, it is also a working environment. Fishermen, ferry operators, oil industry workers, tourism operators, defence contractors and even the local energy workers all rely on the coastal environment for their livelihoods, and that is as it should be. Over time, a balance has been struck on the proper use of the marine environment. I turn to the proposal for ship-to-ship oil transfer. The proposal by Melbourne Marine Services, which is now SPT Marine Services, to initiate ship-to-ship transfers of oil opens a new chapter in the story of the Firth of Forth. I will set out how I intend to approach the subject, before outlining some of the detailed legislative issues that the Government is considering. This is a major proposal about which major concerns have been expressed by communities on both sides of the Forth. Local authorities such as Fife Council, East Lothian Council and the City of Edinburgh Council have taken a serious interest in it. During the Parliament's second session, the Public Petitions Committee and the Environment and Rural Development Committee listened to public concerns on the issue. Members of all parties have expressed grave concerns about some aspects of the proposal. When such concerns exist, it is vital that there is a robust and accountable process to ensure that the range of views can be expressed and the proper analysis undertaken. That is what the people of Scotland look to the Parliament to provide. I will approach the issue by making a firm commitment to ensure that decisions are made through mechanisms that have support both in the Parliament and in the country at large. I will now outline our concerns. As a starting point, it would appear to me that there is a strong case for ruling out new ship-to-ship oil transfers in areas that are in close proximity to areas that have been designated as environmentally sensitive, such as the Firth of Forth. Moreover, there is certainly a strong case for ensuring that decisions on whether a proposal would damage environmentally sensitive areas are taken by an organisation that is democratically accountable for those decisions and which is subject to independent and impartial scrutiny. Those views do not appear to be controversial and I am sure that they would carry widespread support in the Parliament and throughout the nation. Unfortunately, the current legislative framework does not appear to be fit for purpose and may not be able to deliver the desired objectives. Therefore, today I announce our firm intention to ensure, through legislation, that Scottish ministers  will have the opportunity to consider the merits of proposals such as the one that we are discussing and to ensure that any proposal is compliant with the relevant environmental legislation. My officials are urgently developing the options, which include the proposal for legislative change that the Scottish Green Party made last week. It has provided us with one option that has the potential to meet the objectives that I have set. This morning, I spoke to Charles Hammond, who is the group chief executive of Forth Ports, to explain to him the terms of this statement and to initiate further discussion with him. We have arranged a meeting in the near future to give him an opportunity to outline the proposals and for me to explain our legislative options to his organisation. I will be as clear to members as I was with Charles Hammond. I have asked Forth Ports not to take any precipitate action before we have had the opportunity to consider the issue in detail and as a matter of urgency. I strongly encourage Forth Ports to recognise the concerns of the Scottish Parliament, the public and the wide range of interests and commentators who have expressed concern about the proposals. Their concerns must be heeded. I will ensure that the Parliament can consider the legislative options that are available to it, but I recognise that the issue is also relevant to the United Kingdom Government, so I am seeking an urgent meeting with it to discuss its options for addressing public concerns on the issue within its areas of responsibility. Under merchant shipping legislation, it appears to be open to the UK Government to block ship-to-ship transfers anywhere around the UK, including in the Firth of Forth. I intend to make representations to the UK Government on whether those powers should now be exercised to stop the proposal in the Forth and on how they should thereafter be devolved to this Parliament to allow members to take any action that is deemed necessary to protect our precious marine environment. At this stage, I would describe the discussions as exploratory talks and not yet firm proposals. However, I believe that we can work in partnership with the UK to provide a package of complementary measures to resolve the issue. I am sure that UK ministers will want to reflect the public interest that has been clearly expressed in Scotland but, irrespective of the response from Westminster, I am determined to consider all the options that are available to the Scottish Parliament. At present, the decision-making process is a complex mix of devolved and reserved responsibilities, with some steps having already been completed. For instance, the Maritime and  Coastguard Agency has already endorsed the Forth Ports oil spill contingency plan. However, as a paramount consideration, any decision-making process needs to address the concerns that are expressed by affected communities. Communities want to know whether it is possible for the proposal to be safe, reliable and secure and to offer economic benefits while safeguarding our precious environment or whether it carries unacceptable environmental risks. Many members of the public and members across the Parliament consider that even a scintilla of environmental risk is unacceptable. Those are valid and, indeed, vital questions. Scotland's Parliament should decide but, at present, it does not. To the public's amazement, we are to all intents and purposes excluded from the decision-making process. At present, the responsibility lies with Forth Ports. It is the statutory harbour authority and is responsible for the regulation of any oil transfer operation in its area. It will develop the assessment of environmental impact and make the judgment on whether the proposal might damage the integrity of the environment. In effect, it is both judge and jury of its own assessment. That cannot be right. I welcome the assurance that Forth Ports has given that it will seek to comply with its responsibilities as the competent authority in relation to the habitats directive. In doing so, it is carrying out the required appropriate assessment to ascertain whether there is likely to be a significant impact on a Natura site. My understanding is that the work to prepare the required appropriate assessment, which will determine any implications for the Natura sites in the Forth, is nearing completion. Forth Ports has said that it will make the final document available on its website for comment. That is welcome. The company has also given assurances that it will demonstrate that it has followed the requirements of the habitats directive and that no decisions have yet been taken. All that is welcome, as is the comprehensive and constructive way in which Forth Ports has developed the document with expert input from the Scottish Government's adviser, Scottish Natural Heritage. I understand that SNH has made a number of comments and highlighted further work that is necessary. I turn now to the options for legislation, because it is clear that the locus for the Scottish ministers to intervene is limited. Even for legislation that they have a duty to implement—for example, the habitats directive—there is no mechanism for them to take a view in the round on the proposal and no scope for them to consider whether the proposal strikes the correct balance between  economic benefit and social and environmental risk. It is clear that existing legislation is insufficient for a proposal that has attracted such a degree of public interest and concern throughout the country. The Scottish Government is committed to ensuring that Scottish legislation gives full effect to the provisions of the EC birds and habitats directives. The current position, which relies essentially on the competent authority—in this case, Forth Ports—making decisions on ship-to-ship oil transfers, gives us in the Government and, no doubt, members across the chamber grave cause for concern. That is not because we oppose ship-to-ship oil transfer in all circumstances—quite the contrary. It is a legal activity and the Government appreciates that there may be good reasons why it should take place in certain circumstances and in some places. Our cause for concern stems from the fact that, in the case of ship-to-ship oil transfers—particularly in environmentally sensitive areas—the controls that would normally lie with the Scottish ministers under part IV of the Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c) Regulations 1994 are not available, as such transfers are not one of the purposes listed. We believe that the issue is too important to be left in the hands of Forth Ports alone. My concern is to ensure that elected ministers have an appropriate locus in relation to decisions of such public importance, particularly when Scotland's precious environment is at stake. That will be my department's guiding principle. The previous Administration recognised the system's weaknesses and initiated its own review of the legislation to consider what improvements could be made. That work, which still continues and which I have asked to be accelerated, includes determining whether legislation that is applicable to ports and harbours is compliant with the environmental obligations; considering the boundaries between reserved and devolved powers in relation to environmental obligations; and determining any necessary improvements to compliance that need to be addressed through changes to legislation or guidance. That was a good step forward, but we need to go further. We believe that ministers must be satisfied that the current proposal presents no danger to Scotland's environment. That is why we welcome the Scottish Green Party's proposals for legislative change and are giving them close consideration. However, no option is being ruled in—or, indeed, ruled out—at this stage. There are other possibilities in addition to the Green party's proposal, which would require Forth Ports to obtain a certificate of compliance from  ministers. We will give consideration to amending regulation 6 of the habitats regulations, which defines who is to be regarded as a competent authority for the purposes of compliance with the directive. We will also consider possible amendment of part IV of the regulations. As I mentioned, it sets out rules about appropriate assessment of plans and projects but only in relation to a specific list of purposes, which do not include ship-to-ship oil transfer. We will also consider extending ministers' powers in relation to the overriding public interest test. Finally, we will consider nature conservation order powers as well. At present, they apply only to land and not to parts of the sea or internal waters. We will review those powers to determine whether they should be widened. I emphasise that there is no one solution. In considering the options, I will be the first to recognise that none will be perfect. There will be strengths and weaknesses to each of the options and there will be limits to the current responsibilities of the Scottish ministers under the Scotland Act 1998. I also believe that the way forward will involve a mix of short and long-term changes and, as I said, no option is being ruled in or out at this point. I hope that all interests in the Parliament will recognise the importance of the issue of ship-to-ship transfers in the Forth and work constructively with the Government to introduce legislation quickly and effectively. I believe that the Parliament—and, indeed, Scotland—desires to be able to prevent ship-to-ship oil transfers and proposals that could pose a threat to our precious marine and coastal environments in the Firth of Forth or elsewhere. That is what I intend to achieve. It has been a privilege to make my first statement to the Parliament. I invite members to embrace our proposals and work together to implement the changes quickly once decisions are taken.

I thank Rhona Brankin for her initial good wishes. However, I must pick up on her comment about prevarication because the issue of ship-to-ship oil transfer has been bubbling away and causing major public concern since December 2004. I was sworn in as a minister two  days ago and today I have appeared before Parliament promising firm action. When the Labour Party was in power, it had two and a half years in which to act. I will pick up on a couple of important points that Rhona Brankin made in her questions, starting with her point about the marine and coastal strategy group. The SNP is keen to take forward the group's recommendations, particularly the recommendation that the Parliament should have conservation powers from 12 to 200 miles out to sea. I am delighted to have Labour Party support for that measure. Rhona Brankin was perhaps distracted during the election campaign in her reading of all the SNP's policy documents, because the SNP is committed to introducing a marine bill for Scotland. More announcements will be made on that subject in due course. The SNP led the debate in the previous session on the need to change marine legislation and clear up the dog's breakfast that is the current management of Scotland's marine waters, with more than 85 acts of Parliament applying between Europe, Westminster and Scotland. We are conscious of that argument and I guarantee that, unlike the previous Administration, we will take action to address the problem.

I thank John Scott for his constructive questions and approach to this important issue. I share his concerns about the  perception of the role of Forth Ports in the issue, which is of course the source of much of the concern that has been expressed by the communities around the Firth of Forth and by many members across the chamber. On the options for legislative change, a key purpose of today's statement is to invite members from across the chamber to speak to and negotiate with the Government. We are open to ideas and suggestions from other parties. We already have a good suggestion from the Green party. We must be careful to ensure that any legislative changes that we propose in this Parliament are within the remit of the Scotland Act 1998. That is one reason why the issue is so complex. There is a grey area—for example, in harbours legislation—about what is reserved to Westminster and what is devolved to this Parliament. That is a tricky issue to get round, but we are determined to do that as soon as possible. On John Scott's question about timing, I will meet my officials this afternoon to discuss a timetable for taking forward the issue. However, we would like to take it forward in tandem with all parties and, indeed, with the new environment and rural development committee, once it is up and running. We want to take a consensual approach to this important issue, which has widespread and cross-party support throughout the country. We welcome the Conservative party's support for that approach.

Again, I thank the member for his initial good wishes. I can only reiterate the point that I made to Rhona Brankin. Whereas the issue had been bubbling away for two and a half years, within days of coming into government we have made a commitment to legislate in the very near future and to negotiate with the UK Government. We must bear it in mind that, if the Parliament wishes to adopt a policy of immediately preventing ship-to-ship oil transfers in areas of environmental sensitivity, the issue currently lies with the UK Government. The UK Government could take such a decision today if it so wished. We have agreed to bring forward legislation within the Scotland Act 1998 as soon as possible to address the issue. We have done what no previous Administration has done, by laying out some of the options that are possible at the moment. We must all ensure that, within days of coming into government, we do not achieve any unintended consequences, so let us get it right. Let us discuss across the parties the best way to do that. Some parties have been constructive and have made proposals; I invite Iain Smith to do the same.

I thank Tricia Marwick for her question. As the constituency member for Central Fife, she and her constituents clearly have a close interest in the matter. The fact that Forth Ports is a private company that can, as I said in my statement, in effect act as judge and jury on the issue is a cause for serious concern. That goes back to the fact that there is an anomaly, because at the privatisation of the port authorities they were left with that power. There is a democratic deficit, which is why we were determined to give an early commitment to the Parliament that we would close that deficit and ensure that elected ministers have the power to influence such issues, which are important for our environment. I will be delighted to meet Tricia Marwick along with my officials. We can discuss that later today and make the appropriate arrangements.

I thank the member for her questions. First, I am disappointed that the member is disappointed, given that a few days into Government we have delivered a ministerial statement, which the previous Administration did not do. We have also given a commitment to take firm action as early as possible. The previous Administration gave a commitment only to a legislative review, but today we have given an update on that review plus more commitments. On retrospectively applying legislation to Forth Ports, as I said in my statement, I have made it clear to the port authority that the Parliament expects it not to take any precipitate action over the next few months and that it should reflect the will of the Parliament.

I thank Robin Harper for his many questions. I will try to answer as many of them as possible without using up all of my remaining 12 minutes. First, accidents do happen. Having witnessed accidents in Denmark in recent years, we want to take a belt-and-braces approach to ensure that accidents do not happen in Scotland. On Scapa Flow and other areas of Scotland where ship-to-ship oil transfers already take place, as I explained in my statement, there are many places in Scotland where it is perfectly acceptable for such transfers—which are a necessary function—to take place. Our concern is that environmentally sensitive Scottish waters need extra protection. That is the purpose of today's statement. On the Donaldson report, many of its recommendations are either reserved or devolved. This Parliament clearly has a role in taking forward those that are devolved, and we should take forward any remaining measures that should be taken forward. I am keen to look into that. On whether I am optimistic about negotiating with the UK Government, I am always optimistic about that. I am looking forward to one of the first tests of my negotiating skills. Finally, I have already discussed the marine bill in my response to Rhona Brankin. All that I can say is, yes, Robin Harper is correct that we need emergency legislation. A marine bill will take some time—months or years perhaps—to work up, and it will be a complex piece of legislation. Anyone who was involved in the previous Environment and Rural Development Committee's inquiry into marine legislation a few months ago will know just how complex the issue is. We need emergency legislation, which we are committed to bringing forward. However, we will take into account the Green party's constructive and attractive proposal.

I know that, as a Fifer, the member is interested in the subject that we are discussing and that he recognises how serious the problem is. I hope that in the months ahead he will move away from being a member of the awkward squad, which I was in, so that we will both have joined the new consensus squad. We must ensure that any legislation that we propose, even in an emergency context, will not have unintended consequences. That is why the matter is so complex. We want to ensure that the Green party's proposal, for example, would achieve our objectives and would not lead to unintended bureaucratic consequences that could involve ministers in all kinds of decisions that we do not want to hold up. That is an important point. We do not want to frustrate genuine and welcome business activity in the Firth of Forth or in any other Scottish waters. Our legislation will, of course, specifically address ship-to-ship oil transfers, and not other water issues. That is also an important point, which must be taken into account when we put together the draft legislation. Finally, I emphasise that environmental non-governmental organisations in Scotland play an important role in the environmental debate, but they do not propose laws or decide policies—ministers do that.

I thank the member for her constructive comments. The City of Edinburgh Council previously expressed serious concerns about the proposal. I am sure that the member is in regular contact with the new council and that it will express its concerns, too. I addressed the overriding public interest argument in my statement. That is one option that ministers are considering. On the timetable, I reiterate that the problem is a priority for the new Government. I made that clear in my statement. We have made a number of commitments. I will not reiterate what I said in my statement, but our approach contrasts sharply with that of the previous Administration. That said, I want to take a leaf out of that Administration's book and keep a dialogue going with all interested MSPs. Indeed, I will be delighted to meet all interested MSPs in the coming days so that we can work together constructively to progress the matter.

I am delighted that Professor Chris Harvie, who is one of our new members, has contributed to the debate, as he has huge expertise, which all ministers will be able to tap into in the months and years ahead. I hope that they do so. I have a lot of sympathy with many things that he said, but not all the points that he made fall within my remit. I am sure that ministers with responsibility for enterprise and transport will be keen to tap into his expertise. The marine bill has been mentioned a number of times. It will clearly offer opportunities to tidy up the legislation that applies to Scotland's seas and inland waters. I advise Professor Harvie to contact the other ministers to lend his expertise to their good work.

I thank Malcolm Chisholm for his contribution. I look forward to working with him and members of other parties in the days ahead to find a solution that has cross-party support. I reiterate that I had a constructive—albeit brief—conversation with the chief executive of Forth Ports this morning, prior to the statement, simply to inform him that the statement was taking place. I have undertaken to send him a copy of the statement. My impression is that Forth Ports is willing to take a constructive approach and is listening carefully to the views that are expressed in the Parliament. I also have the impression that it is willing to undertake a full consultation once the appropriate assessment and other steps in the  process have been completed. I am keen for that to happen, and I will raise it when I speak to Forth Ports at the meeting that should happen within the next few days.

I welcome Liam McArthur to the chamber. I look forward to tapping into his expertise, which has been learned behind the scenes over the past few years. On Scapa Flow, I reiterate my earlier comments: the specific issue that we are discussing today very much derives from the fact that a private company holds the decision-making power, as opposed to a publicly accountable body, which is the case in Scapa Flow. The member made an important distinction on that point. On Orkney's economic future, I would be delighted to lend any support I can to furthering the economic interests of the Orkney Islands. I hope that I will soon have the opportunity to visit the islands.

I recognise fully why Iain Gray's constituents will welcome the Government's statement, because it highlights how seriously we are treating the issue. On the timetable, I can only reiterate that today's statement demonstrates that this issue is a priority for the Government. Within days of being elected  we have made a commitment to legislate. We will present our proposals as soon as possible, once we have had more time to review the various options and have spoken to the other parties involved. I hope that before the summer recess we will be able to take forward the various options that I have outlined today.

I welcome Dr Ian McKee to the chamber and thank him for his question. Having just moved from Opposition to Government, I have learned quickly that ministers have to be a lot more even-handed than Opposition members on the back benches, or indeed members of the governing parties who are not ministers. We have a duty to be even-handed in our approach to the issue, and we have to be seen to be fair. On the economic benefit, many arguments have been ventilated in the public domain over the economic benefit or otherwise of the proposal. I reiterate that the Government's policy is that there should not be ship-to-ship oil transfers in environmentally sensitive areas.

I welcome Claire Baker, another new member of the Parliament, to the chamber and assure her that ministers will work constructively with the other devolved Administrations and the UK Government on those matters. It is in all our interests to do so. This Government will play a leading role in that to ensure that the rest of the UK and the UK Government recognise the urgency of addressing such situations, which have been neglected for far too long.

I nearly joined in the applause, but realised I had better not, to maintain the dignity of being the minister in this debate. Unfortunately, many of the answers to Scotland's problems lie in London—that is the reality that the member has outlined. The specific issue of ship-to-ship oil transfer is within the remit of the shipping legislation at Westminster. As I understand it, Westminster has the ability to decide the exact definition of any regulations it wishes to make, the kind of ship-to-ship oil transfers that could be banned and the circumstances in which that could happen. Our view is that the practice could be banned in cases where there are environmental sensitivities in waters. The UK Government has the power. On the actions of the previous ministers, correspondence between those ministers and the UK Government on the matter is in the public domain. I shall leave the previous ministers to account for themselves.

Does the minister agree that it is unfortunate that many of the rural schools in Moray that have received excellent inspection reports in recent years have been threatened with closure and merger by a  local council seeking to cut costs? Should education not always be the first priority in any decision on the future of rural schools?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made towards allocating Grampian police a more equitable share of national funding. (S2O-12414)

The minister has failed to compare the funding of Grampian police with the funding of forces elsewhere in the country. The point of my question was to ensure that Grampian police gets a more equitable share of national funding. Is the minister aware that many communities in Moray and Grampian feel that the police are all but invisible? According to the Grampian branch of the Scottish Police Federation, Grampian police has the lowest number of police officers per head of  population in Scotland. Does she agree that that is related to the unfair funding formula that has penalised Grampian for far too long? Is not it about time we reversed that situation by giving Grampian a fair share of police funding, to help not only with the policing of Balmoral when the royal family is there, and the policing of the offshore industry, which is an additional responsibility on the Grampian force, but with tackling the many challenges that face our communities?

I begin by congratulating John Swinney, the local constituency member, for doggedly pursuing the campaign since 2003. I also pay tribute to his campaigning constituents who, likewise, have kept the issue on the agenda since the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000 was passed. I speak not only as my party's spokesperson but as a former member—like Mike Rumbles and Alex Fergusson—of the original Rural Affairs Committee. I also speak as a member of the current Environment and Rural Development Committee and as a constituency member who, like Mike Rumbles, represents part of the existing national park—in my case, upper Speyside. Like Mike Rumbles, I have not received any representations from businesses or organisations in upper Speyside opposing the inclusion of highland Perthshire. I say that as a member who receives almost weekly letters from the local community, yet the issue has not been raised with me.

I am pointing out to the minister the extent to which representations are being made, given that two of the constituency members who have spoken in the debate who represent parts of the existing park have not received any representations that John Swinney's bill should not progress. I turn to the National Parks (Scotland) Act 2000 and the previous Rural Development Committee, on which I sat. The stage 1 report on John Swinney's bill by the current Environment and Rural Development Committee refers to the previous committee's report. Paragraph 10 states that "That Committee"—the previous Rural  Development Committee— "reported to Ministers that, 'There appeared to the Committee to be almost unanimous dissatisfaction with the proposed boundary, along with a degree of bewilderment due to the fact that the Executive had not provided clear and transparent reasons for its departure from the recommendations of SNH'". That was then, and the situation is exactly the same now. Paragraph 45 states that the existing committee found that "The National Trust for Scotland stated that 'The consultation carried out by SNH in 2001 was exemplary'. SNH stated that the reasons that it put forward to include this area in the Park during the consultation process for the draft designation order remain valid." Very little has changed over the years. Opinion is almost unanimous that the highland Perthshire area referred to in John Swinney's bill should be included within the boundary. The stage 1 report states: "Evidence to the Committee indicated that the local communities and business organisations in the eastern and highland Perthshire area generally support the Bill. The Association of Cairngorms Community Councils stated, 'Moving the boundary in that way would, as far as the communities are concerned, be the natural completion of the park. It has been noted that there is currently a gap in the connections between communities.'" The committee found itself in the strange position, when we went to Blair Atholl and took evidence from the local community, that witness after witness representing all the local sectors virtually gave us the same evidence, which was that they supported highland Perthshire being included within the boundaries of the national park. Almost all the evidence that the committee received during our inquiry gave us the same message, yet the majority of the committee—the Labour and Lib Dem members—voted against including highland Perthshire within the boundaries. John Swinney referred to the conclusions of the Environment and Rural Development Committee's report, which lays out all the reasons why his proposal should be supported. The report refers to the powerful case put forward by John Swinney and the local constituency and the many reasons why the area should be included within the boundaries, yet the committee voted five to four in favour of rejecting the bill. I turn briefly to some of the spurious arguments that were put forward against John Swinney's bill. We heard arguments from Labour members of the committee that we have to draw the boundary somewhere, so why should we accept an extension? However, we have heard time and again that the topography and natural character on both sides of the existing boundary are almost the same. We could easily extend the boundary to  include the area that is currently outside the boundary, because the areas are very similar. We also heard the argument from Labour members that the bill would just encourage other MSPs to bring forward bills to extend the boundaries even further. Can members believe that? That is part of the democratic process. It is the right of any MSP in the chamber to bring forward a member's bill to extend the park's boundaries, if they so wish. Parliament, through the democratic process and consultation, can make a decision. That is called democracy. For some reason, the Labour members of the committee do not like democracy. They do not think that people should have a say or that MSPs should make representations on behalf of their constituents. There was also the spurious argument that our accepting the demand from this community might generate demand elsewhere. At the moment, there is no evidence of strong demand for any other community to be included in the park. Two members who represent parts of the current national park have indicated that they are not aware of strong demands in their constituencies for the park to be extended further into those areas. If there is such demand in the future, so be it—that is part of the democratic process. Another spurious argument was that we would have to change the composition of the national park authority. So what? That could easily have been sorted out at stage 2, where any necessary tweaks or slight changes to the bill could have been made. That happens to any bill that goes through the Parliament. What was wrong with tweaking the bill at stage 2? After eight years in the Parliament and having gone through this process in the first session, it was an incredible experience to go through it again. The same scenarios were outlined to us, and there was virtually unanimous support for one side of the argument, but the Environment and Rural Development Committee, of which I am a member, split five to four, with the coalition parties sticking together. I wish that Nora Radcliffe were here today. I am sure that she has a valid reason for not being here, but I would have loved to have heard her reasons for speaking throughout the process in favour of the bill and of including highland Perthshire within the boundaries of the park, but, when it came to a division in committee, voting with the Labour Party not to support the bill's general principles. That is fascinating. It is a pity that she is not here to explain herself, but I am sure that in due course she will be asked to do so to the people concerned. Today we have an opportunity to right a wrong. I urge the Parliament to do a great service to democracy, to John Swinney, to the consultation  process that took place and to John Swinney's constituents, who almost unanimously supported the inclusion of their area within the national park. Let us do the right thing and support the general principles of the bill.

I note that the minister took only three of his six minutes to make that speech; I expect that I will be equally brief. Speeches in debates such as this tend to repeat many of the points that were made during consideration of amendments. I pay tribute to the Environment and Rural Development Committee. That of course includes paying tribute to myself as a member of that committee.

I also pay tribute to the clerks, and to all the stakeholders who gave such good submissions in response to the consultation on the bill and to the committee. The Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development will today find herself in the strange position of summing up in support of the motion to pass the bill, having been convener of the committee that scrutinised it. Scotland's natural environment is very precious. The bill is about protecting it and promoting and protecting two vital sectors in Scotland. On aquaculture, the Scottish National Party welcomes the steps to prevent escapes, to control parasites and to put in place the new inspection regime. We  have tried to emphasise to the minister the importance of cutting down on red tape in that sector. That is an on-going theme, to which we urge ministers to pay close attention, so that the industry is not held back because of even more red tape. On the freshwater fisheries element of the bill, speaking as the member for Moray, which contains the Findhorn, the Lossie and, of course, the Spey, I know only too well the value of the freshwater fisheries sector to Scotland. Anglers, managers and others who are associated with the sector bend over backwards to conserve fish stocks in those rivers; they do what is best for biodiversity and the environment. I believe that elements of the bill will help them to achieve that and to develop that valuable sector. It is vital that we do all that we can to prevent GS from arriving in Scotland. If there were an outbreak and we had to kill all life in our rivers to contain it, that would be devastating. The SNP has used the debates on the bill to convey to ministers the fact that it is about the future not just of anglers but of tourism and renewable energy, including hydroelectricity and other renewable technologies that make use of our rivers. It is also about the future of the whisky-distilling sector, to which I referred during consideration of amendments. There would be enormous ramifications across many sectors in Scotland if there were an outbreak of GS. That is why there has been such an emphasis on trying to prevent it from coming to Scotland in the first place and on ensuring that we take appropriate measures at our ports of entry. Future ministers will be held to account in relation to the measures that they take and the negotiations that they hold with the United Kingdom authorities in that regard. The minister mentioned that the information campaign will begin on Monday. I recall that the minister's study found that it would cost £6 million to run the campaign. It would be good if the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development, when she winds up, could detail how that will be funded. Will £6 million be made available? If so, over what timescale? If not, how much will be made available? During the stage 3 proceedings, Dennis Canavan raised the important issue of freshwater fisheries management. We are 60 days away from the third election to the Parliament. After each of the previous elections, ministers have made commitments to address the issue. Our current system is archaic. As other members have said, we have to replace it with a modern, up-to-date system. We have to keep in place what is good about the existing system but fix what can be improved. We have to think about having a catchment area basis for managing our freshwater  fisheries. It does not make sense to have one set of management structures for salmon and sea trout and others for other fish in our rivers. It makes sense to consider the issues holistically. We welcome the bill and will support it at decision time.

I commend Dennis Canavan for putting his arguments so eloquently and for having done so in Parliament for the past eight years. His amendments are on a theme that he has pursued consistently in Parliament and the SNP agrees with much of what he said. However, unfortunately the SNP will today be unable to support amendment 7 on the anglers trust. The reasons why are simple. We have to ask ourselves some questions. First, is freshwater fisheries management in Scotland archaic? Yes, it is—in some cases it could not be more archaic if it tried. Is it in desperate need of modernisation? Yes, it is—modernisation of freshwater fisheries management in Scotland is long overdue. Is it appalling that although we have been waiting for eight years, the current Administration has in the bill put forward nothing that would address the situation? Yes—of course that is an appalling situation, especially when so many promises have been made by successive ministers over the past eight years. However, we are where we are. The freshwater fisheries forum has been meeting over  the past few years and is considering a new, modern way in which to govern our freshwater fisheries. As Rob Gibson rightly said, it should be governed on a river catchment area basis. A key point to make is that the Environment and Rural Development Committee did not consider the freshwater fisheries management because it is not included in the bill. There has been no scrutiny of Dennis Canavan's proposal or of any others. I say to Dennis Canavan that that is an important point, which Parliament must take into account. After all, today we will be asked to pass primary legislation, so it should be scrutinised properly. I am afraid that the proposal in Dennis Canavan's amendment 7 was not included in the bill or in amendments at stage 2, so it has not been scrutinised. Parliament should have to take that fact into account.

If members listened closely to Jamie McGrigor's speech, it will have been obvious that he was speaking more in favour of amendment 12, in my name, than amendment 2. Amendment 2 would mean that there would be no ban on the use of live vertebrates, whereas amendment 12 accepts that there should be a ban in the bill but that, at a future date, the minister should have the power to introduce exemptions. The reason why we cannot lift a ban completely is that it is imperative that we take a belt-and-braces approach to preventing alien species from going into our rivers—in the past, that has caused much damage to indigenous species—and to protect biodiversity in Scotland's rivers. We need a ban of some kind to ensure that that does not happen. On the correspondence between the Scottish Federation for Coarse Angling and the minister's office in recent months, there is perhaps a case for making exemptions in the future. I know that the federation and the minister have been batting correspondence back and forth. It has been claimed that if we take live vertebrates from the river and use them as bait in the same river, that would not pose a threat to biodiversity and would certainly not introduce alien species to the river. My amendment 12 would leave it open to the minister to bring back exemptions in the future, but  it would ensure that there were no unintended consequences of that. It is a sensible amendment, because all it would do is give the minister the option to bring back an exemption at some future date after further discussions with the fisheries sector and with the coarse anglers in particular. It is as simple as that. I urge members to support the SNP's amendment 12, because Jamie McGrigor's amendment 10, which he did not speak to, does not make sense and would pose a threat to biodiversity in Scotland's rivers.

I will speak to amendments 1A and 15. I agree with Jamie McGrigor, not only with regard to the fact that the Parliament makes lots of laws but on some of his other points, too. I lodged amendment 1A because, if the Parliament chooses to support Jamie McGrigor's amendment 1, the SNP's amendment will strengthen it by ensuring that the minister reports back to the Parliament within a year of the act coming into force on exactly what measures have been taken in conjunction with other UK authorities to stop GS coming into the country. I lodged the same amendment as stand-alone amendment 15, so that it can be voted on separately if the Parliament does not support amendment 1. We can all agree that, if GS arrives in Scotland, it will be utterly devastating first and foremost for our rural economy, particularly for our freshwater fisheries, related tourism and jobs, and for the other industries that use our rivers, particularly the whisky industry and, increasingly, the renewable energy industry. It will also damage Scotland's image, which will be done no good whatever if we have rivers in which all the wildlife has been killed. I, too, will quote from the Environment and Rural Development Committee's report on the bill, which says that the Association of Electricity Producers said in relation to the River Tay: "If such an incident were to happen, we would have an on-going containment problem for evermore. Instead of thinking of ways of treating or containing it, we should be putting our minds to preventing it from entering our water system in the first place."—[ Official Report , Environment and Rural Development Committee , 24 October 2006; c 3576.] That shows that prevention is better than cure. I was going to quote the committee's recommendation in paragraph 99, with which we agree, but Jamie McGrigor did that. On the damage that would be done to the whisky industry—as the representative of Moray, it is close to my heart—I have an e-mail that the whisky industry sent following the recent GS contingency planning exercise. The industry says: "the exercise made it clear that if GS comes to Scotland then eradication will not be quick even if chemicals are employed ... Repeat dosing of watercourses would mean repeated disruption to distilling activities and a higher likelihood of a negative impact on international consumer confidence. This has re-inforced our view on the importance of focusing on preventative measures."  It also says that the Government's assessment of the economic damage that would result from an outbreak of GS "makes no mention of the broader impact ... on the Scotch Whisky brand reputation internationally and consumer confidence." I highlight that e-mail to the Parliament to reinforce the fact that the issue affects not just freshwater fisheries and anglers, although they are extremely valuable economically and for jobs, but other industries that use our river systems for their own ends, such as the renewable energy and whisky industries. It is imperative that we support the taking of steps at ports of entry, which the committee and the wider sectors that the debate affects support. It is also imperative to ask ministers to report to Parliament within one year of the act coming into force, to ensure that the issue is a priority for the Government. I move amendment 1A.

I appreciate the fact that the minister has strong views on Ted Brocklebank's amendment. However, the SNP's amendment 1A simply asks ministers to report back to Parliament within one year. Surely he has no objection to that.

I, too, will press my amendments. It would be good to place in the bill an obligation on the ministers to report back within one year of the act coming into force. That is not a huge demand, and the minister has already said that he would be prepared to report back at some stage. Let us ensure that that happens, given that the issue is crucial for the industries involved.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made on the dualling of the A96. (S2O-12180)

Does the minister recognise that people in Moray and elsewhere in the Highlands think that the area's economic prosperity depends on the upgrading of its transport infrastructure, particularly the dualling of the A96? If so, he will appreciate their concern about the letter that John Ewing, the head of the transport group, sent last month to Howard Brindley of HITRANS. John Ewing indicated that money may not be available for major projects in the region, including the A96. With reference to the A96 he said: "we anticipate that partial dual carriageway is the most appropriate intervention". Does the minister understand that that will be viewed as a big blow to Moray and its local economy, as well as to the economy of the rest of the Highlands? Was the civil servant speaking for the minister? Does the minister agree that that should not be the position, given the need for  much more ambitious proposals that will take the area forward in the 21 st century?

Andrew Arbuckle asked the other parties for a specific figure for what they would invest in organic farming. What is the Liberal Democrat figure?

The Scottish National Party very much welcomes today's debate. It has been a long time since we debated agriculture in the chamber. It was debated many times during the first session of Parliament, but the current Government—which controls more than 80 per cent of parliamentary time—has not brought the issue up all that often in the past few years. I recently tasted a lovely dram of Benromach malt whisky, which was distilled in my constituency at the Forres-based Benromach distillery, which is owned by the Elgin-based company Gordon & MacPhail. Of course, it was a dram from the first bottle to be certified organic by the Soil Association. I know that other malt whisky distillers in Scotland, such as Springbank in Campbeltown and Bruichladdich in Islay, have also produced organic whiskies. I was interested to note that Celtic Football Club was in the news yesterday because its restaurant is converting to healthy menus that will include organic produce. That has led to panic in the ranks of the club's fans, because the humble Scotch pie, which is eaten at half-time during matches, might now be at risk. Those two anecdotes show that many people in Scotland are responding to the new demands of consumers, who are now insisting on more organic food. Therefore, there is huge potential for the sector to boom. As the minister said, sales of organic produce throughout the United Kingdom expanded by more than 30 per cent over the past year. That is a great sign. Consumers are now asking for more locally produced nutritious food that has a lesser impact on the environment. That  provides the organic sector in Scotland with a massive opportunity. As the original organic action plan stated, the production of organic food in Scotland meets many of the objectives of "A Forward Strategy for Scottish Agriculture". On the objective of producing food for the market, our organic farmers certainly produce food for a growing market. The objective of protecting the environment is also fulfilled by organic farmers. Another objective was that farmers should embrace change—organic farmers operate in a changing market. The strategy also included the objective of promoting human health and well-being, to which organic farmers certainly contribute. This is an unusual debate, in that the SNP agrees with all the amendments that have been lodged by members of other parties. We do not even see anything to disagree with in the Executive's motion. It is an unusual circumstance that we should agree with the motion and all the amendments. We hope that the other parties will agree with the SNP's amendment as well. However, not all is rosy. The subject of today's debate is the Government's "Third Organic Annual Report", which was published earlier today. It would have been useful to have had a bit more time to read the report in full and to discuss it with the industry before today's debate but, unfortunately, we got the usual short notice. Having had a quick look at the report, we have two or three points of concern that I will highlight in my remaining two or three minutes. First, table 4 on page 10, which is entitled "Hectares under organic aid scheme agreements as at 31 March each year", shows that the total number of hectares included in the organic aid scheme declined from 342,142 hectares in 2002 to 126,746 hectares in August 2006. That represents a drop of 63 per cent, which is a pretty substantial decline in anyone's book. That must give cause for concern. I appreciate that the minister partly explained the reasons for that in her opening remarks, but perhaps she can provide further details in her closing speech on how the Executive intends to reverse that trend. Secondly, table 5 on page 11, which is entitled "Applicants for organic aid scheme", shows that only 162 of the 314 applicants in 2006 were approved. Barely half of the applicants to the scheme were successful, which highlights the financial predicament that the sector faces because of the limited budgets that are available.

I appreciate that, but I wanted to highlight the statistic, because it highlights the wider issue that faces farmers who are seeking financial support. The situation is complicated by the on-going negotiations in Europe over the budget for the rural development programme, which is not yet settled. Given that the ability of the Government to provide more financial support to organic farmers and other farmers under the schemes will depend on the outcome of the Brussels negotiations, we need to ensure that such factors are taken into account. Thirdly, page 29 of the report refers to the Soil Association's report "Market research study into the market penetration of Scottish organic produce", which highlighted further concerns. As the minister briefly alluded to, we have exploited only some areas of the organic market, but many more areas have potential. For example, the Soil Association report mentions organic eggs and organic horticulture. We also know that Scotland's arable sector has much more potential to meet the demand for organic produce. We need to ensure that we have a wide-ranging basket of organic produce rather than just the two or three areas in which we have achieved the target of meeting 70 per cent of indigenous demand in Scotland. Finally, the Soil Association's food for life initiative, which is also referred to in the annual report, has led to an increase in uptake of school meals at the schools that were involved in the pilot project. That is good news. It shows that our schools want more local produce and organic food. We need to support that. That brings me to the issue of public procurement. One of the main ways in which we can support the organic sector in Scotland is by using our massive public procurement budgets. If the Government wants to help to achieve the targets, it could, in part, use that public procurement opportunity. In the annual report, the Government states: "many producers do not compete for public contracts as they perceive they will be unsuccessful."

It is clear that we have to send out better signals to the organic sector in Scotland. The sector needs to know that it can compete for public procurement contracts and that it has a chance of being successful. Public procurement is an issue that crops up time and time again in terms of promoting local food and giving farmers new economic opportunities. I ask the minister to address that in her closing remarks.  Finally, the new action plan, which the SNP will support in the next session of the Parliament, should examine communicating the message of organic farming to the buying public in Scotland and beyond. At the moment, we are getting mixed messages. A range of bodies certify organic farming, which is complicated and confusing. We should address that. I also want to mention David Miliband, who put his foot in his mouth when he spoke about organic food, and the Manchester business school report. Consumers deserve accurate and up-to-date information on organic food. That must be part of a new action plan. On that point, I will close, Presiding Officer.

I commend the SNP amendment to the chamber. I move amendment S2M-5655.2, to insert at end: "but believes that, as many of the targets in the current Organic Action Plan have only been partially met, it is time for a new updated organic action plan that encourages a more balanced basket of healthy, locally grown organic produce, and pledges to use public procurement to promote organic produce, to communicate the benefits to consumers and to minimise the bureaucracy associated with organic production."

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will investigate the extent to which any shortage of nursing home places in Moray is exacerbating delayed discharges from local hospitals. (S2O-12082)

Is the minister aware that in rural Grampian, particularly in places such as Moray, care home residents are often placed in or offered places in homes that are far from their communities? Has he issued any guidelines to local authorities and health boards on this matter? It can be distressing for clients in care homes if their families have to travel a long way to see them.

Will the member take an intervention?

What about nuclear power?

Will the member give way?

The First Minister has repeatedly said that the report of the Committee  on Radioactive Waste Management would indicate to him whether a solution had been found to dealing with nuclear waste. What is the position of the minister and the First Minister? Did the report provide them with a solution?

Last week, the High Court in London delivered the devastating judgment that the United Kingdom Government's decision to pursue a programme of new nuclear power stations was unlawful. I know that all members will want to congratulate Greenpeace on pursuing that action in the UK High Court and doing us all—not just in Scotland, but in the UK—a tremendous favour. The High Court judge deemed the decision illegal because there was no proper consultation process, as was promised in the UK Government's 2003 energy white paper. The judge humiliated the Government when he said that the consultation was "seriously flawed", "manifestly inadequate" and "unfair", and that the Government had provided no information on the real costs and risks associated with the building of nuclear power stations in the UK. The case is, of course, reminiscent of the case of the dodgy dossier that Tony Blair produced before the Iraq war, when he decided on the outcome before he had justified the policy. The judgment vindicates what the Scottish National Party and many others in Scotland have said: the consultation that the Government undertook—if we can call it a consultation—was a complete and utter sham. It was simply an excuse for Tony Blair to back his cronies in the nuclear power industry in the UK. The judgment is another humiliating blow to the Government's nuclear policy. The Government's adviser the Sustainable Development Commission said last year that nuclear has no role in meeting the UK's or Scotland's energy needs and no role whatever in tackling climate change. The Government's amendment is disappointing, as it avoids the big issue. The Scottish people expect the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish ministers to take a stance on the issue of future nuclear power stations in Scotland. It is utterly cowardly of the minister not to mention nuclear power or express a view as to whether it is a good or bad thing for Scotland. The people of Scotland expect the Scottish Parliament to take a stance on the issue. They do not want new nuclear power stations to be built in Scotland and they feel that there is no need for them.  Our small country of 5 million people is a very lucky nation. We are blessed with an array of cleaner, safer and cheaper alternatives to meet our future energy needs and to fulfil our commitment to tackling climate change at the same time. We have hit the energy jackpot yet again, through having many of Europe's wind, wave and tidal resources, among others. We welcome yesterday's announcement from ministers—albeit it was eight years late and only 70 days before polling day—that they will back wave energy generation in Scotland. That is a step forward, but we have taken our time over it and we could have been much further forward in implementing renewables technology if ministers had got their act together. If they had put just some of the energy and enthusiasm into promoting renewables in Scotland as the UK Government has put into promoting nuclear power, we would be a lot further forward. The Government's record in Scotland does not stand up and it represents a lukewarm response to the need to promote renewables in Scotland. We had yesterday's announcement of support for the wave energy industry only because of the wake-up call when the Portuguese got in before us. Technology that was developed in Scotland was deployed commercially in Portuguese waters before we could put it in ours. There is a £50 million fund for renewable energy projects, but it has been held for years in London by the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets. Although the Labour-Lib Dem coalition Government in Scotland says that promoting renewables is a huge priority for Scotland, that pot of money has not been touched in the past few years. All our ministers have to do is draw down that £50 million and start investing it in promoting renewable energy technology in Scotland. Energy efficiency has a crucial role in the debate but, as we speak, we are still waiting for the Government's promised energy efficiency strategy for Scotland, which is at least one and a half years late. We have been promised the strategy time and again in the past 18 months but now, 70 days before the election, we are still waiting for it. During the transition period in which Scotland moves towards becoming a renewables nation in a few decades, we must harness the technologies that are available in Scotland today. We must harness the expertise that we have on our doorstep and play to Scotland's strengths. The offshore industry in Scotland, which is much maligned by members of some parties, has a crucial role in the transition from where we are today to a renewables economy. Talisman Energy Inc's massive offshore wind project in the Beatrice field, which will be the world's first deep-water offshore wind farm, is tremendously exciting for  Scotland and we must support it as much as we can. BP and its partners propose to build the world's first hydrogen power plant with carbon capture in Peterhead in north-east Scotland, which would be another world first. We must ensure that we do not miss the boat and that the UK Government is on board.

The key problem is that the UK Government has postponed a decision on the matter. We must decide now and get behind what is a massive opportunity for Scotland's energy future. That is the key, but the UK Government, and Gordon Brown in particular, have decided to postpone the decision and BP has put the project on hold. That is bad news for Scotland. We must get the go-ahead if we are to reduce Scotland's emissions and tackle global warming. Doosan Babcock Energy Ltd in Renfrew wants to develop world-leading clean coal technology in Scotland but, yet again, the Government in London is delaying decisions on support for the technology. The key point is that global warming is a threat here and now. It is a real and present danger facing Scotland. The energy sector is Scotland's biggest contributor to the harmful emissions that cause global warming. We must clean up our energy industry in Scotland, but nuclear energy is not the answer. We must scotch the myths. Nuclear energy is not reliable. As we speak, Hunterston B is closed down and it is not producing energy but, of course, the lights have not gone out in Scotland, which shows that we do not need nuclear energy at present. Nuclear energy is not carbon free: drilling for uranium causes lots of carbon emissions. Nuclear energy is certainly not a clean industry: for the past few decades, nuclear waste has been produced by the nuclear sector in Scotland. There is no safe solution to nuclear waste in Scotland. The minister should face that reality and dump any commitment to producing even more nuclear waste in Scotland. We should be supplying our communities from renewable energy sources, not sending nuclear waste convoys through their high streets. We do not have time to wait for nuclear energy. If we supported its construction, the first nuclear power station would not be up and running until 2017-18 or even later.  I conclude my speech in this short debate on nuclear energy and its relation to our energy needs and our environment by saying that we have to take the right decisions now. Future generations will depend on this Parliament having taken the right decisions now. We can have a win-win situation in Scotland. We can make the most of clean energy technologies and of our renewables potential. That could create thousands of new jobs and could meet our energy needs for centuries to come. It would also make a disproportionate contribution towards tackling global warming and towards the global effort to tackle climate change. I commend the SNP's motion to the chamber. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the recent ruling by the High Court in London that declared the UK Government's decision to back new nuclear power stations illegal due to a failure to consult adequately; recognises that the judgement is a further blow to the UK Government's pro-nuclear policy, and rejects the case for new nuclear power stations in Scotland in favour of developing our nation's enormous renewables and clean energy potential which is the quickest, most effective, safest and less expensive energy option for tackling climate change.

To ask the First Minister what measures the Scottish Executive is taking to reassure consumers at home and abroad that Scottish poultry is safe. (S2F-2731)

The First Minister no doubt shares the alarm expressed by many people that the UK apparently continues to import meat products from Hungary despite the fact that that was not supposed to happen. In the words of the UK Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, it happened only because of a "lapse in biosecurity". Is the First Minister aware of the strong feeling in the Scottish farming sector that while farmers in Scotland have bent over backwards to prevent disease and promote biosecurity on their own farms, the same cannot be said for UK Government departments, which are failing to control the very complex import and export routes for meat products, particularly from countries that have a history of animal disease? Will the First Minister investigate those very serious concerns and protect the interests of Scotland's farming communities?

Does the minister share my dismay at the dithering by the United Kingdom Government that has led to BP and other partners putting on hold their plans for a hydrogen power station in Peterhead in north-east Scotland? It would also be a carbon capture and storage facility, and a world first. What representations has he made to the UK Government to get an early decision on funding support for that project, which is vital for Scotland and the planet? Can the Scottish Government offer any assistance to ensure that the project gets the green light sooner rather than later?

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are being taken to reduce the risk of flooding in Moray and across Scotland. (S2O-11836)

I thank the minister for her detailed answer. She might be aware that in Elgin, the proposed biggest flood prevention scheme in Scotland, which will cost more than £95 million, has at long last passed the approval stage at Moray Council and will be passed to her office to go through the next stage of the process. Will she undertake to ensure that the scheme goes through the next stage of the process as soon as possible, given that the people of Elgin have been waiting many years for it to get off the ground? To what extent will the future consultation process on sustainable flood solutions, to which she referred in a previous answer, influence the timescale for dealing with the applications that are submitted in the next few weeks?

Will the member give way?

I find myself in the unusual situation of agreeing with the Conservative party's amendment in a debate on the environment, which makes me realise that there is a growing consensus in Scotland on the threat of climate change to our nation and the wider world—even the Conservatives are on board these days. The debate that the Green party has brought to the Parliament is an important one and will involve a consensus on many of the issues that are discussed. We all agree that Scotland can  play a role in tackling climate change and that, through Scotland's £30 billion central budget and the budget of United Kingdom departments and other public authorities in Scotland, we can help to create a low-carbon society in Scotland and take the environment into account across the board. We must realise that we can influence the debate through public procurement. As Patrick Harvie said, the issue is not only about helping the environment but about creating jobs in Scotland. If we think local, we will create more local jobs in our communities in Scotland and save cash for the public sector in the longer term, through the adoption of energy efficiency and other measures. However, we must raise awareness in every single public body in Scotland, whether local schools and hospitals or central Government departments. We must also remove legislative obstacles that prevent such bodies from using their budgets to buy environmentally friendly goods and services. We must ensure that all staff in public sector bodies are trained so that the issue is at the centre of their consciousness and that, day in, day out, they think about how they can help the environment as they go about their daily working lives in the public sector. Patrick Harvie mentioned the food for life initiative, details of which were sent to all members prior to the debate. That is not only about helping local businesses through local procurement and helping the environment through cutting down food miles but about improving people's health. Local food is healthier than imported food, for example because it is often not as processed, which is another key reason why we should promote the food for life initiative. I hope that the initiative is expanded outwith the Highlands and the other areas where it has been put in place so far. I sought to intervene on the minister earlier to raise an issue that a local authority worker brought to my attention a few months ago about a move to centralise contracts in local government in Scotland, I presume, to achieve economies of scale across local authority areas. However, that runs counter to any effort to encourage local procurement. I hope that that issue is being addressed.

I hope that that will help and provide comfort, but we must bear in mind the slight difference between putting pressure on local  authorities to save money through centralised contracts and legislative measures. One reason why public procurement is so important in greening our economy is that it stimulates the market for renewable energy technologies and other green products. If the public sector in Scotland spends tens of millions or perhaps billions of pounds on green products, that will increase demand for products such as solar panels or other renewable energy technologies. Prices will fall, which will allow the general population in Scotland to access such products more easily, as they will be more affordable. That is one reason why it is so important that we use public sector finances on green procurement. We must also ensure that appropriate information is available to authorities through eco-labelling and that there is traceability, so that they know that products that they buy are genuinely green. My amendment refers to the Environment and Rural Development Committee's report on its inquiry into climate change. I was a member of the committee when it produced that report, in which the committee expressed frustration about the difficulty of getting information from Government ministers on what progress has been made on using the Scottish budget to promote green procurement. I hope that the minister will address that issue in his closing speech. I move amendment S2M-594.3, to insert at end: "and further calls on the Executive to report to the Parliament, prior to dissolution, providing details of any measures taken, and their results, in response to the call made by the Environment and Rural Development Committee in its report published in May 2005 for public procurement to be used to tackle climate change."

Will the minister give way?

To ask the First Minister whether any recent steps have been taken in conjunction with the United Kingdom Government to improve the effectiveness of Scotland's representation within the European Union. (S2F-2675)

I take it that the document I have in my hand is the report that the First Minister commissioned. The report was sent to him and his Cabinet colleagues on 27 September and confirms that, in European negotiations,  Scotland is undermined, sidelined and ignored by Whitehall and the UK Government. Will the First Minister tell us what his response was when he and his colleagues received the report on 27 September? Is it the case that the report makes such uncomfortable reading for him and his colleagues, given that it vindicates the Scottish National Party's arguments for independence in Europe, that he dismissed it when he received it and he and his fellow ministers are now trying to discredit it? Will he explain to members and to Scotland why Lib Dem and Labour ministers circle the wagons to defend the reputation of Whitehall and the UK Government but do not stand up for Scotland and help the civil servants who are fighting for Scotland in Brussels?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it plans to make a submission to the United Kingdom Government's consultation on the post office network and, if so, when. (S2O-11749)

On Monday evening, in Elgin, I met representatives from nearly 20 post offices from across Moray. I was told that many of those who run post offices continue to fear for their future. That said, all of us welcome the reprieve that the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry offered last night. It would seem that some rural post offices in Scotland will come under that reprieve; they will not have to close under the Government plans. Does the minister accept that the big challenge for all the post offices in Scotland that are under threat lies in generating new business? What assistance will the Scottish Government offer in that regard? Post offices are mooting ideas such as bringing together tourist information services under the post office network and issuing local authority bus passes through post offices—a development that is already happening in some local authority areas. Is the minister looking at such proposals?

The Deputy First Minister will be aware that fishing communities consider the new days-at-sea restrictions that were imposed at the fishing negotiations this morning to be a major blow. Is he aware that, in response to the outcome of the negotiations, Michael Park, the head of the Scottish White Fish Producers Association, said on the radio this morning: "This is the most blatant display of a north south divide that I have seen for many, many years ... Not our Minister, but the English Minister Ben Bradshaw chose not to defend us"? Will the Deputy First Minister explain to the chamber and our fishing communities why Ross Finnie, Scotland's fisheries minister, who is responsible for 70 per cent of the UK fishing industry and 25 per cent of European Union waters, did not have the power to defend our fishing communities at the negotiations?

If the Liberal Democrats take the issue so seriously, why are their ministers absent from today's important debate?

I am delighted that the SNP has chosen to debate this vital issue, but I am extremely disappointed that ministers have chosen to be absent. That shows contempt for our rural communities and undermines the Parliament as an institution. The empty row of ministerial chairs sends out a loud and clear message to rural communities. Last week's statement in the House of Commons on the future of the rural sub-post office network struck fear into the hearts of rural communities. We are in the run-up to Christmas, which is the busiest time for the post office network in rural communities, and many  communities and post office staff will be wondering whether their branches will be open in 18 months' or two years' time. Scotland is bound to take the biggest hit from any closure programme. The figures quoted so far are that Scotland could lose anything from 300 to 600 sub-post offices. Anything remotely on that scale would be devastating for our rural communities. Moray Council is currently discussing the future of nine rural schools in my constituency. Those communities will have sub-post offices as well, so they will find themselves in a position in which not only their schools but their sub-post offices are under threat. Those same communities have lost their petrol stations, shops and local bank branches in recent years. It is about time that UK ministers in London asked themselves what their vision is for the future of rural communities in Scotland, because we are in real danger of turning rural communities into a preserve of the wealthy. People will have to have a car to travel to post offices elsewhere if their local post office closes, and there will be no schools, so people will have to use their cars for that too. Vulnerable local people, those without work and the elderly will be left in the lurch if rural facilities continue to close. It is hypocritical for the UK Government to say that the fact that the post office network is making a loss is the reason why its future has to be reviewed when, as others have said, the same Government has withdrawn the very services that provided that network with vital income. The crux of the debate is that the rural post office network does not play simply a commercial role. It also has a social role. The Scottish Government's research from July this year, which was published after examining three case studies in rural Scotland, listed the many reasons why local communities value their rural post offices. Those reasons include the fact that rural post offices provide "access to post office services to community members who are restricted from using other services due to their geographical location, regardless of income or physical well being" and "promote financial inclusion ... Accessing these post office services locally is reported to be useful by more vulnerable groups of the communities, such as groups of older people, who draw their pension from the post office, groups of disabled people" and others who do not have access to local bus services. According to the research, a post office provides a hub in the community and plays a role in the local tourism industry, by providing information for tourists.  In the Scottish Government's Environment and Rural Affairs Department's business plan, the list of priorities for rural communities in 2006 says that ministers will contribute to UK policy on the post office network. It is vital that the Parliament finds out what was said. The time for submissions to the UK Government was in June, July and August—before Alistair Darling made his statement in the House of Commons. We must have transparency. Our rural communities deserve to know what input ministers in this Parliament made to UK ministers before the statement was made and that input should be published. I hope that Parliament will use the opportunity today to stand up for our rural communities.

I take the minister back to stopping GS coming into the country in the first place. She has not addressed the widespread concern that the Scottish National Party, committee members and other members have expressed about the proposed scope of the ban on live fish imports. Does she see any chance of expanding the scope of that ban from what is proposed?

Will the member take an intervention?

I, too, welcome the committee's report and the debate, in which I speak both as the spokesperson for the Scottish National Party and as a member of the Environment and Rural Development Committee who has been involved in the production of the report. The debate and the bill are about two vital sectors in Scotland: the aquaculture sector and the freshwater fisheries sector. Our natural environment plays host to both sectors. The debate is not only about the jobs in those two sectors and their importance to the economy; the impact of the sectors on the environment and on biodiversity is of equal importance. All the sectors that use our natural environment for commercial, economic or recreational purposes must do so responsibly. The purpose of the  Parliament is to ensure that the necessary regulation is in place. As the minister outlined, aquaculture is an enormously valuable industry in many rural and remote parts of Scotland. It is not only about salmon but about the wider sector, which brings £700 million of value to the Scottish economy and sustains more than 10,000 jobs. As I found out during my visit last week to the Spey District Salmon Fishery Board in my constituency, the freshwater sector continues to be of enormous importance to many of our constituencies. The great salmon rivers that many of us are lucky to have in our constituencies also continue to play an important role. Last week, I met staff and anglers at the fishery board and spoke to them about their livelihoods and their hobbies. The discussions were informative and interesting. The Spey is worth £11.8 million and sustains 370 jobs in Moray. Such a scenario is replicated on our other salmon rivers throughout Scotland. The aquaculture sector in Scotland has taken enormous strides in recent years, and the Parliament has played a valuable role in ensuring that that has happened. As the minister says, the voluntary code of practice is in place. However, only 97 per cent of operators have signed up to it, so the SNP supports the minister's view that it is important to have a legislative backstop to the voluntary code of practice. It will also give more meaning to the code of practice and send out the right message from the Parliament about the code's importance. The bill aims to achieve two goals in the aquaculture sector: first, to prevent escapes; and, secondly, to control parasites and, in particular, the infamous sea louse, which can also impact on a freshwater fisheries environment. In that context, the SNP welcomes the creation of the new inspection regime. We take into account the commitment that the minister recently gave to the committee that she will do her best to rationalise the number of inspections that will take place at salmon farms, because a common theme throughout the aquaculture debates in the Parliament has been the level of bureaucracy foisted on salmon farms. We must do what we can to streamline the bureaucracy. There have been calls in the past for a one-stop shop. The bill creates a new inspection and we must recognise that it is in the interests of the sector and the Parliament that we streamline the process. The committee calls for the "intelligent rationalisation" of the inspections and the minister has given a commitment to address the matter; it is very important that that is done. We must ensure that regulation is in place, but it must be proportionate and necessary. It should not lead to significant increases in expenses for salmon farm operators in Scotland.  To stick with the aquaculture sector, we note that the minister did not include in the bill introduced to Parliament the concept of strict liability in respect of escapes from salmon farms, despite the fact that that concept was included in the consultation process. The committee report expresses concern about the matter, which the SNP shares. I think that I am right in saying that the minister has agreed to reconsider the issue at stage 2, but perhaps she will verify that when she sums up. The reason for our concern is that although we welcome the enforcement regime that will be put in place by the new inspectors' use of enforcement notices and we welcome the fact that there will now be an appeals process for salmon farmers in that context, that is taking action after the event and after escapes have occurred. Having a strict liability offence in the bill would perhaps create an incentive for salmon farmers to ensure that they take all possible steps to ensure that such escapes do not happen in the first place. The threat that GS poses to Scotland's rivers overshadowed most of the committee's consideration of the bill. The seriousness of that particular fish disease is explained by the Government's economic impact assessment statement on GS. It states: "The prevalence of Gs throughout Scotland would destroy salmon angling." That is how serious the issue is. If GS occurs in Scotland, it will destroy many jobs, it will be a huge economic blow and it will be bad for Scotland's main salmon rivers and for the rest of our freshwater fisheries. We must take every step to ensure that if GS occurs, the impact is minimised. It is difficult to argue against the minister acquiring powers to eradicate GS if it occurs in Scotland, but we must ensure that we take into account the serious concerns expressed to the committee. It was put to the committee that the cost of eradication could outweigh the benefits. That point must be at the heart of the Government's strategy in this context. Very serious concerns were expressed to the committee by the malt whisky sector. It said that, given that the only chemical that is available at the moment to treat GS would kill all life in and close down all activities related to a river, eradication would have dire consequences for local economies, including the malt whisky industry. If to treat this fish disease chemicals were inserted into some of the rivers from which water is taken for distilleries, distilleries would have to stop operating and the image of malt whisky distilling in Scotland would be affected. We must take into account the wider ramifications of treatment for GS. Other sectors such as the renewable energy sector also expressed concern about the issue.  One common theme of the debate on GS throughout the committee's deliberations was that prevention, rather than cure, is the answer. We must prevent GS from occurring in Scotland in the first place, as that is the key to safeguarding many jobs and the biodiversity of our rivers. The minister gave a lukewarm response to the committee's suggestion that we introduce stringent measures at ports of entry not just throughout Scotland, but throughout the UK, for people returning to Scotland from GS hot spots in Scandinavia, especially Norway, who have been involved in water-based sports or angling. We must ensure that disinfection takes place at ports of entry, so that we minimise the risk of GS coming into the country. The committee took a strong line on that issue. The SNP shares the view that we must speak to HM Revenue and Customs and the port authorities about ensuring that the best-possible steps are taken to encourage disinfection of people involved in angling or water-based sports when they come into the country. It is also essential that there is a big education campaign among the angling population in Scotland and other users of our rivers. The minister says that our Achilles' heel in that regard is the Scotland-England border, but the Republic of Ireland was not put off from combating foot-and-mouth disease by its border with Northern Ireland. In the same way, it is important that we should not be put off from establishing the most stringent safeguards at ports of entry in Scotland. The economic study says that the cost of running a major information campaign and putting in place disinfecting facilities at ports of entry would be £6 million. Perhaps when the minister sums up she will indicate whether that money will be provided by the Government, from where it will be provided and what progress has been made on putting together the information campaign that the minister says she supports. The SNP supports the general principles of the bill and will vote for it. We await the return to the chamber in May—when the minister may no longer be the person responsible for the matter—of the issue of freshwater fisheries management, which is the missing part of the jigsaw and is not addressed in the bill. The SNP supports the modernisation of freshwater fisheries management by updating the fisheries boards that govern Scotland's freshwater fisheries.

My reason for believing that we should have a single energy efficiency agency in Scotland is that it is imperative that the man or woman in the street is conscious of the effort to promote energy efficiency in Scotland. My experience at the moment is that if I speak to the man or woman in the street, or indeed to any local businesses, few are aware of any of the existing initiatives to promote energy efficiency in Scotland. Having one agency would heighten the profile of the issue as well as achieve economies of scale. At present, each existing agency is sourced from a different area in terms of the way in which it is organically grown.

Will the minister update members on the timescale for the energy efficiency strategy? We are still waiting for it.

I congratulate Nora Radcliffe on securing the debate. We cannot talk enough about tackling climate change, and tonight's debate is another example of the recent trend for such debates in the chamber. We all know from the weather that has occurred over the past few days, which has affected communities in your own constituency, Presiding Officer, and elsewhere in Scotland, about the here-and-now impact that climate change is having. It is imperative that we reduce Scotland's carbon footprint. As individuals, we have to reduce our carbon footprints. Households have to reduce their carbon footprints, and the public sector and business community must do so too. The Carbon Trust effectively deals with the public sector and the business community, so it plays an important role in that regard. We must get the case across to the business community and the public sector in Scotland that it is in their economic interests, as  well as the environment's interests, to reduce their carbon footprints. As Sarah Boyack said, doing that will reduce their energy bills, which is a big issue on the balance sheet for the private sector. There are also economic opportunities for new business start-ups, and I was delighted to learn that the Carbon Trust is involved in many exciting initiatives in that area. Scotland can take a lead in reducing not only its own carbon footprint but the world's carbon footprint, by developing energy efficiency techniques and technologies and exporting them to the rest of the world. I will raise two or three issues that other members might not raise. I have met representatives of the Carbon Trust in the past couple of weeks, although I was unable to attend the event in Parliament due to other engagements. I learnt that the trust has nine employees in Scotland, out of 140 across the United Kingdom. Given the urgency of the situation, I have to ask whether nine people working on behalf of the trust in Scotland is enough of a resource. I know that the trust has received a grant of £5.7 million from the Scottish Executive and that it has other income streams as well, but again, given the scale of the challenge that faces Scotland, we must, as a society and as a Parliament, examine the scale of the resources that are being devoted to that subject. The climate change levy provides much of the income—perhaps half of it—that the Carbon Trust acquires. Is the minister convinced that we are getting back our fair share of the climate change levy raised in Scotland? I do not know what the figures are, as I have been unable to find them out. I assume that the question is of importance to the minister and that he will look into it if he does not have the figures to hand. Perhaps we get more than our fair share, given Scotland's opportunity to make a contribution, but we must find out the level of climate change levy that is raised in Scotland, and how much is being spent in Scotland to tackle climate change. That is what it is all about. I am concerned about duplication. The excellent initiatives from the Carbon Trust support business incubators and other measures at the research and development stage, but other organisations, such as ITI Energy in Aberdeen, run similar projects. Enterprise agencies and companies are also involved in such initiatives. Is that work joined up, or is work being duplicated? Given that so many agencies are involved, do people know where to go to get proper advice and support? We need to look at that. It is sad that the Government in Scotland has not yet published its energy efficiency strategy, which we have been promised time and again. If the strategy is a priority for the Government of  Scotland, it should have been published long ago. We should not be waiting until just a few months before the elections and eight years into the Scottish Parliament. The issue is of the utmost importance. We were promised that the strategy would be published this December, but we are still waiting for it; I hope that the minister will give us some news on that. I hope, too, that ministers are not simply paying lip service to the issue, but are making it a priority. It is important that we have a simple message and a simple one-stop-shop approach with which to get that message across both to the public and to the business community and public sector. I do not believe that that is happening just now. Far too many agencies are involved—they include the Carbon Trust, the Energy Saving Trust and various other charities, independent organisations and Government initiatives—and they all promote the same message. We must bring them all together and have a single energy efficiency agency for Scotland. Let us have one-stop shops in Scotland's cities and bigger towns, perhaps with energy advice centres that can service the business community and the public. We must streamline our efforts, so that the public can identify with this important issue and find it easy to get support and information. I hope that the minister will give us good news, because we have been waiting for the Government to make energy efficiency a priority.

rose—

I thank the minister very much for his final 30 seconds. We wish him the best of luck in a week's time at what will be, for one reason or another, no doubt the final time that he makes representations for Scotland at the fishing talks. The minister will recall that he called the deal that was dished out to Scotland, which led to half of our white-fish fleet being scrapped, "pernicious". Does that not vindicate the SNP's concerns about having 25 per cent of Europe's fishing waters, but absolutely no say over their future?

He is not here.

Is the member not being slightly hypocritical, given that the minister, who is a Liberal Democrat, has slated some recent policy statements from the European Commission? Surely there is at least some common ground there.

On behalf of the Scottish National Party, I welcome today's debate and I use this opportunity to pay tribute to the men in our fishing industry. In particular, I pay tribute to the men at sea who—as many of our communities have found out to their cost in the past year or so—have often had to pay the ultimate sacrifice to bring fish to our tables. We welcome the debate as we prepare for the Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition's eighth December fisheries council in Brussels. The outcome of those negotiations will impact on one of Scotland's most vital sectors. Even after the difficult times of recent years, fish landings alone in Scotland are valued at more than £0.33 billion. That does not take into account the value that is added to Scottish sea food by the processing sector. Although the industry has benefited from fair fish prices this year, it is a pity that the catching sector's turnover has been undermined by the expenses of fuel costs and of acquiring quota. Given that quota must often be leased, not just from other fishermen but from companies, I hope that when the minister winds up the debate he will address the issue of why our catching sector is still required to lease such fishing rights from private companies. That is not right. Those profits could have regenerated the existing fishing fleet, which is aging. Despite past assurances that the fishing industry would be allowed to sail into calmer waters after the enormous sacrifices of previous years, our fishing communities once again face an anxious 10 days as they await the outcome of negotiations, given the backdrop that the European Commission has painted in recent months. The catching sector needs an assurance that it will be given not only quota, but enough time at sea to catch that quota. Our processing sector needs an assurance that it will be able to benefit from continuity of supply and that no more jobs will be lost in our vital onshore sector. We cannot afford to lose any more vital skills from our fish processing sector. The fishing industry's difficulties of recent years have hit the  onshore sector hard. That is why I raised that issue in my intervention. Our fishing industry has been promised time and again that it would receive due reward for the sacrifices that it has made. It was told that it would be rewarded with stability and certainty. However, yet again as this year's negotiations approach, our fishing communities face uncertainty and instability.

I will take an intervention from the minister.

I was about to come to those very points. When the European Commission proposed in July a 25 per cent across-the-board cut for quota and effort, there was an outcry from not only the fishing communities, but the minister himself, so I am surprised by his intervention. Then we had the November talks with the Norwegians about joint stocks and the 14 per cent cut in the cod quota. Even the minister described that decision as "particularly disappointing", which he reiterated in his opening speech. The SNP's point is vindicated by the minister's words in previous weeks. Last week, the first proposal for next week's talks was made by the European Commission. Once again, it has reiterated its proposals for draconian cuts that will hit Scotland's fishing communities extremely hard and, as I mentioned in my intervention on the minister, the prawn fleet in particular, which is threatened with a 25 per cent cut in effort. That would devastate the prawn fleet at a time when Scottish prawn stocks are at a healthy level. It would be ludicrous if that fishery's effort was cut back further. We welcome the minister's support to try to ensure that that does not happen. The minister described those latest EC proposals as "controversial, provocative and confrontational." The industry and ministers are once again on the back foot. Ten days before the talks, the industry is fighting for survival. We should be debating in this chamber, as well as with the European Union, the long-term management of Scotland's fishing resources. However, because of  the way in which decision making happens in Brussels, we are talking instead about several sections of the industry fighting for their survival. That has implications for public perception. Despite the talk of cuts that emanates constantly from the European Commission, Scotland's key stocks are in a healthy position. Haddock stocks are at record levels and prawn stocks are in a healthy position, as are many of our pelagic stocks, as the minister commented. Yet, because of the cod recovery plan that the Commission has described as failing, the cod problem will dominate the talks in 10 days' time, which will have implications for those fleets that catch cod as a bycatch.

Again, I return to the minister's own comments in which he described the Commission's proposals as "provocative and confrontational" and "particularly disappointing". We have a mixed fishery and, time and again, the European Commission shows willingness to sacrifice the other fleets in Scottish waters in a vain attempt to save the cod when it has admitted that the cod recovery plan needs to be reviewed. That will happen next year. Why on earth then are we talking about more draconian cuts hitting Scotland's fishing sector 10 days before the negotiations when the review of the cod recovery plan will happen in a few months? The Commission refuses to swallow its pride. In evidence to the Environment and Rural Development Committee last week, the minister made that very point. He said in his submission: "the Commission has staked its credibility as a fisheries manager on the recovery of cod." It seems that the European Commission is willing to adopt a scorched earth policy to prevent itself from having to swallow its pride over its failed cod recovery plan. We cannot afford to sacrifice all the other sectors of the industry on the altar of the cod recovery plan, which has failed. Climate change and other factors influence the location of cod stocks. We saw the report of two weeks ago in which it was verified that climate change is impacting on the location of cod stocks. I will conclude with two further points. If we manage Scotland's waters properly, we can have a prosperous future and our fishing communities can go from strength to strength. That means changing the existing system of fisheries management in Scottish waters. Scotland  accounts for 25 per cent of European Union waters, yet of all the countries round the table deciding the future of Scotland's fishing communities, we have the least say. That has to change so that we can make fishing a priority in Scotland and give the industry a prosperous future. I move amendment S2M-5303.2, to insert at end: "calls for a deal that provides Scotland's fishing communities with a sustainable share of fishing opportunities and adequate time at sea to allow the industry's quota to be caught and demands that any deal to the contrary is rejected; notes with regret that the failed Common Fisheries Policy continues to deliver remote, inflexible and draconian fisheries management that results in ongoing instability and uncertainty for our catching and fish processing sectors, and believes that, since over two-thirds of UK fish landings are in Scotland, Scotland's fisheries minister should be designated as the official lead minister for the United Kingdom in EU negotiations."

The minister will be aware that the prospect of a cut in days at sea and in the quota for the prawn sector is causing enormous concern around Scotland's coasts. Has he had any feedback from the European Commission on its approach to its own scientific advice, which is in Scotland's favour?

I asked about prawns.

Does the minister accept that the proposed measures would have an impact on not just the catching sector but the onshore sector? Fish processors will also be hit hard if there is a cutback in the number of days at sea for vessels.

To ask the First Minister what steps are being taken to ensure that the risk of flooding for communities is reduced. (S2F-2603)

The First Minister will be aware that the past week has been an anxious time for many communities that are at risk of flooding, given the number of flood warnings that  are in place. He might also be aware that the number of severe flood warnings in 2005 exceeded the total number in the previous five years, since the warnings system was put in place. Does the First Minister agree that it is now time to carry out a thorough review of flood prevention in Scotland with a view to expediting the process for getting schemes up and running and making sure that the appropriate funding is in place? Is he aware that in Moray, even with an 80 per cent contribution from the Government, the need to find the remaining 20 per cent from taxpayers' money is crippling the local authority, which has to divert money from other budgets? Does he agree that that is unacceptable and that the system puts an unfair burden on Moray, which has severe flooding problems?

My last members' business debate earlier in the year was on the subject of the future of Post Office card accounts and the future of our post office network, so I welcome the debate secured by John Swinney, which keeps the subject firmly on the Scottish Parliament's agenda. The minister's response at the end of the debate will be an indication of the current coalition Government's commitment to rural Scotland. I hope that she has many positive things to say, because since the Parliament was established we have seen throughout rural Scotland the closure of bank branches, shops, petrol stations and, in some cases, rural post offices. We must stem that trend and ensure that, as Mark Ruskell said, we start to regenerate our rural communities by  ensuring that no more viable rural post offices in our rural communities close. Recently, when I could not get to sleep one evening, I read the Scottish Executive Environment and Rural Affairs Department's business plan. We must remember that the post office network is a reserved issue, and tucked away in the business plan was a commitment to have input into UK Government policy on the future of our rural post office network. When the minister sums up at the end of the debate, I would like her to explain to the Parliament exactly what the department's input—not just lobbying but input, as laid out in the business plan—has been into UK Government policy on our rural post office network. Of course, in the business plan the minister also recognises the importance of the network. John Swinney's motion recognises the strength of public concern throughout Scotland over the future of our rural post offices. There are 32 sub-post offices in the rural communities in my constituency of Moray. I know from my rural surgeries over the past couple of months the extent of the concern expressed by people who have come to see me to discuss the future of their local sub-post office. Many members have mentioned the Postwatch Scotland survey, but I point out—no one else has done so yet—that a few months ago the Scottish Executive commissioned its own research into the value attached by our local communities to the rural post office network. The report came to several extremely positive conclusions about the value of rural post offices, covering the role of our rural post offices in protecting the community, providing jobs for people, promoting financial inclusion and helping vulnerable groups such as the disabled and the elderly to access post office services. Those findings are from the research of the Government in Scotland—they are not from another organisation's research. The people of Scotland expect our ministers to stand up for the rural post office network in the face of the onslaught from the UK Government in London and ensure that we protect that valuable service. I recently got a letter from a 15-year-old pupil at Lossiemouth high school, who lives in the village of Duffus, which is not far from Elgin. He explained the importance of the post office to the community: "Without Duffus Post Office & Shop, our village would not be a community. Just a block of houses on a map". That is how important the issue is. I hope that at the end of the debate the minister will detail exactly what she is doing to stand up for the rural post office network.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures the Justice Department is taking to help to address the level of road traffic accidents in Moray and across the Grampian area. (S2O-11161)

The minister may be aware that there have been 49 fatal collisions on the roads of Grampian this year so far, resulting in 55 fatalities, and that, over the past two or three weeks, most of the fatalities that have occurred have either been in my constituency of Moray or involved my constituents. I ask her to consider how we can promote road safety in Grampian. Will she indicate what measures could be taken to review the legislative tools that are available to the police? After all, they can take the keys off drivers who do not have proper paperwork, yet they cannot take the keys off dangerous drivers or newly qualified drivers who have been driving too fast. There are a number of measures that the grieving families wish the Justice Department and the United Kingdom Government to consider, such as allowing newly qualified drivers to carry only one passenger—or no passengers—during the first year of driving. Will the minister advise us how those issues can be considered? Will she ensure that Grampian police and Grampian fire and rescue service have appropriate resources for coping with the recent spate of accidents and for promoting road safety in the region, which is one of their key tasks?

Agents in my constituency tell me that although the administrators promised them, through the media, an update on the situation, as of yesterday they still had not heard from them. Clearly, they need those updates as soon as possible. Will the minister look into that?

I congratulate Elaine Murray on securing this important and timely debate. Like many members, I have been contacted by dozens of constituents who have been affected by the crisis. Friday 13 October was an unlucky day for hundreds of my constituents, as for thousands of people throughout Scotland who were customers of Farepak, because the company went into receivership on that day. In many communities in my constituency, Farepak recruited agents who, in turn, recruited their families, neighbours, friends and people in their workplaces. It is galling to see that the front page of the brochure that was given to agents and their customers a few months ago states: "GIVE YOUR FAMILY THE BEST EVER CHRISTMAS" and "Start saving now for Christmas 2006". As members know, many families now face a disappointing Christmas unless we pull out the finger and do what we can to help to make up for the loss that they face. The Farepak scheme was especially helpful to families that went out of their way to budget and, as Elaine Murray said, it was particularly pertinent for many low-income families in Scotland. That is certainly the case in my constituency. To give some idea of the scale of the impact area, members should know that, in many of our smaller close-knit communities where people know many other people, agents signed up their families, neighbours, friends and workplace colleagues. I received an e-mail from one workplace in Elgin that said: "From our office alone we have lost nearly £5,000 in store vouchers between 14 members of staff and their families, and we are all aware of others in the Moray area who have lost large sums of money. ... Sir Clive Thomson who was the Chairman of Farepak was given a knighthood for services to industry in the 1990s but has been allowed to basically steal this money from us with no intention of providing goods or service." I have received similar e-mails from other small communities. An e-mail from Lossiemouth states: "I am an agent for Farepak (or was!) and my customers including myself have lost £4,000 of voucher orders." An e-mail from the small community of Rothes says: "My wife is (or was) a agent of farpak whose personal loss is £850.00 but her clients total loss is £3100.00". Another e-mail from Lossiemouth says: "My family has lost £730 through vouchers I ordered through Farepak freedom2shop. Freedom to be fleeced more like."  I am sure that those stories are reflected throughout Scotland. As Elaine Murray said, it was particularly galling that Farepak accepted money from agents right up to the last moment. I have spoken to constituents who sent their cheques in on the Monday which were cleared on the Friday when the company went into receivership. As things stand, those constituents have lost every single penny of that money, which is despicable. Financial problems were known about as long ago as July, but the company continued to take money. Customers gave it money in good faith until the moment it went into receivership. It is unfortunate that the people who are involved in the crisis—the former bosses of Farepak and HBOS, for example—have had many arguments. We must help Farepak's customers, who are stuck in the middle. It is all very well for former bosses of the company and other companies to have a big public battle, but the United Kingdom Government and the Scottish Government must pull out their fingers and do what they can to help the victims of the crisis. We must bring those victims some Christmas cheer in the next few weeks. I congratulate The Press and Journal , which has started a campaign to help the 10 families in its circulation area that have been most affected by the crisis. It has appealed to businesses throughout that area to give donations. I am sure that members support what it is doing. Thousands of Scots have been affected by what has happened. We must do what we can to help low-income families in particular, agents and the families, friends and workplace colleagues of agents through the crisis and ensure that we bring them some Christmas cheer.

I am being inundated with communications from constituents in Moray who are unable to access NHS dentistry. The minister may be aware that the Grampian NHS Board area has one of the worst problems in the whole of Scotland and that Moray has perhaps the worst problem in the Grampian NHS Board area. Will he therefore investigate the situation in Moray and report back—I hope to me—on the best way forward and what can be done to help the many patients who are excluded from NHS dentistry?

The minister might be aware that following a spate of fatal road traffic accidents on roads in Moray during the past fortnight, a number of families are grieving for lost loved ones. Is he also aware that the number of fatalities on roads in Grampian this year has already exceeded the total for last year? The trend is in the wrong direction. Will the minister consider what more can be done through education and, if necessary, regulation, to cut the number of deaths on roads in Grampian? In particular, will he consider measures to reduce deaths among young people, which Gordon Jackson mentioned? Will he meet me to discuss that important issue?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I warmly welcome the minister's statement and the comments that she made at the beginning of her statement, which we echo. Does she agree that having to find even 20 per cent of the cost of flood  prevention schemes in areas that are afflicted by flooding problems is an unfair burden, given that such money does not have to be found in areas that have no flooding problems? Often, cash has to be diverted from other council budgets, which is an unfair burden on council tax payers and on other budgets, such as education budgets. Could the pace at which flood prevention schemes are produced be influenced by the fact that local authorities must find that 20 per cent contribution, which can in many cases amount to millions of pounds? That is another serious matter that must be addressed if we want such schemes to be produced sooner rather than later.

Recently, there were media reports that the Scottish Executive wanted more powers over the marine environment to be transferred from Westminster to Holyrood. Will the minister confirm whether that is the case?

Will the member list the people who have lobbied him calling for coastal marine parks in Scotland?

Will Sarah Boyack give way?

I remind the Parliament that Sarah Boyack supports the introduction of a marine act for Scotland to streamline the existing 85 acts that apply to Scotland's waters. Would it not make sense to go down that road before we foist another tier of bureaucracy on our seas?

Joined-up thinking is exactly what I am talking about.

The Conservatives are always criticising bureaucracy. Do they not feel that we should sort out the existing bureaucracy that applies to Scotland's seas before we add another tier?

The marine environment is moving up the political agenda. The European Union is consulting on its maritime strategy, the United Kingdom Government is preparing a marine bill, the Scottish Government's marine strategy is developing and there is now a proposal for a coastal and marine national park.  The whole chamber agrees that our marine environment should be taken extremely seriously, because Scotland is a marine nation. Scotland accounts for 25 per cent of Europe's waters. We have 10,000km of coastline, which represents 80 per cent of the UK's coastline. We have a superb marine environment that supports myriad species and habitats that we want to protect. Our marine environment represents 50 per cent of Scotland's biodiversity and it is part of the wonderful landscape of this country. We need prosperous coastal communities and healthy seas because our economy relies heavily on the industries and activities around our coast. Traditionally, we have obtained food from our seas. Our fishermen make their living from the seas, as do the onshore fishing sectors—fish processors, harbour services and so on. In recent decades, we have used our seas for trade, transportation, recreation and extracting oil and gas to meet our energy needs. There are now new demands on the seas around Scotland: aquaculture, renewable energy production, marine wildlife tourism and many other opportunities. We continue to find new benefits from Scotland's marine environment. We must all agree that the Parliament has a prime duty to protect and promote our seas and coastal communities. Although the SNP has no objection in principle to the concept of coastal and marine national parks, we do not believe that they have a role to play at this stage. The minister has failed to persuade us and the people of Scotland that there is a demand for coastal and marine national parks in Scotland, especially from the people who matter—those who live in our coastal communities. Given the minister's half-hearted consultation exercise and the wording of the motion, we are not convinced that even he is persuaded that there is a need for such parks at this stage. We believe that the minister should spend his time and energy on more pressing priorities that coastal communities in Scotland face. We also believe that, currently, the management of our marine resources is a dog's breakfast. The last thing that Scotland's coastal communities and our seas need is yet another layer of bureaucracy and yet another body with a say over our marine environment. Let us consider the demand for coastal and marine parks. I looked at information sheet 1 of the minister's consultation document to find out from where in Scotland the demand for such parks is coming. Under the heading "Where has this proposal come from?" the minister states: "This consultation took place during 2004 as part of the Scottish Executive's consultation on Developing a Strategic Framework for Scotland's Marine Environment. Taking into account the responses to this consultation, the Minister for Environment and Rural Development announced on 15  June 2005 the Executive's intention to proceed towards the establishment of Scotland's first Coastal and Marine National Park by 2008." I asked the Parliament's research service to examine the responses to the consultation in 2004. There were 834 responses, of which 730 were postcard or e-mail contacts organised by WWF. There were 104 substantive responses, of which only 50 addressed the questions posed by ministers on coastal and marine national parks. Only 25 of the 50 people in Scotland who responded to those questions supported the establishment of coastal and marine national parks. Twenty-five out of 834 responses—3 per cent of the total—called for the establishment of such parks.

I will come to that very point. I plan to refer to Scottish Environment LINK. The whole point of the debate, and the point that the SNP is trying to get across to the minister, is that, currently, other more pressing priorities face Scotland's coastal communities. Marine national parks are worthy and perhaps should be established in the future, but we are talking about the here and now. As Fergus Ewing mentioned, plenty of priorities are brought to the attention of MSPs who represent coastal communities. I doubt that few, if any, of us have had people coming to our surgeries and demanding that the best way forward for their community is the establishment of marine national parks at this time. People come to talk to us about the rural housing crisis; the lack of dentists; rural health services closing down; the lack of transport links in rural communities; the fact that our fishing industry is fighting for its life on an annual basis, with talks taking place in Brussels in December, and the need to cope with the decline of that industry in some communities; and the importance of inshore fisheries. Two shadow inshore fisheries groups have been set up and 10 more are planned. Why cannot we give them time to settle in? People also come to our surgeries with concerns about the future of agriculture in  rural Scotland. The average age of farmers in Scotland is above the EU average and we need to do more to encourage new entrants. People in rural and coastal communities bring plenty of pressing priorities to our surgeries.

It is not, because coastal and marine national parks are different from terrestrial ones. Marine management in Scotland is currently a complete dog's breakfast. In 2006, seven years in to the Scottish Parliament, Scottish, United Kingdom and European international agreements and more than 85 acts of Parliament govern our waters. The first thing that we should do is review the governance of Scotland's marine environment before adding yet another body and applying another tier of bureaucracy. The minister referred to Scottish Environment LINK, and I am happy to quote that organisation: "Current management of the coasts and seas around Scotland is fragmented, outdated and unable to take account of local communities ... The system is failing people and our environment. It is time to deliver truly sustainable management of our seas." That is why we believe that there are other priorities to consider. We have to sort out the dog's breakfast of the 85 acts of Parliament and the fact that European, UK and Scottish Government international agreements have more say over the future of our coastal communities and marine environment than do the people who live and work there. That is the key to the argument. We must allow people who are directly affected by decisions taken in this Parliament to have a say in their own future. We need more bottom-up governance of our marine environment, not more bureaucracy, new bodies and dictation from ministers sitting in their offices in Edinburgh. The minister is out of touch with what is happening. There might be a place for coastal and marine parks in the future, but now we have to sort out the dog's breakfast that is marine management in Scotland and put democracy before bureaucracy. I move amendment S2M-5008.2, to leave out from "supports" to end and insert: "notes that coastal and marine national parks may have a role to play in the future but that at the present time there are many other more pressing priorities facing our coastal communities; further notes that, according to Scottish Environment Link, there are already over 85 Acts of Parliament that apply to Scotland's waters and yet a further layer of bureaucracy would not be helpful or popular and would only add to the existing complexity of marine and  coastal management in Scotland; calls for a review of the governance of the marine environment before additional legislation is considered; believes that the creation of coastal and marine national parks should not be considered until other priorities are addressed and there is evidence that there is sufficient demand within local communities, and calls for the Scottish Parliament to have additional powers to help protect and promote our marine environment."

Is the minister aware of the timetabling problems that passengers who are travelling north face with connections, such as one Glasgow train arriving in Aberdeen 60 seconds after the Inverness connection has left? Passengers who want to make that journey face a two-hour delay waiting for the next Inverness train. Does he also recognise that FirstScotrail blames the timetabling problems on the fact that the route between Aberdeen and Inverness is a single-track line and does he agree that that means that it should be a priority for upgrading?

The Scottish National Party welcomes this latest of the debates on climate change in recent weeks. There is now political consensus on the matter in the chamber. The Conservatives sponsored their first debate on climate change in the chamber a few weeks ago. We know from daily media coverage that climate change is a clear and present danger to Scotland and the rest of the world. It is good to have such political consensus, which is one good thing that the Scottish Parliament has delivered—there would have been no such consensus pre-1999. I hope that we can now have a sensible debate on the impact of climate change on Scotland and how to tackle it. Despite the political consensus on the threat that climate change poses, there will be political disagreement in the chamber about how to tackle that threat and reduce Scotland's carbon footprint—indeed, we have already heard such disagreement. We must accept that we do not live in a low-carbon Scotland. Therefore, our challenge is to get society from where it currently is to the point where it is a low-carbon society and to address how society in Scotland can transform its behaviour to reduce our carbon footprint. We know that the highest emissions in Scotland are from the energy sector and the transport sector, which is the subject of today's debate, and land use. However, it is not helpful for the Greens  to walk around the Parliament with sandwich boards that say that the end of the world is nigh and to suggest that the only way forward is to close down Scotland's airports, not build any new roads and shut down the oil industry—that tends to be the Green party's message in the chamber. Such proposals will simply cause economic dislocation in Scotland's communities and will not win support from the people of Scotland for environmental policies or do anything for Scotland's environment. We must have a sensible and rational debate and plot a way forward for Scotland that its people can sign up to. Of course the SNP accepts that the transport sector is responsible for emissions that cause global warming and deteriorating air quality, particularly in many of Scotland's urban communities. We must address that important issue. The Parliament must do what it can to encourage the people of Scotland and the Scottish business community to change their behaviour. We must encourage people to take up alternatives to cars and ensure that we have a sustainable public transport system for the 21 st century. I live in Elgin. At most times of the week, it is extremely difficult—indeed, it is virtually impossible—to get from Elgin to the Parliament by public transport. It is much more tempting for me to use my car. Doing so is much easier, quicker and more efficient, although I try to use trains whenever I can. We must ensure that alternatives exist for the people of Scotland so that they can use the public transport system. Our public transport system must be integrated. An issue that I raised recently is that if a person is travelling from Glasgow through Aberdeen to Inverness, Moray or somewhere else in the Highlands, the train from Glasgow arrives in Aberdeen 60 seconds after the Inverness connecting train has left. We are light years away from having an integrated transport system in Scotland, but if we want to tempt people out of their cars, we must create such a system. A clean transport fuel strategy has an enormous potential for cutting our emissions from transport and creating thousands of new jobs in Scotland. Opportunities exist to grow biocrops to fuel our cars, and biodiesel plants have been set up in Scotland. The Government's schemes to convert our vehicles so that they could use clean fuels collapsed because the European Union stepped in and said that the schemes were illegal. The European Union has said that tackling climate change is important, but has then said that the schemes to use cleaner transport fuels that were in place in Scotland were illegal for competition reasons. The situation is ludicrous and must be tackled at the European level. A clean road-fuel strategy in Scotland could create thousands of  jobs. We should remember that it is the fuel in cars that causes emissions, rather than the cars themselves or roads. I move amendment S2M-5005.2, to leave out from "within a generation" to end and insert: "recognises that a range of measures are required to reduce transport emissions, including a clean transport fuels strategy and provision of sustainable alternatives to road transport, and further recognises that the energy sector accounts for the greatest proportion of emissions and that Scotland has enormous potential to develop cleaner and renewable energy to reduce our carbon footprint."

Will the member give way?

The minister refers to the Executive's dealings with the supermarkets. Can she elaborate? Surely it is time for a summit with the supermarkets, with ministers present. We should get everyone together to discuss the issues in a full and frank manner.

The SNP very much welcomes today's debate and the committee's report. Scotland has a reputation for being a superb food-producing nation. When food producers such as farmers and others warn us that that reputation and the very industry is being jeopardised, the Parliament has a duty to sit up and take notice. The Environment and Rural Development Committee certainly took on that task and, as Sarah Boyack mentioned in her opening speech on behalf of the committee, many of the issues are highlighted in its report. Today's news mentions that Tesco now commands nearly one third of the United Kingdom's grocery market and that its half-yearly pre-tax profits are up by 12.5 per cent. A key theme in today's debate will be that the primary producers, on whom our supermarkets largely depend, will not record similar increases in their profit margins or in their half-yearly figures.

I appreciate the minister's defence of the supermarkets, but I ask him to allow me to develop my point. Our primary producers in Scotland will not record similar increases in their profits because they are at the bottom of the supply chain. In many cases, the supermarkets are increasing profits by squeezing those who are further down the chain. That is the crux of the issue that the committee investigated and of the general debate that is taking place in Scotland about dominance in the marketplace.  We need to protect Scotland's food and drink industry. We are all aware of its importance and economic value. It puts Scotland on the map for excellent produce around the world. This country produces healthy, good-quality food and, at a time when we are debating Scotland's diet and eating habits, we should also be talking about protecting and promoting the sector. Food security needs to be part of the debate. It is important for any nation to ensure that, in so far as is possible, it can maintain food security and not simply rely on food imports. That is particularly important at a time of environmental considerations and climate change. We know that we can cut food miles by increasing our purchasing of local food. That issue has been raised with the minister time and again in relation to public procurement. We must protect our indigenous food businesses but, as the minister rightly says, we must also understand that there is a marketplace. Our businesses can survive on quality, because in many cases they offer quality produce, but they must be able to compete on a level playing field. The debate is about abuse by supermarkets, which have so much power in the marketplace. At the same time, we must recognise that consumers vote with their feet. They want convenience and, in many cases, a good price—perhaps the lowest price. We know that supermarkets are here to stay. The challenge that faces the Parliament and regulatory bodies lies in ensuring that our primary producers, consumers and supermarkets can all survive on a level playing field and in partnership. We must ensure that consumers are made aware of why they pay lower prices in many cases. That is why transparency is so important in this debate. One way in which we can empower suppliers is to ensure that consumers have full information, so that they can buy in full knowledge of exactly what they are paying for and of who is getting the profit. We are aware of the fact that the supermarkets have been abusing their power. It is a ridiculous situation when the Environment and Rural Development Committee has to take evidence from farmers on an anonymous basis. That speaks volumes about the relationship between food producers and supermarkets in today's society. In this age of openness and transparency, people should not have to give evidence anonymously to a parliamentary committee because, as they pointed out to the committee, the relationship between the supermarkets and their suppliers is often characterised by blackballing and bullying. That is wholly unacceptable. Some supermarkets, although perhaps not all of them—we must find out which supermarkets are doing  it—are abusing their massive power in the marketplace. As other members have mentioned, milk producers are being paid less than the cost of production and are being put out of business. That is wholly unacceptable and must stop. We must ensure that there is transparency, so that consumers know that producers, rather than the supermarkets, are picking up the tab for two-for-one promotions. It is unacceptable that in many cases there are no binding contracts between suppliers and supermarkets. That is a ludicrous situation. Supermarkets can simply phone up suppliers to tell them to change or cancel orders without notice, although a supplier may be dependent on such orders for survival. Proper contracts must be put in place. The committee was convinced that such things are happening and that the problems need to be addressed. In the little time that I have left, I can make only one or two more points. I urge the minister not to rely on the Competition Commission. He should not think that he can get himself off the hook by passing the buck to the commission. We need proactive action on the issue from Scotland's responsible minister. Time and again, the SNP has made the point that the minister should get together with supermarket chiefs in Scotland to discuss the issue in an open and transparent manner, to ensure that the public know that he is taking the issue seriously and doing something about it. Regulation is required and we must ensure that it is introduced. We must also ensure that the minister uses public procurement to support local produce. He has a massive budget, which should be used to buy such produce. My closing message to the minister is that he should pick up the cudgels and get tough with the supermarkets. He should talk to them on the issue so that we can deliver a much better deal not only to suppliers in Scotland, but to consumers.

As an SNP member and long-suffering member of the Environment and Rural Development Committee—I trust that I got those in the right order—I welcome the debate and the ministers' climb-down, in response to the committee's report, on the important issues that we are discussing. In many ways, this is a victory for the crofting communities, which expressed clearly their strength of feeling about some of the dangers that  they saw in the bill. It is a victory for the committee and shows the value of parliamentary committees when they work at their best. It is also a victory for the Scottish Parliament. I think that it was Jim Hunter who said that in the days before the Scottish Parliament this would not have happened; legislation would have been introduced at Westminster and put through the system, no matter the public response. Now we have our Scottish Parliament and what has happened with the bill is one of the best illustrations of its value. The saga raises serious questions about the ministers' handling of the issue. The committee and Parliament received a strong message from ministers about the benefits of the bill to our crofting communities, but the committee got an equally strong contrary message from crofting communities themselves—the same communities that ministers were supposed to have consulted before they drew up the bill. It is clear that, as far as the ministers are concerned, the process was seriously flawed. Serious questions must be asked, given that the bill that was introduced was so wide of the mark. I will say a few words about the complexity of the legislation on crofting. I hoped that when we established the Scottish Parliament, one of the things that we could do differently would be to make our legislation more accessible so that the people on whom it impacts could work with it and understand clearly what it was trying to achieve.

It is good to talk to the crofters involved, but it is more important to listen to what they say. It appears that that did not happen; otherwise, the bill would not have been so wide of the mark. One concern that the committee expressed was about the level of complexity. The bill adds further layers to crofting legislation as opposed to simplifying what already exists, which is a difficulty. Matters were made even worse when proposed amendments were presented late. They stretched to several pages and made the bill even more complex. The committee, crofting communities and everyone else engaged in the debate had to wrestle with the complexity and wade through legislative treacle. We must do something about that and I hope that, once the inquiry reports back and a future bill is drafted, we can use the opportunity to simplify crofting legislation. We received three clear messages in the evidence. The first message, as other members  have mentioned, was about the danger of having unfettered market forces at work in the crofting community. As introduced, the bill would promote those forces or at least maintain the danger, which is not what is wanted. Behind that message was the recurring theme of housing shortages in remote areas of Scotland and the temptation for crofters to sell their crofts or crofting land in what is a competitive market. As we know, housing in rural areas does not meet demand, which is why the debate occurred in the first place. I was concerned by that, because it seemed that the Crofting Reform etc Bill was a response to the housing situation rather than what was best for crofting in the 21 st century. That is perhaps its fundamental flaw. The second clear message from the crofting communities was that no vision was presented for crofting in the 21 st century. Crofting is drastically different now from what it was like in the 19 th century. My family and I spent our holiday in Harris at Luskintyre this summer, and I met many crofters while I was there. All of them held down other jobs locally as well as being crofters—mainly full-time jobs that provided their income, such as driving trucks or working in care homes. Crofting in the 21 st century is clearly different from in the 19 th century, which is why we should have considered our vision for it before introducing any bill. We put the cart before the horse, and now the ministers are paying the price. Having said that, I welcome the inquiry. It is a great opportunity and I hope that it will travel round Scotland as the Napier commission did back in the 1880s. The SNP welcomes many provisions in the remaining parts of the bill, including those on the creation of new crofts and extending crofting tenure, which other members have mentioned. Let me use Aberdeenshire as an example. If 17 members of the Westminster Parliament had voted differently on an amendment to the Crofters Holdings (Scotland) Act 1886, Aberdeenshire would also have been a crofting county. Given that we are supporting provisions for the creation of new crofts and that we know that certain parts of Scotland support that, we must ensure that other communities, whether they are in my constituency of Moray, in Aberdeenshire or elsewhere, are made aware of the potential benefits and opportunities of having crofts created in their areas. I hope that the inquiry will consider that, travel to such areas to ascertain the level of demand and explain to local communities the opportunities for new crofting areas. The third message was scathing criticism of the Crofters Commission. It was not seen to be exercising its existing powers or to be accountable. That is a serious issue. I know that David Green is moving from the Crofters  Commission to the Cairngorms National Park Authority—a good job if you can get it. That is because its convener is moving on to Scottish Natural Heritage to become its chairman at £45,000 a year for 12 days a month—another good job if you can get it. The state of the Crofters Commission and the fact that we are playing quango chairs raise some serious issues. We must do what we can to ensure that the Scottish Parliament is consulted on the appointments and is able to hold them to account. For example, the Scottish Parliament's only involvement in the appointment of the chairman of SNH was a copy of the minister's press release being passed to the clerk to the Environment and Rural Development Committee to distribute to members. In the 21 st century, when we are supposed to be promoting democracy and accountability, the Parliament should have a say in quango appointments.

The minister raises a separate debate that must be had, but we must hold appointees to account more. Crofters said that they felt that the Crofters Commission was unaccountable and not doing its job properly and that they could do little about that. Once the committee of inquiry has reported and we come back to Parliament, I hope that we will have a proper vision for crofting in the 21 st century, so that we can have thriving crofting communities in which people have the opportunity to stay on the land and we can support fragile communities. Crofts should not simply be sold to the highest bidder—whether that is a London barrister or anyone else—as holiday homes. As part of the overall debate, we must address the wider issues and not just crofting. We must ensure that the structures that surround crofting are accountable and democratic.

I congratulate Maureen Macmillan on securing tonight's debate. The issue is of vital importance to Elgin and Moray, which I have the privilege of representing. I recognise the role of my predecessor, Margaret Ewing—who sponsored the previous debate on the subject, to which Maureen Macmillan referred—who was a strong supporter of the community-based campaign to secure a bypass for Elgin. The parliamentary campaign for the bypass started when an 8,000 signature-strong petition was submitted to the Parliament by the Elgin bypass committee, which was led by The Northern Scot and Moray & Nairn Express . After working its way through the system in Parliament, the petition was closed in May this year. Since then, the bypass committee has been extremely busy prosecuting its case and taking it forward. It secured a visit by the Minister for Transport to Elgin. The minister will notice his picture here on the front page of The Northern Scot . During his fantastic visit—which I hope he enjoyed—the minister saw at first hand the traffic problems in Elgin. The headline in The Northern Scot , which organised the visit together with the bypass committee, reads "Bypass plea makes its mark on minister". I hope that that is the case. Perhaps we will find out at the end of the debate. I pay tribute to all the community campaigners who have ran the campaign for so long, including the business community and Moray Council. However, I pay particular tribute to the hugely  respected editor of The  Northern Scot , Pauline Taylor, who has put so much personal effort into the campaign. The bypass committee is as busy as ever. Although the petition has been closed, the minister will have learned from his visit that the case for a bypass in Elgin is stronger than ever. Elgin is not only the biggest community in Moray without a bypass, I am told that it is the biggest community in Scotland without a bypass. At the most recent census, Elgin had a population of 22,000. At the moment, the city is undergoing major developments, with on-going house building and major retail developments in the pipeline. Within the next few years, there will be major refits of the neighbouring RAF bases at Kinloss and Lossiemouth. As the minister and the rest of us can imagine, the traffic levels in the years ahead will increase non-stop, given those projects that are in the pipeline. Moray and Elgin need a transport system that is fit for purpose and fit for the 21 st century. In response to the minister's visit a few weeks ago, Pauline Taylor said that Elgin is "a mediaeval city trying to cope with 21st century traffic". That sums up the situation. I know that the minister is sympathetic to that viewpoint. I live in Elgin—I am perhaps the only MSP who lives in Moray—so I share the experiences of my constituents day in, day out. However, the bypass would benefit not only the residents of Elgin but, as Maureen Macmillan said, the people who use the A96, on which Elgin sits. The A96 is the route between Aberdeen, the oil capital of Scotland, and Inverness, the Highland capital. Hundreds of thousands of commuters in Scotland are familiar with the traffic jams and notorious bottlenecks on the A96. The first bottleneck in my constituency is Fochabers, which is notorious. I know that the minister is aware of the situation there: we have the go-ahead for the bypass but we have to wait for the inquiry, and there are various delays. I hope that in his closing speech the minister will address the situation in Fochabers. The other bottleneck is the subject of this debate, which is Elgin itself. Anyone who travels through the north of Scotland will be familiar with both bottlenecks. I will address the reasons why we must have the Elgin bypass, why we must upgrade the A96 and why we must deal with the other bottlenecks. The Moray 2020 strategy, which Maureen Macmillan mentioned, was published a while back. At the time, there was a threat to the RAF bases, which thankfully has since been lifted. The strategy recognises that although we have a lot going for us in Moray—our community spirit, our iconic industries and businesses, our fantastic natural environment and our quality of life—the area faces many significant challenges,  particularly economic ones. As outlined in the strategy, those economic challenges are illustrated by the fact that three quarters of the young people in Moray leave the area. One thing that we must do is retain our young people in Moray. Three quarters of 17 and 18-year-olds leave Moray to pursue a career elsewhere or to further their education. Very few of them come back to Moray. We must address that problem and change the situation. The economic challenges are best illustrated by the many examples in the strategy. A lower number of graduates work in our local economy than is the case in most places in Scotland and we have fewer jobs in the private sector—the figure is well below the national average. There is a need for diversification, because most jobs in Moray relate to the food and drink sector, the two RAF bases or the public sector. The focus of the strategy is to bring diversification to the local economy. The number 1 priority on which the whole community—the business community, residents and everyone else involved in the debate—agrees is that we must upgrade the transport infrastructure. That is seen as the key to securing economic progress for Moray in the 21 st century. It is seen as the make-or-break issue, which is why this debate is so important. We cannot have an A96 upgrade without having the Elgin bypass, as dualling the A96 would not make sense without it. This evening we are looking for, first, an acknowledgement that the current state of the A96 is unacceptable and that it needs to be upgraded. Secondly, we want the minister to acknowledge that the upgrade should include a bypass for Elgin—I hope that he was persuaded of that during his recent visit. Finally, I would like an indication of the timescale for decisions on the Fochabers bypass, the Elgin bypass and the upgrade of the A96. If the minister gives us some good news this evening, I promise to get him a nice Speyside malt to reward him for his fantastic news—I am talking about a dram, not a bottle.

We should bear in mind that a fraction of the £600-odd million that has been talked about for the Edinburgh airport rail link would solve many of our problems in Moray, which have been left to wither on the vine for far too long. I hope that we get some good news from the minister this evening.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether Scotland is able to set its own modulation rate to fund the Scottish rural development plan. (S2O-10576)

I welcome the fact that the minister is pursuing the issue. Will he acknowledge the widespread feeling in the farming sector that the modulation rate that is set should be the one that is best for Scotland, given that the recent reform of the common agricultural policy was intended to give more flexibility to our ministers to ensure that such deals are the best for Scotland? Is it the aim of the minister's end game to ensure that he has the right to set a modulation rate that is the best for Scotland?

Will the member take an intervention?

My name is Lochhead, and Mr Morrison will be hearing lots more of it in the years ahead, not to mention that of Mr Allan. In recent months, Prime Minister Tony Blair, Labour back bencher Elaine Murray and the Executive have been rejecting wind farm applications. Does the member accept that that illustrates that wind farms have to be correctly located? Does he accept that the Labour Party seems to have signed up to that? As ever, the member is expressing his hypocrisy when he speaks on this issue.

The Scottish National Party members welcome the debate, but I am sure that we are not the only ones in the chamber in a state of shock because the Tories, for perhaps the first time in seven years, have lodged what at first glance appears to be quite a sensible, pro-environment motion. Perhaps we are seeing the new Tory party, seven months before next year's vital Scottish elections. Perhaps its next debate will be about saving the fox in Scotland or the case for more land reform. The Tories have even adopted a tree as their new logo. However, one thing is for certain: their tree will not bear any fruit at next year's elections, because the people of Scotland will see right through them and judge them not on this debate or on what they say in the next seven months but on what they said in the first seven years of the Parliament.

I thank the member for her explanation. Members have also noticed that the shade of green on the Tories' logo north of the border is a bit darker and more sinister than the shade of green on the logo south of the border. Perhaps that speaks volumes. We all know that the Tories are not quite ready yet to park their four-by-fours and that their green policy is not much greener or fairer than it was. The Tories' motion is undermined by their commitment—which they have emphasised in previous debates on energy and the environment—to build new nuclear power stations in Scotland. The motion mentions the need to decentralise energy in Scotland, but they want new nuclear power stations to be built here. The motion also talks about finding extra funds to install microrenewable technologies in Scotland's residential sector, which most parties would support. I think that Murdo Fraser was in the news earlier this week calling for £12 million to go towards microrenewables. However, the Tory party wants to spend £2.5 billion at least on each new nuclear power station—that is not to mention the billions of pounds that would be required for  cleaning up the waste. If the SNP had a choice between spending £2.5 billion on a new nuclear power station and putting that money into renewables, we would certainly choose to do the latter, because that would be better for tackling climate change and for Scotland. Next year's elections are not just concentrating Tory minds; as this week's news shows, they are also concentrating the minds of the Liberal Democrats. Seven years into devolution, the Deputy First Minister and Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, Nicol Stephen, has finally said that he supports tidal and wave energy for Scotland. Scotland has had a big opportunity that it has taken him seven years to wake up to and he has done so only after the outcry that occurred when wave technology that was developed in this country was exported to Portugal before it had been deployed in Scottish waters.

I will take an intervention from Mr Finnie.

The minister can publish as many glossy documents and use as many warm words as he wants to, but it is action that matters. The Portuguese have beaten Scotland in deploying technology that was developed on Scotland's own doorstep.

I do not know how the member has the brass neck to talk about a potential energy gap in Scotland when Scotland currently produces six times as much energy as it uses. If we play our cards right, there is no chance of there being an energy gap in Scotland. Nicol Stephen has said that he will meet the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets this week—seven months before the next elections—to discuss the charging regime that discriminates against Scotland's fledgling renewables sector. The SNP has been calling for such discussions for the past two years, but he has decided to meet  Ofgem and stand up for Scotland's renewables sector only this week. We can all agree that climate change poses a threat to Scotland and the rest of the planet and that human activity is behind that threat. We can also agree that, in Scotland and on the rest of the planet, energy is the biggest emitter of harmful emissions. That is why energy issues are so tied to environment issues in parliamentary debates and why such issues are dominating today's debate. Scotland is lucky. Of all the European nations, it has the biggest potential to make a disproportionate contribution to tackling climate change because of its renewables and clean technology potential. It can make a contribution by developing carbon capture so that harmful emissions are stored under the North sea; by developing clean-coal technology, which is currently being exported from Scotland to other countries around the world—we should be using it here—and by taking advantage of our massive renewables potential, which we must do. We have failed to do that in the first seven years of the Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition Government. There is a massive golden—indeed, green—opportunity for Scotland and we must get our act together. Not only will taking advantage of that opportunity help us to tackle climate change and reduce harmful emissions; it will create thousands of jobs for the Scottish economy.

I apologise for not taking Chris Ballance's intervention. However, I have already taken three or four interventions. We welcome Nicol Stephen's recent statement that 100 per cent of electricity in Scotland should be produced from renewable sources, but we must be much more ambitious. [ Interruption. ] I see the minister reacting—he should let me finish the serious point that I am making. Electricity use represents only 20 per cent of our energy use. We must tackle heating and transport fuel issues. For example, biocrops have the potential to meet 20 per cent of our transport fuel needs, but the minister is doing virtually nothing to develop that potential. A huge opportunity has been missed. Scotland has the potential to become an all-renewables nation by 2050. Addressing heating and transport fuel issues as well as electricity issues must be a greater priority of all the parties that are represented in the Parliament. I have been generous in taking interventions and am now running out of time. I will therefore conclude by saying that all the parties that are  represented in the Parliament must accept that Scottish society must make huge sacrifices to tackle climate change in the years ahead—indeed, the behaviour of society and political parties must change. We must all recognise that the sacrifices that we must make to tackle climate change are nothing compared with the cost that we will pay if we do nothing to tackle it. We will have to pay an horrific price if we do not take radical action now to tackle climate change. The Tories' motion is pro-environment and difficult to disagree with. Perhaps this is the first sign, in the year before vital Scottish elections, that all the parties are reaching a consensus that tackling climate change is the number 1 priority of Scotland and the planet. I move amendment S2M-4810.1, to insert at end:  "believes that the building of new nuclear power stations would undermine Scotland's efforts to tackle climate change, and recognises that, to make an effective contribution towards the global campaign to tackle global warming, our Parliament requires the powers of other independent nations including responsibility for energy and fiscal policy."

Does the member accept that her supposed environmental credentials are undermined by her party's support for new nuclear power stations? Will she explain how the production of nuclear waste in Scotland and the diversion of funding from renewables to nuclear power would be good for Scotland's environment?

To ask the First Minister what action is being taken to promote Scotland's excellent food produce at home and abroad. (S2F-2420)

This being Scottish food fortnight, I know that we will all want to celebrate Scotland's food industry. Is the First Minister aware of the increasing concern that the frequent abuse of power by some supermarkets is crippling some of our food and drinks companies and the farms that supply them? What is his message to the supermarkets today? Irrespective of the Competition Commission's current inquiry—it has a poor track record on this matter—will he pick up cudgels on behalf of Scotland's food producers and meet personally the supermarket bosses in order to fight for Scotland's food producers and consumers?

One of the most enjoyable parts of being an MSP is getting out and about in our constituencies and visiting local primary schools and high schools. I certainly feel that in Moray. I will talk about the rural dimension, because I often visit rural schools in Moray. It is fantastic to speak to children, who  always take a great interest in our jobs and particularly in matters such as how much we are paid; to meet teachers and see them in their workplaces; and to learn about schools and visit the school estate. That is humbling, because we see fantastic dedication and professionalism and we see children taking a great interest in their education. The First Minister has said in today's press that he wants Scotland to have the best education system in the world by 2020. One of my concerns is to ensure that many of our rural schools are still alive and kicking in 2020. In the Moray Council area, we have had a major campaign in the past few years to save 21 local primary schools, most of which are in my constituency. I am thankful that the campaign appears to have succeeded in the main. The most recent outcome of the council's review was that the closure of rural schools should be a last resort, but the council will still start a two-stage process when a school roll falls below 60 per cent of capacity. That is a controversial issue, to which I will return. It is important to consider rural schools not in isolation but as part of the local community and in the context of rural development. First and foremost, we must ensure that rural schools deliver a first-class education. Rural schools—particularly in Moray, but also elsewhere in rural Scotland, I am sure—tend to deliver a first-class education. We must ensure that we have the benefits of educating children in their own communities, which is another reason why rural schools are important. Rural schools also tend to fulfil an important social and economic role in our communities. Rural schools are at the heart of communities. If I go to Portgordon, Portknockie, Alves or Glenlivet primary school or any other smaller school in my constituency, I cannot imagine the community that it serves without its local school. We must bear it in mind that many such communities have lost their post offices, local shops and banks, for example. If they lose their schools, they will no longer view themselves as communities. It is essential for the Parliament to prevent our rural communities from simply turning into retirement communities, by ensuring that we have vibrant local schools. It is important to consider the future of rural schools in the context of rural development because we should gear our rural policy towards sustaining communities through sustaining local community schools. If young families want to move into an area, their first interest is whether the area has a local school. The demographic trends in rural Scotland and particularly in Moray are towards an aging population, with young people tending to leave and live elsewhere. Given that,  we must use every measure to attract and retain young families, which means that we must retain local schools. Rural Scotland has an affordable housing crisis. As part of housing policy, why do we not consider building some of the desperately required houses in communities with schools that have spare capacity? That would help to maintain rural schools' viability. It is a pity that Ross Finnie, the Minister for Environment and Rural Development, is not present. It is important for Peter Peacock to work closely with him on maintaining the viability of rural communities. Another way of ensuring that our schools are viable is to find other roles for them, which was a theme that emerged from the recent campaign to save primary schools in Moray. Grampian police are considering whether to open police offices in rural schools. That is an excellent idea that represents one way of generating extra income and using spare capacity in the school estate. The Minister for Education and Young People should encourage other public authorities to base themselves in rural schools with spare capacity when appropriate. We should also hand a greater role to communities that want to use spare capacity for their own purposes. If a village hall does not exist, a community can of course use a rural school. Our rural schools can have a wider social remit. I will touch on the controversial threshold of 60 per cent of capacity that Moray Council has set as the trigger for reviewing a rural school's future. The 60 per cent threshold simply does not make sense and has no credibility. If we applied it in other walks of life, our local buses would not run, because they might not operate at more than 60 per cent of capacity at a particular time, and ministerial cars would not be used, because ministers probably do not use them for 60 per cent of the time. Moray Council's threshold is not credible and should be scrapped. Just about every submission to the council's recent consultation argued against using the 60 per cent threshold to trigger a review of a school's future. In a recent parliamentary answer to me, the minister suggested that he thinks that the 60 per cent threshold has no value whatever. I urge him to write to Moray Council to make that clear again, because it is keeping the 60 per cent trigger in its current policy. That threshold must be scrapped to maintain the security and long-term future of many of our rural schools. The final point that I will make before I sit down concerns the reference in the motion to the importance of delivering education for our 16 to 19-year-olds. That is a particularly important point for rural areas, where more than two thirds of  young people have to leave home to find work or education in urban Scotland. If we want to retain young families in rural Scotland, we need to deliver those education opportunities in our rural communities. I hope that the minister will address that point. I hope that all party manifestos will include a commitment to protect our rural schools.

Good school.

In talking about Scotland's safe future, does the First Minister agree with the Scottish National Party that Scotland's future should be a nuclear-free future?

To ask the Scottish Executive what average percentage contribution it makes to the cost of flood-alleviation schemes that it funds and whether the rules for grant eligibility are available in writing. (S2O-10258)

I am sure that the minister will appreciate that, even when 80 per cent of the cost of a scheme is funded by central Government, local authorities still face enormous financial challenges. That is especially true in Moray. The prospect of receiving only 70 per cent—as happens in other schemes elsewhere in the country—has set alarm bells ringing. If that happened, the financial hole left in Moray would be even bigger. Will the minister issue up-to-date guidance to Moray Council on what expenditure is eligible, and what is not eligible for central Government funding? Will she review the eligibility of many of the expenses that local authorities incur when putting flood alleviation schemes together? Is she aware that this is just one of many issues for which her co-operation will be required to ensure that thousands of my constituents never again have to face the devastation of local flooding? I hope that she will discuss the issue with me and others.

I, too, congratulate Fergus Ewing on securing this very important debate. Like him, I am struck by the frequency with which my constituents raise with me the state of local roads in Moray, particularly the A96, the A95 and the A9, which many of my constituents use regularly. The number 1 priority is to improve the safety record of our local roads. I note with alarm that although during the past 10 years the number of road deaths in Scotland has fallen by 17 per cent, the number of road deaths in Moray has risen by 9 per cent. The other key reason for upgrading the roads through Moray is that it would bring economic benefits. As members will know, Moray has not had economic challenges to seek and the biggest bit of the jigsaw for the achievement of economic prosperity is the upgrading of local roads, particularly the A96, which is the lifeline road running through Moray. The business community will depend on the upgrading of that road sooner rather than later. Given the limits on time for speeches, I turn now to the Fochabers and Mosstodloch bypass, the  campaign for which has been running for decades. The project has been plagued by delay after delay. Finally, in 2002, after a long-running campaign by the local community that was supported by my predecessor, Margaret Ewing, ministers gave the green light to the bypass. However, here we are approaching 2007 and we are still waiting for the project to start. That is all because a handful of local objectors have launched a civil appeal that is going to the Court of Session. We now hear that the case will not be heard until May 2007 at the earliest, but the Scottish Court Service told the local community council in Fochabers and Mosstodloch that the case could have gone ahead in October 2006 or January 2007. We need the case to go ahead sooner rather than later. Why is it that a handful of objectors are able to delay the project time and again? If legal counsel for the objectors say that they are not prepared to go ahead in May 2007, will they be able to delay the case any further? Will the minister investigate the case? We cannot allow a major infrastructure project that is in the public interest to be held up yet again by a handful of objectors. We accept that it might be a few years before we can dual the whole A96, but the priorities have to be the Fochabers and Elgin bypasses. It is disappointing that we have to wait for the new strategic review that is going to take us up to 2020 to take place. I assure the minister that the people of Elgin cannot wait until 2020 or anywhere near that for their bypass. The city of Elgin has an expanding population and major effort is under way in residential and commercial development. That will all be frustrated if there are bottlenecks and congestion in the middle of Elgin that can only go from bad to worse. Can we do what we can to expedite a decision on the Elgin bypass? I invite the minister to visit Moray and speak to representatives of the local community about those two bypasses and the wider issues. He would find it a very productive visit. The issues facing the people of Moray are very urgent and it would be great if he could visit.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree with the many people who believe that if we opt for new nuclear power stations in Scotland, we will undermine the case for investing in the renewables to which he refers?

The Scottish National Party welcomes the debate, which concerns something that might be the biggest threat to humanity in the 21 st century. Members from all parties must agree on the scale of the challenge that faces our society if we are to curb global warming and prevent the devastation that could take place across the planet as a result of climate change. Further, all parties must agree that human activity is contributing hugely to global warming and that it is the duty of the Parliament to show leadership to Scotland, the rest of Europe and the planet. As the minister said, quite rightly, our message must be that Scotland can make a difference. We are a small country and many people are cynical and believe that there is not much that we can do to influence climate change. However, it is our duty to do what we can. We have a moral responsibility not only to future generations of Scots, but to the rest of the planet, particularly to the vulnerable communities that are always the first to feel the brunt of extreme weather events that occur as a result of climate change. Of course, we must remember that Scotland is not immune in that regard, given the tragic events that have occurred in this country in recent years as a result of extreme weather. The SNP welcomes the publication of the Government's climate change programme. Again, the programme is a boost for and a vindication of the idea of having a Scottish Parliament: if there were no Scottish Parliament, there would be no climate change programme for Scotland. Within the limitations in the context of devolution, we welcome the fact that a target will be set for reducing carbon emissions in Scotland and that a Scottish share will be established of the commitments in the UK programme. We also  welcome the fact that the commitments that the Government in Scotland makes will be independently audited. Parliament has a duty to hold ministers to account. We welcome the Minister for Environment and Rural Development's commitment that climate change proofing will take place throughout all Government departments. The mainstreaming of climate change policies is important. We must reach a stage at which all ministers report to the Parliament annually the carbon savings and costs of their policies. That is the best way for the Parliament to hold ministers to account and we hope that that will happen sooner rather than later.

As I said, we should be told the carbon costs and savings of all policies. That includes transport policies. I will return to transport in a few moments. Climate change is not just a threat to Scotland, but an opportunity because transforming our economy into a low-carbon economy will have massive economic and social benefits. We have the technologies and we can gain tens of thousands of jobs if we take a lead and put in place the necessary measures as soon as possible. Scotland's track record on emissions is not impressive, especially given our enormous potential to become the renewables capital of Europe. Of the 25 members of the European Union, only nine other countries have higher per capita emissions than Scotland. The Scottish Executive's record is poor, as were the records of the previous UK Governments that ran Scotland. We hear that net greenhouse gas emissions fell by 14 per cent between 1990 and 2003. On the face of it, that is impressive, but as the minister's document says, that reduction is due to industrial decline in Scotland and the closure of massive plants such as Ravenscraig. It is not due to the Executive or previous UK Governments putting in place proactive measures to cut emissions. Energy accounts for 37 per cent of emissions in Scotland and is therefore the biggest contributor. It is embarrassing that England has made a bigger reduction in its emissions than Scotland, yet Scotland has the biggest potential to cut emissions and the biggest potential for renewable energy.

I can tell the minister why it is embarrassing. He and his Government have been in power for seven years—since the Scottish Parliament reopened—but that time has been wasted. We have not caught up with other countries that have clean technologies and, in particular, clean energy production. Had we had ministers who were proactive, we could be where many of those countries are now. The Government made great play of the fact that it has announced an investment of £20 million over two years in renewable energy in Scotland, but that is chicken-feed in comparison with what is required to transform Scotland's energy sector into a low-carbon sector. Twenty million pounds equates to 1 per cent of the cost of building a nuclear power station. Scotland can be in the lead if the Government gets behind the major projects on clean energy production that are taking place. We can get into the lead and we could have an impressive record. The building of the hydrogen plant at Peterhead is exciting. It will be the biggest industrial hydrogen plant in the world and will produce carbon-free electricity, but the project requires Government support and the Government must get behind it.

I am sorry. I would love to take an intervention, but I am running out of time. We have the potential for clean coal technology in Scotland and the Government must get behind that, too. If we want to reduce drastically carbon emissions from the energy sector, carbon storage offers immense opportunities for Scotland, given our geographical location and the North sea. The UK Government has announced that it will invest £25 million in developing carbon storage, but Norway—a small country of 5 million people—has announced that it will invest £162 million in that technology. On carbon storage, we need to up our game. Energy efficiency is another major route to cutting emissions, yet we are still waiting for the Government's energy efficiency strategy. It was promised in 2004 and again in 2005, but we are nearly halfway through 2006 and we still await it. We need a high-profile energy efficiency agency in Scotland that will be a one-stop shop that can be accessed by people outside the Parliament who do not know where to obtain advice about energy efficiency. I wanted to discuss many other issues, but I am running out of time. The Government must avoid  gesture politics. Many schemes that are up and running are underfunded. If the Government really wants to tackle climate change and to transform Scotland into a low-carbon economy, we need real resources. We should not spend billions of pounds on nuclear power; we should put money into transforming Scotland into a low-carbon economy. The Parliament should have the powers so that we can make the maximum contribution to tackling climate change and saving the planet. I move amendment S2M-4507.3, to insert at end: "recognises that Scotland requires many of the political powers currently reserved to the UK Government in order to build a low-carbon society and make a greater contribution to the global effort towards tackling climate change; regrets the ongoing delay in publishing the Scottish Executive's energy efficiency strategy; calls for the establishment of a single high-profile public sector organisation to provide a one-stop shop for the promotion of energy efficiency across all sectors; urges Scottish Ministers when reporting annually to the Parliament to publish the carbon costs and savings that have resulted from their policies, and rejects the view that new nuclear power stations offer a solution to climate change."

Is the minister aware that NHS Grampian, which is his local health board, has said that the waiting time for drug treatment services for drug users in Moray has reached eight months? Does he accept that that is unacceptable, despite all the hard work that professionals have done on the ground in NHS Grampian? Will he investigate why the waiting time is so long? Is there a lack of resources? Does he accept that the quicker drug treatment programmes for addicts are delivered, the quicker a lot of misery for families and our local communities will be prevented?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to carry out an audit of youth facilities across Scotland. (S2O-10110)

Many young people in my constituency have approached me to complain about the lack of youth facilities in their communities. I am sure that that is the case in other members' constituencies throughout the country. Will the minister outline what assistance his Government gives local authorities to build new youth facilities? Does he agree that carrying out an audit would provide a national picture of where the gaps in youth facilities lie throughout Scotland, so that we could do something about them?

When a member is the second-last person on their feet in a stage 3 debate, most of what they wanted to say has often been covered by the other speakers. However, I start by saying that those of us who campaigned for the establishment of the Scottish Parliament and voted for it in the referendum in 1997 did so because we wanted a Parliament that would modernise legislation in Scotland and bring new, progressive legislation on to the statute book as well as making sure that it was up to date with public opinion in Scotland. The bill that we will—I hope—pass in a few minutes' time achieves those aims. The debate has been controversial and complex at times. I pay tribute to all those who gave evidence, particularly to the Environment and Rural Development Committee, of which I am a member. We received an enormous amount of evidence, much of which conflicted, and it was difficult to sort out which evidence we should use to reach conclusions on some of the difficult questions. As the member for Moray, I was contacted by constituents on both sides of the debate on, for example, tail docking. Such debates are difficult, and we cannot please all the people all the time. When legislation comes before us, we have to consider complex issues and sort out what is right at the time. The Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Bill is an enabling bill, so many of the issues that we  have debated today will come before the Parliament again. I hope that there will be full consultation with the committees and an opportunity for maximum input. The secondary legislation on some issues will take a few years to come through, as has been discussed, but we hope that the Government will bring forward many of the most important provisions, which we have celebrated today, as soon as possible. Part 1 of the bill is on animal health, which is extremely important to the livestock industry and the wider agricultural sector in Scotland, both socially and economically. That is why part 1 is so important. It is horrible to contemplate the idea that we could experience another outbreak of an exotic disease, but of course Scotland has been through that as recently as 2001; we also had the recent avian flu scare. The bill gives ministers huge powers of slaughter and we urge the minister to use them wisely should there be a call for him to do so. Amendment 1 sought to insert the following provision: "Before exercising a power of slaughter conferred by paragraphs 1 to 6 the Scottish Ministers must be satisfied, on the basis of veterinary and scientific advice, that it is necessary to do so in order to prevent the spread of disease." The amendment was defeated by only four votes. The Parliament sent the Government a message on the issue. The minister must be aware that the committee and members from all political parties take the matter seriously and believe that a condition should have been attached to the licence to kill that the Parliament has given ministers. The images of bonfires of burning carcases that we saw in 2001 were not popular. We are not complaining about the fact that such scenes took place, but we all want to make sure that steps are taken to ensure that they are not repeated and that the power to slaughter is regarded as a power of last resort. Part 2 of the bill is on animal welfare. Like others, we welcome the introduction of a duty of care on those who keep animals and the powers that the bill gives inspectors to seize animals who are suffering or to make pre-emptive moves to seize animals that are likely to suffer. That is a welcome step forward. Society generally is becoming a lot more intolerant of animal cruelty, and that is reflected in the bill. I—indeed, we—must pay tribute to the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, with which many of us spent a day in the run-up to stage 1, for its work to promote animal welfare and prevent cruelty wherever possible. I hope that the deputy minister will refer to resources, particularly for local government, which  have been mentioned. COSLA and others have said that until the secondary legislation is produced, they will not know what resources are required to meet their obligations under that legislation. I hope that the dialogue will continue with local government. One issue that has not really been discussed today but which was discussed at stage 1 is the need to prevent diseases from entering Scotland in the first place—that relates to preventing the spread of diseases under part 1. To prevent diseases from entering Scotland, the Parliament needs powers to prevent the importation of illegal meat, for example, which was a big issue during the foot-and-mouth outbreak in 2001. I am interested to hear from the deputy minister what our Government is doing to ensure that our ports of entry in Scotland are policed and made secure against the importation of illegal meat and other items that could bring exotic diseases into Scotland. House of Commons committees have made many recommendations, some of which have been implemented and some of which have not been implemented. I would welcome ministers' feedback on those important issues, because the best way to prevent diseases from spreading in Scotland is to stop them from arriving in Scotland. The Scottish National Party commends the bill to Parliament.

Amendment 51 is about the need to regulate the sale of animals on the  internet. We all recognise that the growth of the internet brings massive opportunities, but it also brings some challenges. One challenge that has been highlighted during the past few months of debate on the bill is the challenge to animal welfare. Some people believe that the trade of animals on the internet is detrimental to animal welfare. Amendment 51 seeks to persuade ministers that there is a need to regulate that trade. I draw members' attention to the briefing from the International Fund for Animal Welfare, which mentions a survey that it carried out on the web. It found that among animals for sale on the internet, there were 146 primates, including a gorilla and four baby chimps, as well as a Siberian tiger and a giraffe. That raises various issues. How do we ensure that such animals are kept in the best conditions and that the people who facilitate the trade of animals on the internet are held responsible under the bill? At present, internet service providers and people who own websites in Scotland are not covered by the bill. At stage 2, the issue was raised with ministers, who said that they intended to make regulations on the sale of animals on the internet but that those regulations might only reflect those that have been adopted south of the border. In effect, they would regulate only online pet shops but not the internet service providers or the website owners. The purpose of amendment 51 is to go one step further and ensure that those people are regulated, given the potential implications for animal welfare. The main reason why the Government rejected a similar amendment at stage 2 was that it felt that the regulation-making power would be time limited. That is why in the amendment at stage 3 we are saying that some but not all of the regulations should be brought in within the first year. Given that the time constraints have been removed, I hope that the minister will feel able to support amendment 51. I am very sympathetic towards amendments 52 and 53, in the name of Christine Grahame, but I know that she is going to speak to them, so I will not do so. I hope that members will support all the amendments in this group. I move amendment 51.

Briefly, I do not accept the minister's view that there are too many time constraints in amendment 51. The amendment would require that only some but not all of the regulations on the sale of animals over the internet would need to be made within one year of the bill receiving royal assent. On that basis, I will press amendment 51. On the amendments in the name of Christine Grahame, I urge members to recognise that amendment 53 is an alternative to amendment 52—a softer option. I see no objection whatever to amendment 53 and I hope that members will support it.

Will you exercise your discretion, Presiding Officer?

I can do it in 10 seconds if you wish, but I will take my two minutes. There is an element of déjà vu here, in that many of these debates were rehearsed at stage 2. The arguments were won by the members who lodged similar amendments, but at the end of the day we lost the vote. We all recognise that a balance must be struck. The minister should have sufficient powers to act quickly and robustly in the event of a disease outbreak in Scotland, but we must ensure that checks and balances are in place. The Environment and Rural Development Committee's stage 1 report said that the bill should mention explicitly that the minister should take the appropriate advice, as laid out in the various amendments. I remind members that the stage 1 report said: "These new powers, therefore, provide for the slaughter of animals that may not be affected, suspected, exposed or in contact with disease." We are giving the minister an enormous power, without any checks or balances in the bill. The minister will be able simply to issue an order to slaughter wild animals, companion animals and animals that have not come into contact with disease or shown any evidence of disease. That is a wide-ranging power. The minister could order the slaughter of wild animals, which could have an impact on biodiversity or rare breeds. I ask members to imagine the public backlash in Scotland if that went ahead without reassurance to the public that the appropriate advice had been taken. That is a crucial element of the bill. Even if we do not agree to the other amendments in the group, we should agree to amendment 14. Maureen Macmillan lodged a similar amendment at stage 2, which she withdrew because the minister, Rhona Brankin, said that she would lodge an amendment to cover the issue. There is no such amendment. Therefore, if the main amendments—which, although better than amendment 14, may not find favour with the coalition parties—fail, I take it that the Government will support amendment 14.

Does the First Minister agree that, in the medium to long term, greater emphasis on renewables could lead to lower energy bills for Scottish households? I bring the First Minister back to this week. What is his message to Scottish Power, which yesterday—the day on which it announced the huge profits that it has made—warned that its hard-pressed customers face an increase in their electricity and gas bills in the future? Does he agree that, if that increase goes ahead, even more thousands of  Scots could be plunged into fuel poverty? What is he doing about the matter?

To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Executive is taking to help first-time home buyers. (S2F-2290)

Is the First Minister aware that the average age of first-time buyers in Scotland is now 37, which is the highest in the United Kingdom? Does he accept that the crisis in affordable housing in Scotland is due to the lack of affordable housing not only to rent, but to purchase? Is he also aware that, because of a local combination of low wages and high property prices, young people in my constituency and elsewhere in rural Scotland are forced to leave their communities if they want to get on the property ladder? Does he accept that we need a radical package of measures from his Government to address that issue, otherwise young people will continue to have to leave their communities if they want to own their own home?

The minister will recall that I mentioned that, of the 12 potential sites that Nirex has earmarked, five are in Scotland. Does the minister accept that she is unable to rule out Scotland being chosen as a location for such a facility, should the UK Government go down that road?

It is an enormous pleasure and privilege for me to make my first contribution to the Parliament's proceedings as the member for the beautiful constituency of Moray. I have the hardest of acts to follow, given that my predecessor Margaret Ewing served the people of Moray and Scotland so effectively both in the Westminster Parliament and in this Parliament for nearly 20 years. During the past few weeks, I have been struck by the fact that every person to whom I have spoken in Moray has taken a few moments to pay a personal tribute to Margaret, irrespective of whether they agreed with her cause. That alone speaks volumes about the high regard in which she was held by her constituents the length and breadth of Moray. I know that Margaret Ewing would have taken a keen interest in this morning's debates, as she passionately supported an independent, nuclear-free Scotland and over the years pursued on behalf of her constituents many energy-related issues at Westminster and in this Parliament. In particular, her track record in campaigning for fuel poverty to be eliminated in our energy-rich nation was second to none. Like all SNP members, Margaret wanted Scotland's billions to be spent not on new nuclear power stations, but on cleaner forms of energy and on tackling the fuel poverty  that blights our nation. One of my roles is to continue her good work. My task as the new MSP for Moray is straightforward—it is to help build a better life, in a better country, for the people of Moray. The SNP firmly believes that a nuclear-free Scotland will be a better country. We will join forces with others in the chamber who support a nuclear-free Scotland. In the previous debate, we argued against the new generation of weapons of mass destruction. In this debate, we are arguing against the false case for building a new generation of nuclear power stations on Scottish soil. Importantly, we also pledge as a party to stop Scotland being turned into the UK Government's nuclear dustbin. Moray, like the rest of Scotland, has a pristine and renowned environment. It would be a public relations disaster for Scotland's clean image and for our tourism sector, among others, if the UK Government were allowed to turn our nation into a nuclear dustbin. We have responsibility to deal with nuclear waste that is generated in Scotland, but we can rest assured that the people of Moray and the rest of Scotland will resist any attempt to import nuclear waste to Scotland and to turn any part of our beautiful country into a nuclear dustbin. We are aware that five of the 12 sites that Nirex has identified as potential dumping grounds are in Scotland, so we all know that the UK establishment has earmarked several sites in Scotland as potential locations for waste dumps. Any attempt to take forward those plans will be resisted by the people of Scotland. One thing is certain—public resistance in Scotland rules out any possibility of Scotland playing host to new nuclear dumping grounds. If the UK Government thinks that the waste is very safe, perhaps it should propose to dig a big hole in London and bury it there. We all recognise that that will not happen and that the Government's eyes are facing north. I am intrigued by CORWM's recommendations, because they shed little light on the debate on the management of nuclear waste. The same problems that existed several decades ago exist today in Scotland at the beginning of the 21 st century. The fact is simple: there is no safe, long-term storage solution for nuclear waste. The best way of dealing with it is to stop producing the stuff in the first place. That means refusing to allow any nuclear power stations to be built in Scotland. The debate about nuclear has been well aired in recent years in Scotland, and it is now time for the Labour-Lib Dem Administration to come off the fence. It must give us today a concrete statement of when it believes the problems of future nuclear waste will be resolved. The SNP believes that it is time for MSPs from all parties to stand shoulder to  shoulder with the public in Scotland and reject once and for all the case for new nuclear power stations. Let us invest instead in Scotland's potential for clean energy, which is safer, cheaper and cleaner, can protect our environment and can create thousands of new jobs at the same time. The clock is ticking; we have to start taking decisions now. We can do that today by supporting the SNP amendment and the motion. I move amendment S2M-4329.2, to insert at end: "and therefore agrees that no nuclear power stations should be built in Scotland."

Does the minister agree that it would send out a powerful message if she was able to say on the record that the policy in Scotland is to support the retention of Post Office card accounts?

It gives me great pleasure to open this debate, which is on a matter of great importance to many people in Scotland. As is customary, I begin by thanking all those who have signed the motion. More than 32 members have signed it, from every party in the chamber bar the Labour Party. The debate concerns this little card that I have in my hand. It brings huge benefits to hundreds of thousands of people in Scotland. Approximately half a million benefit payments are made by the Department for Work and Pensions and other Government departments into Post Office card accounts in Scotland. Although some Scots receive more than one payment, it is true to say that hundreds of thousands of people hold such accounts in post offices the length and breadth of Scotland. The system allows the Government to pay benefits directly into people's card accounts. People can then go to their local post office and withdraw their benefits in their local community. A pamphlet given to people who wish to apply for an account tells them that the account is a "simple and convenient" way to manage their money. Benefit claimants, Post Office staff and others are absolutely furious that the Department for Work and Pensions has decided that, in 2010, the accounts will cease to exist. The hundreds of thousands of Scots who hold these accounts feel betrayed and deceived. Many of the more vulnerable are fearful of how they will cope.  The many people who hold these accounts thought that the Government would recognise the value of the service, not only to people who hold the accounts but to wider society—particularly rural communities where the viability of the local post office will be jeopardised. The people who opened these accounts were never told that the service would be temporary. They thought that it would be permanent and they welcomed that. However, the Government's message appears to be that, no matter what people think, and no matter how much they value their Post Office accounts, they will have to open bank accounts and like it or lump it. There will be no other choice. The account holders thought that the Government might place the interests of the wider community above the interests of high street banks. They thought that the Government recognised that giving business to high street banks instead of to our post office network would undermine that network—again, particularly affecting rural communities and the many villages and towns that do not want important facilities such as post offices to disappear. Many rural communities have already lost banks and shops and sometimes schools. The last thing that people want is the viability of the post office network to be further undermined. Post Office card accounts are popular for various reasons. First, many people who hold them like the idea of having their benefits paid into a separate account rather than having them paid into their main bank account because that helps them to budget and manage their finances. Only last week, I turned up at the sub-post office in Methlick in Aberdeenshire, where I was met by several customers who were waiting to discuss their fears about the closure of such accounts. One of their fears was that they would lose the ability to manage their benefits as effectively as possible. The proposal to pay benefits into bank accounts means that many people will not be able to withdraw cash locally because many rural communities do not have the option of using a local bank. We all know that many banks on constituency high streets have closed in recent years. It might be possible to withdraw cash from a local autobank, if there happens to be one in a local shop and the shop is still open, but in some of our more remote rural communities it often costs £1.75 to use such autobanks. We must remember that many of the more vulnerable members of society are holders of Post Office card accounts. To someone who is on a low weekly income, such as a pensioner, £1.75 is a lot of money and they should not be asked to pay such a sum.  Citizens Advice Scotland has expressed great concern about the impact on financial inclusion if people who do not have bank accounts are not able to use Post Office card accounts in the future. Members were all sent a copy of that organisation's briefing and I am sure that many members will quote from it. The fact that 12 per cent of Scotland's population do not have bank accounts means that many people rely heavily on the Post Office card accounts that they hold at their local post offices. Maintaining the viability of the local post office network in our rural communities by ensuring that it continues to have business is another important issue. I know that sub-postmasters throughout Aberdeenshire and north-east Scotland—I am sure that many other members have spoken to sub-postmasters in their areas—fear that if Post Office card accounts are lost in the years ahead, the viability of their post offices will be undermined and even more community post offices will be lost. The proposal could be the straw that breaks the camel's back. I will outline what action must be taken. First, we should not allow the Department for Work and Pensions to cease the relevant contract in 2010; the announcement that it would do so came as a bolt out of the blue. The existing contract should be enhanced and should be used to help modernise our post office network. More vulnerable members of the public should be able to use Post Office card accounts for direct debits because, for example, that would allow them to get discounts on their energy bills, which have rocketed over recent years. Such people have as much right as the rest of us to access such discounts. The DWP should be told to stop undermining our post office network by persuading people to opt for bank accounts instead. That practice must come to an end. The Government in London must acknowledge the wider benefits to society that Post Office card accounts bring and the Scottish ministers must make the firmest and most vigorous representations to it about saving those accounts and must express their concern to United Kingdom ministers about a proposal that will remove the many benefits that accrue to people in Scotland from having access to them. Most important, the minister must stand up at the end of the debate and declare her support, and that of the Scottish Government, for maintaining Post Office card accounts. She must recognise their value and pledge that she will pick up the cudgels on behalf of the hundreds of thousands of customers in Scotland's communities who both rely on those accounts and accrue many benefits from doing so.

Does the minister agree with the farmers that we need to establish an enforceable supermarket code to ensure that those at the bottom of the supply chain—the farmers—get a fair share of the profits that are earned by the supermarkets?

To ask the Scottish Executive what its  response is to Scottish Enterprise Grampian's report, "North sea oil taxation: economic impact". (S2O-9267)

The minister will appreciate that that fails to answer the question. He may recall that his colleagues said that Gordon Brown's tax grab would have no impact on Scotland, yet the Government's own agency, Scottish Enterprise, says that it could leave an £800 million hole in the Scottish economy. Will the minister explain to the chamber and to the oil industry in north-east Scotland what measures he is calling for from Gordon Brown's forthcoming budget to help to repair some of the damage that will be caused if nothing is done soon, to encourage investment in the industry, and to promote initiatives such as those on carbon capture and storage?

Will the minister give way?

The minister will appreciate that there is a danger that we might encourage a greater use of biofuels and then have to import them from other countries if we do not make them in this country with our crops.

The member mentioned higher transportation costs. Does he agree that one of the beauties of growing energy crops is that farmers might become self-sufficient in their energy needs in a few years' time?

The SNP very much welcomes the debate and much of what is in the Government's strategy document. We all accept the need for a prosperous farming sector to continue to deliver benefits to consumers, our rural communities and Scotland's environment. Our talented farmers and crofters throughout Scotland contribute a great deal to the nation, and the food that they produce enhances Scotland's reputation throughout the world. They operate in a challenging environment; they have done so for many years and continue to do so. Farm incomes are on the increase, but they are still playing catch-up with the incomes that were achieved in better times a few years ago. Given the recent reforms in agriculture policy, this is a challenging transition period for our farmers.  Many farmers whom we speak to in our constituencies are still not sure of their role at the beginning of the 21 st century; in essence, they are not sure whether they are there to produce food for the nation or to act as guardians of the countryside. That issue will no doubt be the crux of today's debate. The strategy that we are debating must deliver stability for our farming sector and it must allow farmers to plan ahead. They want to know that the support mechanisms that are in place will be there for some time to come. We welcome the minister's comments about the LFA support scheme being secure, because that has caused concern for many people in Scotland. We do not want to see Tony Blair, the UK Prime Minister, go to Brussels and use our farmers as political pawns by raising, out of the blue, the prospect of further reform of the CAP just after our own industry has come through a period of transition. However, our farmers are resilient and will overcome any obstacles that are placed in their way. We welcome this week's good news about the beef export ban being lifted. That is a great boost for the beef sector. We must now market our beef in Europe to ensure that it gets back on to supermarket shelves and dinner tables as soon as possible. As the minister said, we must recapture markets that may have been invaded by other markets from around the world through the increase in imports to the European Union. Our farmers seek an assurance that Government intervention will not simply amount to policing the common agricultural policy or implementing European directives. Our farmers want to be assured that ministers' interventions in the industry will be about increasing profitability and incomes for farmers the length and breadth of Scotland. Customers and consumers rightly demand quality food that is produced to the highest animal welfare standards. However, despite the fact that the farming community has been meeting those demands, the market is still failing our primary producers in Scotland. We know that from the poor farm-gate prices that we have witnessed in recent years. We just have to look at the dairy sector for that to be confirmed. Over the past six years, one in four dairy farmers in Scotland has gone out of business. On our supermarket shelves, milk is cheaper than water. Currently, the farmers get only 18p or 19p a litre, but milk on supermarket shelves sells for 54p a litre. Today, Asda has announced that it will cut the price of milk and that it and not the farmers will take the hit. Of course, the farmers are expressing concern that Asda's cut could lead to a price war between the supermarkets and even more of a squeeze at the  bottom of the supply chain, which is where the farmers find themselves. When we debated agriculture in 2000, we discussed the fact that the farmer got only 15p of every £1 that was spent on groceries. We are now in 2006 and I think that few members would expect the situation to be much better six years on. We do not know what the figure is now; perhaps the minister can investigate that. We know, however, that the supermarkets in Scotland are abusing their power and taking more than their fair share of every £1 that is spent on groceries. In recent weeks, Kettle Produce Ltd, which is a major customer for many farmers who produce vegetables, announced a loss of £800,000. In the past few days, Marks and Spencer has sent out a letter to all its suppliers announcing, out of the blue, a 5 per cent cut in what they are paid. There is no negotiation—the cut is being made on a take-it-or-leave-it basis. That is a straightforward abuse of power. Marks and Spencer is usually regarded as one of the better supermarkets in terms of its treatment of suppliers. Of course, farmers are in a David and Goliath situation. They want to know that the minister will get behind David in this battle and do everything that he can to ensure that there is more fairness and transparency in the sector's supply chain. We welcome today's announcement by the OFT about the likelihood of an investigation. Of course, that is not necessarily directly related to what we are discussing, but it could have an indirect benefit for our farmers should the supermarkets' powers and their dominance of the grocery sector be curbed in the future. However, our farmers must be able to give evidence privately to the OFT investigation because we know of the blackballing and other despicable practices that are undertaken by some supermarket chains in Scotland. For example, they cancel orders at short notice or demand two-for-one offers for the supermarket shelves at the supplier's cost—again, the supplier has no choice in the matter. Many of our suppliers do not even have a proper contract with the supermarkets and the contracts that they have can be cancelled at short notice, leaving the suppliers to carry the pain. We must arm our farmers and that can be the purpose of the strategy. We must ensure that our farmers have information about what consumers want, so that there is a demand for their produce and they can produce the right kind of products. The supermarkets would then have to stock what the consumers want. We need a level playing field for our farming industry, which means that the imports on supermarket shelves must meet the same strict criteria that produce from this country must meet. Currently, the playing field is unfair. For example, beef that comes in from Brazil or  elsewhere in South America does not have to meet the same animal welfare or quality standards that are laid down for beef that is produced in this country. That situation is unfair and it must change. Country of origin labelling would help; if such labelling were clear on products, consumers would be educated about what they are buying. Addressing the issue of red tape would be another way of achieving a level playing field. Time and again, farmers come to our surgeries to complain about red tape and the amount of paperwork that they must undertake each day of the week. Indeed, the farmers say that one of the directives that the minister will implement will mean that they will not be allowed to keep field stones in their fields because they will be deemed to be commercial waste. The minister must ensure that that ludicrous directive does not lead to a ludicrous situation. I know that he is looking into the matter, but that is an example of the unreasonable red tape and regulations that our farmers have to deal with. We can help our farmers by increasing the demand for local food. In its public procurement, the Government has huge influence over that. It can increase the demand for local food in our schools, in the public sector and in Government sectors. That would greatly help our farmers. Let us think global but eat local, as one witness said to the Environment and Rural Development Committee during its inquiry into the supply chain. Doing so would cut food miles and help the environment. We have to help our farmers to access new customers and not only the supermarkets. We have to consider energy crops; that issue is now high on the agenda. Our farmers can be recruited to tackle climate change and global warming by growing energy crops. Biodiesel is an option for farmers. They can grow willow for co-firing in our power stations. It is said that one area of set-aside the size of a football pitch could grow enough oil-seed rape to power 20 cars. Set-aside in Scotland amounts to 100,000 football pitches, which means that 2 million cars could be supplied with biodiesel thanks to our farmers. We agree with many measures in the strategy. There is a lot of motherhood and apple pie, and no one could disagree with much of what the minister said in his opening speech. However, the SNP will address three or four major challenges in our speeches in this debate. Those challenges, which must be the minister's priorities, include dealing with supermarket power, the need to improve local food, and the need to find new markets. Our farmers contribute a lot to Scotland. We have to ensure that they play on a level playing field and have a prosperous future. We can do that if we tackle some of the challenges. We must  ensure that the industry remains viable and attractive to new blood, so that it is around for generations to come. I urge members to support the SNP's amendment. I move amendment S2M-4081.4, to leave out from "and approves" to end and insert: "while approving many of the actions outlined in the strategy, regrets the lack of support and initiative from Ministers for the farmers' campaign to curb the power of the supermarkets and secure a more equitable trading relationship throughout the supply chain; calls for more effort to allow agriculture to compete on a level playing field by addressing the issue of inferior imports and costly red tape; further calls on Ministers to do more to promote locally produced food, especially through the use of public procurement, not only to boost the industry but to cut the number of food miles, and urges the Executive to accelerate the production of energy crops."

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive supports the recommendations made in the Steel commission report. (S2F-2172)

The First Minister will be aware of the growing consensus that the Scottish Parliament requires significant additional powers. Is he part of that consensus?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions it has had with the Scottish Ambulance Service regarding the working hours of paramedics. (S2O-9181)

The minister may be aware of the concern that is being expressed by ambulance workers at rural stations in Grampian, and nationally, about on-call working. Some shifts extend to 106 hours, leaving ambulance staff exhausted and leading to what staff have called antiquated and dangerous conditions. Given the potential risk to patients, will the minister investigate seriously the concerns, which are shared by all of us in the chamber with the ambulance workers? One of my constituents, who on 13 February e-mailed the minister in detail about the concerns, is still awaiting a reply. Will the minister give an assurance that he will personally investigate that serious issue?

Energy bills in Scotland are spiralling upwards. Does the minister accept that that is an indictment of the UK's energy policy, which has failed Scotland miserably?

Will the minister give way? He made a false accusation.

Will the minister give way?

Does David Davidson appreciate that he is scaremongering and misleading the people of Scotland? The statistics that he just read out are UK statistics, not Scottish ones, and our energy profile is completely different from that of the UK. Will he please tell the truth and give the facts?

The SNP welcomes this debate on one of the most important issues that will face the nation in the years ahead. The decisions that we take over the next few years will affect generations to come and determine the Scottish economy's success. I should begin by saying that the Tory party and the Labour Party in Scotland seem to have signed some nuclear treaty. After all, they are the two political parties that will go into next year's Scottish Parliament elections with a pro-nuclear policy. However, the Scottish Labour Party's decision at its Aviemore conference to cave in to Tony Blair and give nuclear power the thumbs up has left it  with egg on its face, in light of a BBC poll that was conducted a few days later in which the people of Scotland gave the decision the thumbs down. Indeed, a few days after that, the Sustainable Development Commission, which was set up by the Scottish Labour Government that has—as I must make clear—just come out in favour of nuclear power in Scotland, also gave the move a huge thumbs down.

I realise that a BBC opinion poll is not the be-all and end-all, but I expect that on this issue it is more in touch with the people of Scotland than is the Scottish Labour Party. Scotland is self-sufficient in energy and, with the right policies, can remain energy-independent. We must get away from the claim made by Tony Blair in London that the UK will be starved of energy in the near future, and instead discuss the facts. Scotland is an energy-rich country. We have more than 60 per cent of Europe's oil reserves, more than 12 per cent of Europe's gas reserves, 70 per cent of the UK's coal reserves, 25 per cent of Europe's wind potential, 10 per cent of Europe's wave potential and a quarter of Europe's tidal potential. Let us talk about the facts in this debate, not the scaremongering of the Tory party and the Labour Party.

The SNP's long-standing policy is that nuclear power stations in Scotland will not be replaced at the end of their technical and economic lives. The debate is about whether Scotland needs new nuclear power stations, and the SNP is arguing that the last thing Scotland needs is more nuclear power stations. There is no answer to the waste issue. The Committee on Radioactive Waste Management has already said that the issue cannot be resolved, so the coalition's current policy is in tatters. Why cannot we update the policy, put the issue behind us and realise Scotland's potential for cleaner, safer and cheaper energy alternatives? That is the way forward for Scotland.

I apologise; I do not have time to take an intervention. If we take the disastrous decision to go for nuclear, it will undermine not only renewables—which can create new jobs and give us clean energy resources—but energy efficiency, which we have to talk about more in this Parliament. To find a solution for Scotland's energy needs, we need to have energy powers in this Parliament. According to the BBC opinion poll, 82 per cent of Scots want decisions on Scotland's nuclear future to be taken in this Parliament, not in London. Scotland's Deputy First Minister, Nicol Stephen, said on television last night that he wants more energy powers to come to the Scottish Parliament. The Steel commission is talking about more energy powers coming to this Parliament from London. Why cannot we just do what is right for Scotland, not what is right for Tony Blair, and say no to nuclear by supporting the SNP's amendment today? I move amendment S2M-4074.2, to leave out from "calls on" to end and insert: "believes that there is no case for the building of new nuclear power stations in Scotland and that decisions on our energy future should be the responsibility of the Scottish Parliament rather than the UK Government, in line with the wishes of the people of Scotland."

I congratulate Maureen Macmillan on securing the debate. It is as if history were repeating itself: not only are we back in the Hub, but I recall that in my first speech on Atlantic salmon, back in 2000, my first comment was to welcome the new minister to her portfolio. The minister has been round the houses, but she is back in 2006, and we are discussing Atlantic salmon again. I pay tribute to the North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organisation and to the Atlantic salmon, which is the king of fish and can be seen as part of Scotland's identity. That is why it is appropriate that NASCO is based in Scotland. When I visited Pictavia in Angus, I discovered that the Picts had carved salmon on 18 of their most important stones in Scotland. Of course, the salmon is also part of Glasgow's coat of arms. The protection of salmon first appeared in legislation back in the 11 th century and was first recorded by the previous Scottish Parliament in the 13 th century. That is a tribute to Scotland's long association with the Atlantic salmon. The Scottish Parliament has a responsibility to do what it can to protect our freshwater fisheries and the Atlantic salmon in our rivers and in the seas for which we are responsible, not only because of salmon's economic role—thousands of jobs depend on angling—but because of its environmental importance. Good healthy wild  salmon stocks indicate high environmental quality. Of course, the Parliament passed the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Act 2001, and I hope that some of the measures in that legislation are partly responsible for the good news in today's press that the River Tweed has recorded its third-highest volume of salmon since records began. I should point out that the 2001 act contains other such provisions. In the near future, the Government will introduce the long-overdue and much-called-for aquaculture and fisheries bill, which will address the important issue of non-native species in Scottish rivers. Many people have been calling for action on that matter to ensure that we protect the integrity of native Scottish stocks, such as the Atlantic salmon. The bill will also address parasite eradication although, as Maureen Macmillan pointed out, it will not deal with the antiquated dog's breakfast that is wild-stock management in our rivers. That said, the Government's consultation paper contains important and welcome suggestions, such as our taking an holistic approach to fisheries management on our rivers—including, perhaps, the introduction of whole river-system management—and bringing together the management of coarse fishing and other fishing. I agree with Maureen Macmillan that we must drop the elitist tag that attaches to salmon fishing and that we must increase access for the people of Scotland; after all, it is their heritage and should not be the preserve of rich people who either happen to be riparian owners or who can afford permits. That has to form part of our consideration of the new management system, which must be developed as soon as possible. Many people wanted the Scottish Parliament to modernise such things: we have been around for more than six years, so we must start getting to grips with those issues. As for NASCO, we need to work internationally because the only way to protect wild salmon is to protect migration routes. At this point, I should mention the legendary Orri Vigfússon, who is associated with the very active North Atlantic Salmon Fund. I realise that the fund itself is controversial, because its work is based on a tradition of people with lots of money buying out nets. We welcome the limited measures that have been taken around the Faroes, Greenland and other countries to cut down on mixed fisheries, because such activity damages the Atlantic salmon that is making its way to Scotland or other countries. We must also give more attention to research to get to the bottom of the migrating salmon's marine phase and find out what influences the state of stocks.  Like other members, I pay tribute to NASCO's work. It is great that the organisation is based in Scotland; indeed, as an SNP member, I hope that one day many international treaty organisations will be based here. At least we are making a start with the king of fish—the Atlantic salmon.

Does the minister agree that the best way of commemorating the 20 th anniversary of the Chernobyl disaster would be to rule out any new nuclear power stations for Scotland? Does he agree that the best people to decide the future of energy for Scotland are the people who are elected to the Scottish Parliament in Edinburgh here in Scotland, and not Malcolm Wicks, who makes fleeting visits to his energy colony now and again?

The minister will appreciate that avian flu and its threat to Scotland cropped up in the debate from time to time. Will she confirm to Parliament at what stage ministers would advise that poultry flocks in Scotland should be brought indoors?

The SNP whole-heartedly supports the general principles of the Animal Health and Welfare (Scotland) Bill because it offers a modern framework for the implementation of effective and enforceable legislation on animal welfare. The approach of the fifth anniversary of the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in Scotland brings back memories of horrific scenes and of the distress that was caused to many families and businesses in our rural communities. In that context, and with the threat of bird flu hanging over the nation, we acknowledge the importance of the issues that we are discussing. Preventing diseases from occurring in Scotland in the first place—and preventing them from spreading if they do occur—is the key. I hope that all members accept that Governments need the ability to act swiftly to implement radical and sometimes extreme measures. The SNP welcomes the many measures in the bill to prevent the deliberate infection of animals, such as the licensing of livestock markets and animal gatherings and the creation of new offences. We agree that there will be times when the limited slaughter of animals and the burning of carcases may be necessary, but I hope that we all accept that such courses of action are a last resort. There are alternative routes to go down,  such as vaccination, controlling human and animal movements and implementing biosecurity codes. I think that all members of the Environment and Rural Development Committee accept that one issue that is causing great concern among the various interested parties outwith the Parliament is the inclusion in part 1 of extended powers of slaughter. There is a real fear that if the bill is not amended it will provide the minister with a licence to kill without the necessary safeguards being in place to ensure that that licence to kill is not misused. After all, we are talking about the possible slaughter of healthy animals.

The bill will give the minister enormous discretion, as I am about to illustrate. Many people think that the schedule to which the minister refers will not prevent other situations from occurring. As the Environment and Rural Development Committee's report states, the committee heard many concerns that the new powers will give ministers "wide discretion to slaughter any animal as they 'think fit'." The report also states that the bill will give new powers that "provide for the slaughter of animals that may not be affected, suspected, exposed or in contact with disease" and that "Ministers may also authorise the slaughter of non-farmed animals that could transmit disease to farmed livestock in a disease outbreak." There are two main reasons for the concerns. First, ministers will have powers but will not be required to take the appropriate advice. Secondly, the power to slaughter will be exercised solely on the basis that ministers consider it "fit" to slaughter. The report states that many witnesses said to the committee that "aspects of the culling carried out during ... 2001 ... are now considered to have been unnecessary" and it quotes the Scottish Agricultural College, which said to the committee: "Being wise after the event, we now find that perhaps the degree and extent of the cull was excessive."—[ Official Report , Environment and Rural Development Committee , 23 November 2005; c 2424.]  Slaughter is therefore sometimes unjustifiable. Surely we can use the bill to ensure that unjustifiable slaughter does not happen again, but safeguards are lacking. We are left with an act of faith. The minister told the committee that ministers should be trusted not to authorise a random slaughter of animals. We have been asked to trust the minister. We accept that the minister needs flexibility. In response to the committee's report, he said that "the Executive does not believe that it is necessary to include the role of veterinary and scientific advice on the face of the Bill" and that he "would require to have regard to all the prevailing circumstances, including the opinions of relevant experts." The question that many people outwith the Parliament and members of the Environment and Rural Development Committee have asked is why that requirement cannot be in the bill in order to give the safeguard that many people request. There is enormous concern that wildlife could be slaughtered on a massive scale. Any mass culls that took place would cause anger throughout Scotland. Of course, that raises biodiversity issues, which the minister has already addressed and which will be vigorously debated in the forthcoming stages of the bill. In preventing the spread of disease, such measures may not be effective, never mind popular. We must take on board public acceptance. We know that public acceptance of bonfires of carcases back in 2001 was limited, but the widespread destruction of wildlife would be disastrous and would lead to an understandably enormous backlash from the public. We welcome the fact that the minister has acknowledged that he would take into account the impact on the wider rural economy, tourism and the environment, but, again, there are no safeguards in the bill. The ability to slaughter companion animals is a sensitive issue. Such slaughter would lead to a public backlash. Many organisations have said to the Parliament that there should be higher tests for such a measure in the bill. Perhaps only companion animals that are infected by a disease should be slaughtered. The minister should address such issues at stages 2 and 3. He was encouraged to put such safeguards in the bill, but he has declined to do so. We must stop diseases coming into Scotland in the first place. The committee took unconvincing evidence from HM Revenue and Customs on whether it is doing enough to stop illegal imports coming into Scotland. The National Audit Office recently issued a report—five years after the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease—that stated that 11 recommendations should be implemented  to tighten things up. I hope that the minister is investigating those issues and ensuring that Scotland is able to police illegal imports. I turn to the welfare part of the bill, which the SNP welcomes. We pay tribute to organisations that have been involved in welfare issues over the years, such as the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. That 8,000 investigations had to be conducted last year alone shows that the issue of animal welfare must be addressed in Scotland. We welcome many of the measures that the minister outlined in his opening speech.

The member is referring to the maximum penalty, of course. There is widespread agreement that cruelty to animals that causes pain and suffering must be addressed, which is why the bill has been widely welcomed. Of course the measures must be enforced, which is why the penalties have been widely supported. I will talk briefly about mutilations. Many SNP members support the minister's statement that mutilations cause unnecessary pain and suffering and should be outlawed. On tail docking, I welcome the minister's response to the committee's report that he will take a tougher stance. Should evidence be produced that banning tail docking has caused more pain and suffering, secondary legislation can be introduced to address the changed situation. There is no doubt that there will be vigorous debate on tail docking as the bill proceeds. We ask the minister to take on board the concerns that have been expressed by sanctuaries. We must improve the welfare of animals in sanctuaries, and it should not be just the 50 biggest sanctuaries that are subject to the bill; it should be all sanctuaries.

I apologise. I am in my last minute and cannot take any interventions. Internet trading is another issue that was brought to the attention of the committee, and we welcome the fact that the minister has acknowledged our concerns about that as well.  The trading and advertising for sale of pets on the internet will be addressed in Scotland. In conclusion, I reiterate the SNP's support for many of the measures in the bill. There are many vigorous debates ahead at stage 2 and stage 3. In particular, the unfettered ability of the minister to impose orders for mass slaughter without there being any safeguards in the bill will be a key battle in the stages ahead. Gandhi said that "the greatness of a nation and its moral progress can be judged by the way its animals are treated." If we pass the bill after it has been appropriately amended, the Parliament will have played a great role in ensuring that moral progress is made in Scotland in terms of animal welfare.

To ask the Scottish Executive how many farmers who are retired or living overseas are entitled to single farm payments and what the estimated total amount of such payments is. (S2O-8839)

I thank the minister for his informative answer. Like other rural members, I am sure, I have been contacted by constituents who believe that the residency of the farmer receiving the single farm payment should be a factor. Like many members, those constituents believe that such payments should go to farmers who live on or work the land directly. It is not right—it is perhaps immoral—that such payments should go to farmers who are living overseas or have retired in this country and are no longer working the land. The minister is aware that there are fishermen who are given quota despite the fact that they no longer go to sea and are in effect retired; this is a similar situation that is causing controversy in the farming sector. Does he agree that it is immoral that payments should go to farmers who are retired and that something should be done about that? Will he do anything about it?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of her statement. The Scottish National Party welcomes many of the steps that are outlined in the statement, particularly those that will enhance the educational role of our forests and promote the biomass sector. However, when it comes to making the most of our nation's forestry potential to provide jobs, tackle climate change and meet our energy needs, the SNP holds the view that ministers are dragging their feet. First, in urging schools to make more use of wood fuel, the minister is out of touch. We are six years into devolution, but schools that are built under public-private partnerships face enormous obstacles in doing exactly that. How does she square her statement with reality? Secondly, if the minister is intent on expanding forestry cover in Scotland, why is the new planting rate so pitiful? We have seen a 50 per cent decrease since 2001. What is she doing to halt the decline of new planting in Scotland? Finally, is the minister aware that, according to Parliament researchers, Ireland's forestry budget is greater than Scotland's and yet Scotland has twice as much forestry as Ireland and more jobs that are dependent on the sector? Is there not a good case for greater investment in a sector that has the potential to deliver so much for Scotland?

Is the minister aware of the concerns that are being expressed about the approach of the United Kingdom insurance industry towards household insurance policies in Scotland when properties have a history of flooding? Only those measures that are being taken by the UK Government to tackle flooding south of the border are being taken into account; measures that are being taken by the Scottish Government are not. Has that matter been raised with the minister? Is she aware of it?

Is the Scottish Government going to make a submission to the UK energy review?

Will the member give way?

I start by observing that two days after the BBC broadcast a powerful drama documentary that portrayed the awful events in Chernobyl almost 20 years ago, only the Tories could come to the Scottish Parliament and call for more nuclear power. The reality is that Scotland is an energy-rich country. We can meet our energy needs for the future and meet our environmental obligations with our existing resources. Indeed, we can make a disproportionate contribution to cutting emissions globally. We do not need nuclear. There is plenty of evidence that Scotland does not want nuclear—there is no public support for nuclear in Scotland—and we certainly do not need nuclear power. The reality is that the UK energy review is a nuclear review by the UK Government in London, which wants to foist a new generation of nuclear power stations on the UK. That raises the prospect of new nuclear power stations being built in Scotland with the backing of Labour ministers in this Executive. The idea that the UK energy review will consider—and put first—Scotland's interests, Scotland's priorities and its unique energy profile is absurd. Of course it will not do that. Scotland will not have a voice in the UK energy debate unless this Parliament ensures that Scotland makes a unique contribution to that debate and takes forward our own arguments here in Scotland. The Scottish Government's argument on nuclear—which is that it will await the outcome of the review into the management of radioactive waste, which will be produced in July—has been blown apart by the leak this morning from CORWM that it will not produce a solution to the problem of dealing with the UK's radioactive waste.

I am happy to correct the phrase and to say that the reporting of CORWM's proposed recommendations indicates that there will be no solution to the problem of dealing with the waste. Therefore, the fence on which ministers in Scotland have been sitting has been blown  apart. Will they stop dithering, rule out nuclear once and for all and concentrate their energy elsewhere?

The fact is that the minister says that his policy is based on waiting for the outcome of that report to see what can be done with waste before taking a decision on nuclear. We now know that there will be no solution to the problem of dealing with nuclear waste, so the minister must take a decision now. He must stop dithering and concentrate on realising the massive potential of Scotland's alternative energies. That is the key to our future in Scotland. Scotland is one of the most energy-rich nations per head of population in the world. We have 62.4 per cent of the European Union's proven oil reserves, 12.5 per cent of the EU's gas reserves, 69 per cent of the UK's coal reserves, 25 per cent of the wind resource in Europe, 10 per cent of the wave resource in Europe and 25 per cent of the tidal resource in Europe. We must scotch the myths that are being perpetuated in the UK media and by the UK Government. Scotland is not a gas importer; we are a gas exporter. Our energy policy should not be based on being a gas importer, because we consume only an eighth of the gas that we produce in Scotland. We should use that for the benefit of Scotland's energy future. We must develop clean technologies and examine how we will extend the life of Longannet using clean technologies that are being developed here in Scotland. The likes of Longannet must have a future role in meeting Scotland's energy needs. The minister should devote his attention to developing those clean technologies. One example is the carbon capture and storage technologies that are being developed in Peterhead—a world first. A hydrogen power station will be built there, which will give carbon-free electricity to the people of Scotland. We have a 10-to-15-year window to get our approach right. We need an energy plan for Scotland that considers where we will produce our energy, how we will produce it and to what extent we will produce it. Only this Parliament can deliver that. The UK energy review will not deliver for Scotland. We need energy powers here in Scotland to decide our own energy future. Otherwise, we are in real danger of having an energy-rich Scotland in which the lights are out.  I move amendment S2M-3870.2, to leave out from "with interest" to end and insert: "that Scotland is an energy rich nation; rejects calls for investment in new nuclear power stations in favour of accelerating the development of our renewables potential and emerging clean technologies; notes that, contrary to the impression given by many commentators, Scotland is a gas exporter and consumes only one-eighth of gas produced, and believes that the Parliament requires the political powers to determine our own energy future and ensure that our energy resources benefit the people of Scotland."

I assure the member that I have probably had a lot more conversations with the British Council and its head than she has had recently, especially when I was convener of the European and External Relations Committee. My argument is that Scotland does not get its fair share of the attention, time and resources of the British Council and the Foreign Office. There is plenty evidence to prove that. The member should check her facts.

There is much in the debate that members agree on. We all agree that we have to use the powers that are available to Scotland under devolution since the advent of the Scottish Parliament in 1999 to promote Scotland overseas. Internationally, there is a huge reservoir of good will for this small country that lies on the north-west periphery of Europe. We must tap into and harness that good will for Scotland's economic, social and cultural benefit. If we do so, there will be huge benefits for Scotland. I was delighted to hear even the Tories say that the Scottish Parliament should try to influence London on reserved matters. Clearly, there is much that we can agree on today. As John Swinney said in opening for the SNP, there are areas on which we disagree. For example, the SNP believes that, to maximise Scotland's impact on the world, we need the trappings and powers of other independent countries. We are talking about not only what Scotland would gain from being on the international stage, but what we could contribute to the rest of the world. I will not be quite as generous as John Swinney was about the Executive's international strategy. I believe that international relations and the international strategy are a very low priority for the present Scottish Government. I agree that we have made inroads, and that things have improved since before devolution, but we could do a lot more. It is always possible to tell from the glossiness of the document how low a priority the Executive, and the Parliament, puts on an issue. The Executive's international strategy document is badly written, and I remember that it was late in being published. There are poor black-and-white photos of the First Minister and the Deputy First Minister. The content is really bad; it does not say much, but it is all warm words as usual. We need much more ambition and leadership from the minister. That is why the European and External Relations Committee called for a dedicated minister for European and external relations. We need direction, leadership and much more focus and ambition. We must remember that today's debate was a last-minute filler. The Executive changed the business at the last moment and, when it thought about what it could come up with quickly to fill an hour and a half, decided that international affairs would do. The debate was not even planned, which is why documents were published late. International affairs are simply not a priority.  If we in the Scottish Parliament do not promote Scotland, no one else will do it for us. That is why it is important that we get our act together. The minister has much more work to do to persuade the Foreign Office in London and organisations such as the British Council to work for Scotland. They are massive organisations with a massive presence throughout the globe and they do very little—indeed, next to nothing—to promote Scotland. The Foreign Office has a budget of nearly £2 billion and 16,000 staff between London, Croydon and Milton Keynes, with 233 overseas posts. If the minister checks the British embassy websites or British Council websites from throughout the world, he will see very little reference to Scotland. I will give the minister an example from the British Council—another massive organisation, with 7,300 staff, a turnover of £430 million and a presence in 110 countries. Its job is to promote UK culture and education throughout the world, but the mindset in the British Council, like that in the Foreign Office, is a London mindset that virtually ignores Scotland. If we look at the pages called "Governance in the UK" on the British Council China's website, we see no reference to Scotland and no mention of devolution. The "Parliament" section refers to the UK Parliament and the "Cabinet" section refers to the UK Cabinet. We can also look at the page called "What the Papers are Saying" to see how the British Council updates the international community on current affairs in the UK. I checked that page this morning and six months ago and found that exactly the same newspapers were quoted: the Financial Times , The Independent , the Evening Standard , The Daily Telegraph and the Daily Mail —all London editions. Those web pages make no reference whatever to Scotland; that is the mindset that we are up against. The minister must acknowledge that there is a huge job of work to do to persuade the UK establishment even to remember that Scotland exists. Today, I contacted the Scottish Parliament information centre, which confirmed to me that the Foreign Office and the British Council are not referring at all to the national bard—Scotland's most internationally famous literary figure—a week before Burns day.

I welcome the member's excellent reference to Rabbie Burns, our national bard. However, does she share my disappointment that, according to the Scottish Parliament information centre, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and the British Council are doing little to promote Burns overseas?

Will the member clarify Conservative policy? Is he suggesting that the Executive's policy is not ambitious enough for Scotland? The Conservatives did not want a Scottish Parliament in the first place; they believe that the Foreign and Commonwealth Office should be in charge of all foreign and overseas issues.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Does the minister acknowledge that not only Jim Wallace but his ministerial and party colleague Tavish Scott do not accept that the deal in December was a good one for Scotland? Indeed, Tavish Scott's comments attracted the headline "Scott urges better deal for Shetland fishermen" in The Press and Journal last week. Does the minister himself accept that the deal was not a good deal for Scotland? Will he publish an action plan indicating how he intends to take forward many of the issues raised by other members, including members of the Scottish National Party? Those issues include tackling the rising fuel costs faced by the fleet, which would help fishermen to achieve increased profitability; access to quota held by retired fishermen, so that active fishermen can enjoy the benefits of the quota that is given to Scotland; and improving the haddock and monkfish quota? Will he publish a clear and concise action plan and tell our fishing communities how he intends to take those issues forward in the near future?

I draw the First Minister's attention to the fishing talks that concluded this morning in Brussels. Will he accept that, although everyone welcomes the significant increase in the prawn quota, 2006 will be an extremely difficult year for many of Scotland's fishing communities? Will he explain to our fishing communities and to the chamber why, at a time of record haddock stocks and when Ross Finnie promised no more cuts in  quotas, Brussels has given Scotland its lowest ever haddock quota? What steps will the First Minister take to ensure that the damage that was inflicted this morning on Scotland's fishing communities, its catching sector and its fish processors will not lead to further job losses?

Will the minister comment on the situation at Aberdeen royal infirmary, which appears to have the longest waiting times for breast cancer treatment in Scotland? Will he hold conversations with the bosses at Grampian NHS Board to see what can be done to reduce those waiting times? Local representatives have had many representations from constituents about long delays. As the minister well knows, there is no more anxious time than that spent by a woman who is waiting for breast cancer treatment.

Does Brian Adam agree that, if children are involved in relationships that break down, it is sometimes to their benefit if their parents are allowed to move on with their lives as soon as possible?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of her statement. Despite the dry title of the directive, the statement is about the need to tackle fuel poverty in Scotland, to curb harmful carbon emissions and to use our energy efficiently. Given that 40 per cent of our energy is used in our buildings, making our buildings energy efficient has to be much more of a priority. We all live and work in buildings, so the measures that we are discussing today will help to engage everyone in the debate about energy efficiency. I ask the minister to respond to concerns expressed by Energy Action Scotland and others that the new measures under the directive are so general and broad-brush that they will, if anything, be weaker and less effective than existing schemes. Does she agree that we need one simple energy rating scheme that can be applied right across the board and in which the energy rating of a building can be explained to people in language that they understand? If so, will she explain how what she has announced will achieve that, given that we will be left with many schemes, the weakest of which could be the one that the Government's own agency has chosen to promote to comply with the directive? The challenge in Scotland is not so much in making new housing more efficient but in dealing with older and colder housing stock. What assistance will be given to  householders to make their homes energy efficient and to pay for the necessary improvements?

I concur with Jim Wallace's comments. The minister will be aware that I, too, have made representations to him on a number of occasions, in connection with cases in the north-east. It is perceived that the current regime does not take into account the possibility of innocent errors and that the penalties are often draconian and disproportionate. I understand—perhaps the minister can confirm this—that the Irish have shown a willingness to raise the subject in the European Union. Will the minister give us an update on the progress that is being made on the Irish representations, say whether he is of a mind to work jointly with the Irish to pursue the issue with the European authorities, and undertake to report back to Parliament on the progress that is made?

Will the minister reject any cuts that are imposed on Scotland this month if it transpires that the other member states have not achieved their effort-reduction targets?

I am looking for an example. Can the member tell the chamber of any independent small country, with independent  member status in the European Union, that fails to protect its national interest?

Does the member agree that it will not help the market for haddock for Lib Dem MPs to tell people to stop buying it?

How has Norway's fishing industry managed to thrive despite the fact that, when Norway takes part in international agreements, it is not part of the common fisheries policy?

On an equal footing?

The Scottish National Party welcomes the debate, which is on one of Scotland's proudest and most important industries. We are indebted to Scotland's fishermen for bringing food to our plates; in doing so, many of them have made the ultimate sacrifice. Despite some of the doom-and-gloom headlines in recent years, the industry remains vital to Scotland. We have fishermen who lead their fields internationally and world-class seafood companies. Many of our coastal and island communities remain fisheries dependent. Every year since devolution, we have had the same debate in the run-up to the festive period. When most people in Scotland are looking forward to Christmas, our fishing communities face a period of uncertainty and anxiety. Many people and families throughout Scotland are wondering what next year holds for them, whether they will be able to pay their mortgages or go on holiday or whether they will have a job in the fishing industry. That includes deck-hands, people who work in fish-processing companies and in the harbour businesses that congregate around our ports and everyone else who is involved in the industry. The Government keeps telling us that that is no way to run an industry and that we should achieve a sustainable fisheries management regime, yet here we are again, with the minister about to go off to Brussels, without much of a voice, facing a situation in which Scottish livelihoods will be traded among the 25 member states that are sitting around the table. The Government does not care enough to change the way in which things are done, and Scotland has paid a heavy price for  fisheries mismanagement down the decades. Fisheries-related employment in Scotland is down, many of our ports have become marinas, many vessels have been scrapped and we are dealing with a part-time fishery in the North sea and on the west coast of Scotland. One skipper sent me a long, moving note for today's debate, in which he says: "During the first week in October one of our fishing boats sailed from Kinlochbervie to fishing grounds fifty miles west of the Butt of Lewis where he saw one 50 metre French trawler. The Scottish trawler started fishing in that area and towed on a north east direction. The trawler towed approximately north easterly for 220 miles to a position 100 miles north of Shetland and during all those miles of fishing the skipper never saw another fishing boat." Over recent decades, we have reached a position in which few boats are left fishing Scotland's waters. Nevertheless, we should bear it in mind that Scotland accounts for one quarter—127,000 square miles—of Europe's seas. This is a marine nation.

What I am pointing out to the minister is how ludicrous it is that a fishing nation should reach a position in which, despite massive seas and rich fishing stocks, few vessels are left. That is due to mismanagement of Scotland's fishing communities down the years by the union, the United Kingdom Government and this Government. Indeed, Scotland is responsible for two thirds of UK fish landings, and fishing is 20 times more important to this country than it is to the rest of the UK. The industry should be booming, not contracting.

Scotland's ills are due to the union with the Westminster Government, which has mismanaged Scotland's fishing communities, and to the fact that the Westminster Government has handed so many fishing powers to the common fisheries policy. We have the biggest marine resource in Europe and the biggest share of Europe's waters, yet we will have the least political power of any nation around the table later this month in Brussels. We have the biggest stake in this month's talks, but the least political influence. Scotland's white-fish fleet has achieved its effort reduction targets. We have been told time and  again that there is no gain without pain. Well, Scotland's fishing communities have suffered plenty of pain in recent years, and now—this month—it is time to get some of the gains. We must find out what the other states that fish the same waters as Scotland's fleets fish have achieved on effort reduction. I wrote to the European commissioner for fisheries, who was unable to tell me what the other states have achieved. We know that our fleet has bent over backwards, and we will hear in Brussels this month that the fleet faces even more cuts. We welcome the minister's assurance that he will stand up to those cuts, but he needs the power to achieve that, and we wish him well in persuading the UK Government to get on board. Our fleet requires a reward for its sacrifices down the years. It needs access to healthy stocks, the time and space at sea to catch them and workable regulations, which do not tie the fleet up in knots. The fleets, the fishing communities and the onshore sector right around Scotland's coast need stability and the ability to plan ahead. We have healthy stocks: scientists describe the haddock stocks as robust and healthy, yet we hear of 40 per cent cuts. Again, we welcome the minister's determination to stand up to that. We must remember how important haddock is to Scotland; we get 77 per cent of the EU's haddock quota. It was a great pity that Lib Dem MPs at Westminster recommended that sales outlets the length and breadth of the UK take haddock off their shelves. We must maintain consumer confidence and remind Scotland that those stocks are healthy. It is not the case that all stocks in the North sea are unhealthy. The prawn stocks are also in a healthy state, and we must ensure that we secure a substantial increase in prawn quotas, particularly for west coast communities, which have been hit hard in recent years. We must ensure that there is no small print that will tie the fleet up in knots so that it cannot access the increased quota. Likewise, monkfish is a valuable stock for which we must secure an increased quota, so we welcome the commitment that the minister has given. We need to ensure that we maintain Scotland's share of the pelagic stocks without getting bogged down with swaps that may do Scotland down or play off different Scottish sectors against each other. To ensure that we do not crucify all our fishing communities on the back of cod, we need to separate the management of cod stocks from that of healthy stocks. We need to benefit from increased access to the healthier stocks in the North sea and west-coast waters. We must avoid blanket measures, which are just a recipe for disaster, as the experience of previous years has  shown. We should look to smart management such as seasonal closures and real-time closures. If we are not to be ambushed at the December talks, we need to ensure that the negotiating team has an industry representative who can give advice to the minister. The fleet's requirement for profitability also means that we need help not only with meeting fuel costs but with accessing quota. The talks must address the slipper skipper situation, whereby people from the comfort of their living room lease out quota to active fishermen. Only active fishermen at sea should be given quota. In conclusion, we wish the minister all the best in the December talks. We wish that he had the powers to negotiate on Scotland's behalf. It is preposterous that he will not lead the UK delegation at the talks, given Scotland's disproportionate reliance on fishing compared with that of the rest of the UK. Only an independent Scotland, negotiating with the full weight and authority of a member state, can deliver the best outcome for Scotland, by returning control of Scottish waters and the livelihoods of our fishing communities to Scotland, where such control belongs. I move amendment S2M-3657.2, to insert at end: "notes that Scotland has achieved its effort reduction target for cod mortality in the North Sea; believes that Scotland must now be rewarded for this disproportionate sacrifice and that any further cuts in key stocks must be resisted; calls for the level of effort reduction achieved by other national fleets that fish Scottish waters to be made available; urges the Scottish Executive to help our fishing communities cope with rising costs such as for fuel and leasing quota; urges the Minister to include representatives from the fishing industry in his negotiating team to provide advice, and calls for Scotland to lead the UK negotiating team in Europe later this month and beyond, until control over our fishing grounds is returned to the Scottish Parliament."

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it will take to promote Scottish history in schools. (S2O-8270)

When my colleague Jim Mather raised this issue, the minister's response was quite poor. When children in the late 21 st century read about what happened in the early  21 st century, they will learn that the electorate chucked out the Labour Government in 2007. Is the minister embarrassed that, more than six years into devolution, the people of Scotland still have to campaign to get more Scottish history taught in their classrooms? What research has the minister done on comparing the access that children in other European countries have to the history of their nations with the lack of access that our children have in their classrooms to the history of their nation?

To ask the First Minister what contribution the Scottish Executive will make to any future reviews on nuclear power undertaken by the UK Government. (S2F-1953)

Does the First Minister accept that the best way to deal with the problem of nuclear waste is not to produce it? Will he therefore go on record as accepting that energy-rich Scotland does not need dirty, expensive and dangerous nuclear power when we have so many better alternatives? We can develop cheaper, cleaner and safer green renewables such as carbon capture and storage technology that can  allow us to use fossil fuels cleanly. Will the First Minister go on the record and say plainly to the Prime Minister in London that Scotland does not want any more nuclear power stations because of the many reasons for opposing them? Will he stand up for Scotland on that issue and not bow to pressure from Tony Blair or the nuclear lobby?

I congratulate Sarah Boyack on securing this very interesting debate. I do not think that there will be too much disagreement on many of the issues. The debate is timely, given that energy is dominating the headlines after Tony Blair's ludicrous comments about the need for nuclear power. It is disconcerting and infuriating that the energy debate in the United Kingdom, which considers the issues from a UK perspective, dominates our headlines in Scotland. Our energy debate is distinct from that of the rest of the UK—we are an energy-rich country. We do not need nuclear power, because we have huge renewables potential and other clean, safer alternatives. Renewables are relevant to the debate. They offer opportunities for households, businesses and communities. The debate is about how we can bring renewables right down to the lowest possible level, away from industrial-scale projects towards small-scale renewables sources and embedding renewables in our homes, our workplaces and our communities. Households can play a role through energy efficiency, which is an important debate as we consider how we can achieve our targets for reducing emissions. By using renewable energy in their homes, people can play their own little part in tackling global warming and we can get people thinking about their domestic energy use, how they can change it and how they can save money. It is exciting to see projects such as the ones that Sarah Boyack mentioned, or Dundee City Council's sun city project, which is installing solar technology in about 700 houses over the next two years. Dundee can take advantage of being a particularly sunny city. It is estimated that half the homes in Dundee could benefit from solar technology. We often think that there is not a lot of sun in Scotland, but if we capture its potential, it can help us to heat our homes.  We need incentives to get renewable energy technologies off the ground, to get more people involved and to make renewable sources more affordable. We must ensure that commercial buildings, as well as homes, incorporate renewables technologies when they are built. That is key to making a huge difference in the future. On local communities' role, smaller-scale, off-grid renewable energy production is full of potential. It can empower local communities, create jobs and give them their own income, as well as taking pressure off the national grid. We must remember that sector. Housing is the big challenge facing Scotland when it comes to renewable energy and energy in general. The Swiss have adopted a target of cutting carbon emissions by 90 per cent by 2050, which would be a huge step that they will achieve through energy-efficient housing. In Scotland, we have a major problem in that respect. It is all very well to have energy-efficient design and to install energy-efficient equipment when we build new homes, but much of Scotland's housing stock is old and cold, and it will be difficult to do the same here. That is a big challenge for ministers. The other barrier is reducing the cost of installing the technologies. We must do that, but we can only do so by increasing demand so that the price falls. The Government must take the lead. Government buildings will have to use renewable energy, as will Government-funded projects. That could make a huge impact on the demand for renewables technology. As Sarah Boyack said, we need more installers. There are huge economic opportunities there for a new industry in Scotland that would create thousands of jobs the length and breadth of the country. To get people on board, we must ensure that householders have the maximum amount of information about energy use and about the types of energy that they can use in their homes. That means that every home in Scotland will have to have an energy rating that people understand and can relate to. They should be able to understand the amount of money that they could save in the long term if they switched to renewables in their homes. There is much more to do, but I am glad that we are starting to work on this area in Scotland. The debate is welcome.

Although the main focus of the debate is deliveries, does the minister acknowledge that the Aboyne unit plays a valuable role in providing care before birth and after birth, even when the mum has given birth elsewhere? I feel that that point has not been given enough emphasis in the debate.

I congratulate Mike Rumbles on securing this important debate. As one of the MSPs who attended the rally in Aboyne on 29 October and spoke alongside Mike Rumbles and others from the area, I pay tribute to the organisers of the rally and the campaign. They have done a magnificent job in bringing the issue further up the political agenda—and, indeed, on to the Parliament's agenda today. The campaign group comprises young mothers and expectant mothers. The fact that they have gone out to campaign to save their local maternity unit reflects the strength of feeling in the community in Aboyne, as does the fact that, as Mike Rumbles said, the turnout at the rally was fantastic.  The proposals that Aberdeenshire community health partnership put forward a while back were controversial, especially those on the future arrangements for older people's services, diagnostic and treatment services and, of course, maternity services. There is controversy over other units as well, particularly in Banff and Buchan; no doubt my colleague Stewart Stevenson will refer to that. However, tonight's debate is about Aboyne. In the early summer, I had the pleasure of visiting Aboyne maternity unit and meeting the staff. I pay tribute to their professionalism. I was impressed by the fact that the unit is a modern facility and the figures show that it is no Mary Celeste. The number of births taking place there has increased by 100 per cent in the past year and there has been a 71 per cent increase in the number of bookings. Indeed, before the day of the rally, my office telephoned the unit to speak to the staff, but was told to call back because they were taking care of a delivery. That is an indication of how active the unit is at the moment. There is talk of closing the unit and we must ensure that that does not happen. There is talk of other changes as well. One such change is what is called the DOMINO arrangement, whereby a midwife would go to the expectant mother's home, take them into the hospital for a few hours and return them to their home as soon as possible after they had given birth. That would represent a downgrading of the service and I would have concerns if that were to go ahead. We do not want to have any sort of downgrading along those lines. As Mike Rumbles said, the issue is about choice. If Aboyne closes, in effect the choice of where to give birth will be between Elgin and Aberdeen. I draw the minister's attention to "We just can't let these things happen", the report from the maternity service provision policy group of the Scottish Women's Convention. The report states: "Women should have informed choice about where and how and in what circumstances they have their babies. This choice should be available to all women in Scotland, regardless of where they live. A 'one size fits all' approach should not be applied to the provision of maternity services as women have different needs according to their location, their economic background, family circumstances and so on." This debate takes place against that background; against the background of the Kerr report—which, we are told, has cross-party support—on the delivery of health services; and against the background of the rural development debate. Rural communities have experienced a loss of local facilities such as banks, post offices, shops and schools and the last thing that they want to lose is maternity services, especially in an area such as Aberdeenshire, where there is an aging population. Aberdeenshire has one of the  most quickly increasing age profiles of any area in Scotland. If we want to attract young people to the area, we must make services such as maternity units available locally, as well as having schools, shops, banks and other community facilities. If we do not have such services, young people will not want to move to those areas. I hope that the minister will respond positively to the debate and not just pass the buck to the local health board. I would like the minister to give a commitment that he will intervene and communicate the Parliament's thoughts and opinions to Grampian NHS Board.

The minister will be aware that the Scottish Government will soon have a budget of £30 billion a year, which is a lot of spending power. Can she outline how the Government intends to use that spending power to increase demand for recycled products?

Does the member accept that—as Sarah Boyack said—many powers that need to be used to reduce the waste produced by businesses are reserved to Westminster? The SNP is saying that Westminster, with full control over our waste strategy, kept us far behind other countries. If we had all the necessary powers, we could catch up with other countries.

Debates such as this one do not exactly pack out the parliamentary chamber, but they are extremely important nevertheless. After all, the debate is about how we manage the planet's valuable resources here in Scotland. I was interested to read in the WWF Scotland submission that was sent to members prior to the debate that if everyone consumed at the rate that we in Scotland consume resources, we would need three planets to survive. The submission also states that waste in Scotland accounts for 38 per cent—well over a third—of our environmental footprint. That means that waste accounts for more than a third of the resources that we use. That is a ridiculously high figure. We must take into account not only the environmental cost but the financial cost of managing—or not managing—waste. At the beginning of such debates, I like to remind members that now that we have our own Parliament, we get to speak about the environment and issues such as managing Scotland's waste, which is so important in that context. Such debates would never have taken place at Westminster, but during the six years of the Scottish Parliament we have had numerous debates on the environment. Those debates have taken environmental policy forward. We should bear in mind the fact that this is a matter on which Europe has a positive impact on Scotland. Europe gets a bad name in this country for its unpopular policies on many issues, but environmental policy is one area in which pushing by Europe has led to progress in Scotland. Many of the pieces of legislation that ministers introduce here are a consequence of pressure from the EU. However, we should not be complacent. I think that the minister's comments on the progress that is being made smacked slightly of complacency. Massive challenges face us in respect of dealing with our waste and, in particular, in respect of recycling, which tends to be the public's interface with the waste debate. Although we have made progress, we know that we lag behind many other countries on recycling. Indeed, the Government's strategy might struggle to be successful because we know that it will be difficult to meet the 25 per cent recycling target next year. We all hope that we make it, but it will be difficult. We know that we produce more waste in Scotland than ever before. The most recent statistic that I have shows a 3 per cent increase in municipal waste in Scotland. At that rate, we will have to deal with another 1 million tonnes in eight years. According to SEPA, the average increase over the past 10 years was only  0.85 per cent a year, so the most recent figure of 3 per cent shows that we are producing more waste faster. We have made substantial progress in recycling. Before the Parliament was established, only 4 per cent of waste was recycled, as the minister rightly said. Six years later, the recycling figure is 17 per cent, which is a substantial step forward. However, we must bear in mind the recycling rates in other small nations: 39 per cent in Sweden; 32 per cent in Denmark; and a massive 58 per cent in Austria. We must learn from those countries and we must consider examples such as that of Canberra in Australia, in which 75 per cent of household waste is recycled. By 2010, Canberra aims to have no household waste. The figure of 17 per cent represents progress in Scotland, but if we are to achieve the 25 per cent recycling target next year, we must achieve the equivalent of the increase in recycling that we have achieved over the past four years in the next four months. That is a big challenge for the Government, but it is a particularly big challenge for our local councils, which are at the forefront of the work to meet the targets. However, there is a variable performance rate across the 32 councils in Scotland. Nine of the councils are less than halfway to achieving the target and in more than half of them the recycling rate is below the national average. Some local authorities tell me that they hope to achieve the 25 per cent target but that, if they do so, they will be unable to achieve other targets and might face fines and penalties for that. They are up against it and we must give them support. We must identify why there is such variable performance among local authorities. Many say that it is because of a lack of resources and recycling infrastructure. The minister must respond to those concerns. The big black hole in the Government's waste management policy is in the tackling of non-municipal waste. Eight million tonnes of waste go into landfill in Scotland and business in Scotland generates 75 per cent of that. The Government's target for recycling municipal waste—the 25 per cent figure to which the minister referred—will amount to only 6.25 per cent of all the waste that will be produced in Scotland by next year. Getting recycling facilities into place so that we can maximise recycling is a major challenge. As the minister said, doing that can create green jobs. Currently, a local authority in the north of Scotland sends the waste paper that it collects from households to north Wales to be processed; that is turned into recycled paper that is brought back up to Scotland to be used again and to go through the same process again. Aberdeenshire Council, for instance, sends 330 tonnes of waste to north  Wales every month, which is 50 truck loads. In terms of our waste management strategy in Scotland, that practice wastes fuel and causes pollution. Surely doing that does not make sense. We must ensure that we have recycling facilities here. We need help for the small business sector. I know that the minister is aware of the concerns of the Federation of Small Businesses, among others. The federation has cited examples of its members going to their local recycling facility in Aberdeen or wherever and finding that waste that is generated by small businesses is not accepted. The businesses must take their waste back to their workplaces and put it in with the general waste, which ends up in landfill. The recycling policy is failing in that regard. We look to the minister to introduce proposals to help small businesses to increase their recycling rates. Of course, the crux of the matter is reducing waste in the first place. The biggest challenge facing the Parliament and the Government is to ensure that waste does not increase at a faster rate than we can recycle. We must look to public education to make everyone aware of the role of waste and, indeed, of the fact that they must redefine their whole approach to waste, because everything has a value and it is all precious resources. Public education is important. Indeed, in some local authorities, 20 per cent of people who have access to recycling bins from the local council do not use them, even when the bins are in their own driveways. We must move from being a throwaway society to being one that recognises the value of all our resources. Finally, I want to talk about the Government's ability to implement an effective waste management strategy. The Parliament lacks the political powers to put in place an effective waste management strategy. I was interested in the point raised about plastic bags. The Parliament is considering the Environmental Levy on Plastic Bags (Scotland) Bill, which is an attempt to cut down on litter and the waste of precious resources. How convoluted the process has become; it is in danger of turning into a dog's breakfast. Whether or not we support the bill, we have to admit that the process is convoluted and complex. It will lead to 32 local authorities having to collect their own separate levies, all because the national Parliament does not have the power to pass a simple piece of legislation to apply a national levy. The member whose bill it is, Mike Pringle, has to go through a convoluted process to get the levies in place. The Environment and Rural Development Committee is in danger of tying itself in knots trying to ascertain whether the Parliament even has the power to do that.

I said that the committee was "in danger" of tying itself in knots. That is the Scottish National Party's opinion. Of course I was not speaking for the committee. That is patently obvious. The minister has spoken about his consultation exercise on reducing waste. That will mean thinking about manufacturing processes, product standards and all the rest of it. Right at the beginning of the production process, we have to cut down on waste and save packaging. We have to consider better design. All those issues require the Parliament to have powers to legislate. We need to tackle this issue and we need the powers to do so. I urge members to support the SNP's amendment. I move amendment S2M-3585.1, to insert at end: "notes that the key to a sustainable waste strategy is a greater emphasis on reducing the level of waste produced; recognises that to maintain public support and participation, waste collected for recycling should not go to landfill; notes that municipal waste accounts for only 25% of waste and that the other 75% comes from business and industry and accurate information on the amount of such waste recycled is required; notes concerns over the lack of accessible recycling infrastructure; calls for waste management support for the small business sector, and recognises that, for any waste strategy to be truly effective, Scottish ministers require the necessary political powers to ensure they have all options available to them, including measures relating to manufacturing, design and taxation."

To ask the Scottish Executive whether any investigations have been carried out into the impact on patient care and, specifically, cancer waiting time targets of the proposed ward changes, such as a loss of beds from general surgery, at Aberdeen royal infirmary. (S2O-8077)

Do I not get to ask a supplementary?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The minister may well be giving the board's view, but I have met the general surgery consultants who work at the hospital, who are very concerned about the ward changes, which will have a knock-on impact throughout the hospital. They tell me—I am sure that the minister will take them seriously—that the impact on patient care and cancer waiting times may well be negative and that, if the changes proceed, they will be unable to deliver the service to the excellent level that they currently provide. Will the minister personally investigate those concerns?

Does the member acknowledge the urgent need for a decision on an Aberdeen dental school? England is to establish a new dental school, which will create competition for the few professionals who could teach at the Aberdeen school.

Will the member explain how the concerted campaign by the Labour Party in Grampian to portray dentists as greedy and selfish will help to retain dentists in the NHS and to attract others back into the NHS?

Has the minister made any progress towards reaching a decision about whether Scotland requires a third dental school to replace the one that was closed by the Tories some time ago?

We all accept the need for more incentives to attract dentists back into the  NHS. However, the minister will appreciate that in many parts of Scotland there are no NHS dentists. If the package that he has announced does not succeed in attracting more dentists back into the NHS, what is his plan B?

I congratulate Alex Johnstone on securing the debate. It is highly appropriate that Alex—the Parliament's very own Desperate Dan—is holding a debate on food. As we all know, he complained to the Parliament's canteen staff about their not stocking enough pies. I think that the problem has now been fixed, as there are now always plenty of pies in the canteen. I had thought that he might lodge a motion calling for a Scottish pie fortnight—perhaps that is the next one in the pipeline.

The farmers market that was held here in the Parliament a few weeks ago was excellent. I commend the macaroon bars, which were the best I had tasted in my life; I bought some to take back to my family. That was a very good initiative. Apart from the minister, there are no Labour or Liberal Democrat members here for the debate. That is a pity, given the importance of the food sector to Scotland—it employs 53,000 people, which accounts for 2 per cent of employment in Scotland. Our food sector does an excellent job in promoting Scotland overseas. We should think of all the products on shelves around the world that are produced in Scotland. They include shellfish, salmon, shortbread, beef and many others. I want to raise with the minister the issue of how successful the Irish are when it comes to exporting food. We are relatively successful in Scotland but, by looking at how Ireland does things, perhaps we can learn some lessons and become even more successful. Bord Bia—the Irish Food Board—has offices in Amsterdam, Chicago, Frankfurt, London, Madrid, Moscow, Milan and Paris, as well as its headquarters in Dublin. It gets a Government budget of €25 million to look for new export markets for food and to promote Irish food overseas. Would the minister be willing to investigate the possibility of introducing such an initiative in Scotland, or at least to learn lessons from how the Irish promote food overseas? It might be very worth while to do so. Food security should come on to the agenda in Scotland. Food producers would like that to happen, but is difficult to pin down ministers on  whether they think that food security is an important thing for Scotland. It could help to increase food production and improve the sales of locally produced food in Scotland, not just sales in other markets. It could cut down total food miles, which would be good for cutting costs and would possibly bring down the prices of some foods. That would also be good for the environment, as less transportation and fuel would be required. Food security coming on to the agenda would be especially welcome in the farming sector, as well as the food sector in general. I turn to farmers and fishermen. I represent Grampian, whose food sector is one of the most valuable, if not the most valuable, in the whole of Scotland. The sector is celebrated every year at the taste of Grampian event at Thainstone, near Inverurie. I mention farming and fishing because of the pressure that both industries are under. Our farmers have recently been protesting at the unfair deal that they get from supermarkets in Scotland. I hope that ministers can intervene and set up an official forum in which farmers could speak regularly to the supermarkets; the forum could support farmers' calls for an ombudsman to look into the trade issues between the food producers and the supermarkets. The farmers have been calling on the Scottish Parliament's Environment and Rural Development Committee to conduct an investigation, and I hope that the committee's members will support that. Fish is a very healthy food but, unfortunately, not enough of it is eaten in this country. It was disgraceful that two Liberal Democrat MPs, Norman Baker and Dan Rogerson, tabled a motion in the House of Commons calling for haddock to be removed from supermarket shelves. That is an utter disgrace, given that haddock is the stock that is at its healthiest. The stock was described even by European scientists as robust and healthy. For those two MPs to be so ignorant as to table a motion—even though they now say that they regret doing so—and not to withdraw it is terrible. It sends out the wrong message entirely. Skills issues are very important to the food industry. Many foreign workers are now relied upon to supply the necessary skills for the industry and they play a very valuable role. We should look to increase the level of skills in the food sector, as well as cutting down on transport costs. This is a good opportunity, which I welcome, to celebrate Scotland's food industry.

I am not sure whether the minister has listened to a word that SNP members have said in the debate, because what he says bears no relation to what we said. The SNP has laid out a clear route map to meeting Scotland's energy needs without nuclear, but the minister says that he disagrees with that approach. Does that mean that he thinks that we could achieve our energy needs only with nuclear?

The last nuclear power station to be built took 12 years from the submission of planning to the completion of construction. Does the member not accept that the  SNP, in our opening speeches, laid out options for plugging the energy gap with non-nuclear sources, which could be up and running much sooner than a new nuclear power station?

Is the member saying that it is wrong to support offshore wind farms? Does the Tory party oppose all kinds of wind energy?

Will the member take an intervention?

How can the member accuse the SNP of not addressing global warming in its motion when it refers to the need for renewables and for carbon capture and storage technology?

Does the minister accept that there is growing demand for a specific Scottish energy policy that looks at where we should produce energy, how we should produce it and how much energy we need? When will he produce that kind of policy, even within the limits of devolution? Why has he not responded positively to the request for such a policy by the Enterprise and Culture Committee?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I shall use my time to make a number of good points. It is a pity that the Government and Tory seats are so empty for a debate that is important to the future of Scotland, but I take great pleasure in opening on behalf of the Scottish National Party. As a result of the rise in global demand for energy, rocketing fuel prices, the fact that the United Kingdom is becoming a net importer of gas, international instability and global warming, energy issues increasingly dominate the headlines in Scotland, in Europe and internationally. That is because our standard of living depends on plentiful, accessible and affordable energy. We produce energy to heat and feed ourselves, to travel and to go about our daily lives. We know to our cost that countries will go to extreme lengths to secure access to energy supplies—indeed, they will go to war. We in Scotland must turn our attention to our energy future. In the 21 st century, the success of our economy will depend on our ability to find, produce and distribute energy and its major by-product, electricity. As we speak, Scotland is at an energy crossroads. The SNP believes that we need a Scottish energy strategy to guide us and ensure that we take the right road. We need to decide how and where we want to produce our energy and how much we need to produce. We also need the right information so that we can make informed decisions. The last thing that we need is a haphazard, ad hoc series of energy developments with no reference to any national energy strategy or policy. Indeed, the Enterprise and Culture Committee called for such a strategy in a recent report published under the convenership of my colleague Alasdair Morgan. Scotland is a lucky country. We have abundant energy resources and we have cutting-edge energy sectors, but we need a Scottish energy policy to ensure that those resources work for the  benefit of the nation. We need to protect and grow our energy sector. However, we must recognise that a dark cloud is hanging over one of our two major power companies, with the threatened takeover of Scottish Power, Scotland's third-biggest company. The loss of that major corporate headquarters would be a body blow to Scotland, to our economy and to Scottish prestige. It would be bad for the Scottish Power employees and for Scotland.

No matter what the member's intervention is about, he always turns the debate around to nuclear energy. One thing is certain: the Government and the Parliament must fight to retain Scottish Power's independence. We must make sure that we do all in our power to resist any foreign takeover of such a major Scottish company. It is not just Scottish Power's future that is uncertain, but Scotland's energy future. Key decisions must be taken by the Scottish Parliament on our future energy policy. If the Parliament is capable of taking decisions on the future of our education and health policies, we are certainly capable of taking decisions on the future of our energy policy. We have to make sure that our energy resources work for the people of Scotland. That is why today the SNP calls on the Parliament to support the formation and implementation of a Scottish energy policy that will give us security and continuity of energy supply and energy self-sufficiency, reduce carbon emissions so that we can tackle global warming, eliminate fuel poverty and deliver affordability and energy efficiency.

The SNP's position is clear. Scotland's energy resources must benefit the people of Scotland first and foremost. If there is potential to export energy thereafter, that will be all very well, as long as certain conditions are met. The UK's energy policy is failing Scotland. We are not receiving the benefits of living in an energy-rich nation at a time when the value of  energy is at an all-time high all over the world. Let us consider Scotland's oil and gas resources. We have two thirds of the European Union's oil. There is a lot of life left in the North sea industry; even Government ministers now say that there are 30 years of production left in the North sea. The oil company Talisman, whose representatives I met a few weeks ago, is the biggest independent operator in the North sea. It said that oil fields that were due to close a few years ago are having their lives extended until 2023 and it thinks that the North sea will produce oil and gas for another 50 years, not 30 years. That, of course, should mean a lot of oil revenue flowing into a Scottish exchequer and not being squandered by London and the Westminster Government. Gordon Brown should not be looking to smash and grab oil profits from the North sea, as that would destroy thousands of jobs and undermine the new-found confidence in the North sea that has been built in recent years. We are also rich in terms of our renewables potential. We have hit the jackpot for a second time. This country has the potential to become Europe's renewables powerhouse. We have 25 per cent of Europe's wind resources, a quarter of Europe's tidal resources and 10 per cent of Europe's wave resources. We have other renewables potential as well—biomass and hydropower, which we use already, solar power and many other areas. The Government's 2001 report into Scotland's renewables potential found that we have the potential to generate six times the amount of electricity that we generate at the moment. Offshore wind power alone could generate twice the present amount of electricity in Scotland. We also have coal resources—we produce one third of the UK's coal. As the SNP is explaining, the UK's energy policy is failing Scotland badly. Let us consider the scandal of fuel poverty. This nation is rich in energy resources, but tens of thousands of Scottish households cannot afford to heat their homes in winter. That is a scandal in 21 st century Scotland. Only yesterday, we found out that there will be further increases in household fuel bills from Scottish and Southern Energy. We should not forget that every 5 per cent increase in fuel bills plunges an extra 30,000 Scottish households into fuel poverty. At the beginning of the 21 st century, in one of the most energy-rich countries in the world, 13 per cent of our households are fuel poor and one in 20 deaths is a result of the cold. I commend the motion that Margaret Ewing lodged in the Parliament yesterday on excess winter deaths. It asks members to agree that the Parliament "believes that, as an energy-rich nation, the people of Scotland should expect warm, dry and affordable ways to heat their homes".  I hope that every member will sign that motion. It is difficult to think of a bigger price that Scotland pays for being part of the UK. We have all those energy resources but people are dying of the cold in Scotland and tens of thousands of households cannot afford to heat their homes. The business community has also been hit by high fuel prices. The Scottish Council for Development and Industry has passed figures to the SNP that show that fish farmers in the Highlands are now paying 52 per cent more for their fuel than they were last year. Manufacturers in Cumbernauld are paying 40 per cent more. The UK's policy is also failing Scotland because of its obsession with nuclear power. During the past few weeks, we have witnessed with amazement the UK Government trying to soften up public opinion and turn it in favour of nuclear power. Some years ago, we were famously told that nuclear power would be "too cheap to meter", but now we know the truth. Scotland cannot afford to pay the economic, health, social or environmental costs of nuclear power. It will cost £85 billion just to clean up the legacy of nuclear waste. Five sites in Scotland have been earmarked by Nirex to become nuclear dumps. The Parliament must make every effort to stop any Scottish community being turned into a nuclear dump by Westminster or this Government. Last week, my colleague Bruce Crawford received an answer to a parliamentary question that confirmed that, today in 2005, 11 farms in Scotland are still subject to restrictions as a result of the incident at Chernobyl in 1986. Surely that speaks volumes about the price that Scotland would be required to pay for nuclear power.

I can tell the Tories that the only thing that our party accepts about nuclear power is that it is dirty, dangerous and expensive. The Parliament must reject it. UK energy policy is also failing our environment. Instead of having an energy sector that is currently Scotland's biggest emitter of carbon emissions, we should be investigating alternatives and accelerating the development of renewables. Six years into devolution, latest Government figures show that the percentage of electricity that is generated from renewables has gone backwards rather than forwards, despite all our country's potential. The Deputy First Minister and Minister  for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning recently announced that he will support projects in the marine renewables sector for energy generation from wave and tidal power, but that announcement came six years into devolution and only after the public outcry that arose when it was discovered that Portugal had stolen leading wave technology from under our noses. People in Portugal will now benefit from wave technology that was developed in Scotland before the people of Scotland will. We need to consider using a mix of renewable energy sources—including offshore wind, hydrogen, biomass, biofuel, solar and even the possibilities of geothermal—to benefit the people of Scotland. Energy policy is important because it deals not just with electricity—which accounts for only 20 per cent of energy—but with heating and transport. However, I draw to the Parliament's attention the on-going discrimination in the transmission charges that are imposed on Scottish power generators by the UK Government and its regulatory sidekick, the Office of Gas and Electricity Markets. The charges threaten to undermine renewables development in Scotland and must be opposed. We urge the minister to challenge that Westminster legislation, which threatens to destroy Scotland's renewables potential. As things stand, a generator in Skye will be forced to pay £23.10 per kilowatt for access to the grid, whereas a generator in Cornwall will receive a subsidy of £8.04 per kilowatt. That is a ridiculous anti-Scottish state of affairs and the situation must be changed if we are to deliver energy benefits for Scotland. We need to manage demand through an energy efficiency strategy, which ministers have promised for a long time but will not—we are given to understand—deliver until spring 2006. We draw to the Parliament's attention the fact that the regulatory powers are reserved to Westminster—the Scottish Environment Protection Agency has rightly highlighted the fact that, because of that, it will be toothless to act on energy efficiency, despite the issue's importance. That is another example of why energy powers must be transferred back to Scotland. Other opportunities for the future of Scotland's energy industry include carbon capture and storage. That could provide a huge opportunity to create new jobs in a new industry that would secure our energy future. Given that the world's largest hydrogen power station will be built in Peterhead and will supply carbon-free electricity to 0.25 million homes, we need to find similar huge opportunities elsewhere in Scotland. Another example is clean coal. We know that, by 2015, 45 per cent of Scotland's generating capacity will close. Some 34 per cent of that is represented by the coal-fired power stations at  Longannet and Cockenzie. By installing clean-coal technology and using carbon capture and storage technology, we could not only keep those stations open and allow them to continue to deliver energy to the people of Scotland, but tackle global warming at the same time. We have the expertise in Scotland to do that, but we are crying out for Government support to allow us to lead in those technologies not just here in Scotland, but internationally. In the North sea alone, we would have the capacity to store 755 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide emissions under the sea if we could put in place the technology that already exists in the offshore industry. That would be equivalent to Scotland's output of carbon emissions for 5,000 years. Scotland could lead the world in a whole new industry. The SNP recognises that securing our energy future will require difficult and radical decisions, but we can keep the lights on, keep our homes warm and fuel sustainable economic development in Scotland. We have the know-how and the resources in oil and gas, renewables and other technologies, but we need the powers for Scotland to take decisions on those matters as part of a Scottish energy policy. I move, That the Parliament considers it unacceptable that in energy-rich Scotland fuel poverty blights our society; notes with concern that, despite Scotland possessing massive energy resources, urgent action is required to avoid an energy gap in the next decade; calls for the development of an energy policy for Scotland that will deliver security of supply, affordability, self-sufficiency and energy efficiency; recognises that the transmission charges for power generators, as permitted by the UK Government, will undermine these objectives; rejects nuclear power in favour of an energy mix that includes making Scotland the world leader in renewable energy and carbon capture and storage technology; believes that such a policy will boost our economy and meet our environmental obligations, and recognises that the Scottish Parliament requires the necessary energy powers and control over our oil and gas resources to deliver the nation's energy needs in the 21st century.

I sat on the Environment and Rural  Development Committee through stage 1, I spoke in the stage 1 debate, I sat through stage 2 and I am now the second-last speaker in this debate, so I am not sure that I can add a whole lot to what has been said. I was going to say that the bill was full of a lot of technical issues and non-controversial but, in their usual open and constructive manner, the ministers rejected every single amendment that was lodged by Opposition members during the process. However, ministers lodged amendments of their own, which I welcome—perhaps that shows that the committee exercised power in persuading them to do so. The SNP welcomes the bill and will vote for it—unlike the Tories. I am always taken aback—although perhaps I should not be too surprised—by how the Tories always try to block progress in the Scottish Parliament, which they opposed in the first place. Only last week, their leadership contender David Cameron said that the environment was going to be one of his big priorities. He said that he was going to pay visits, that he was going to change the Tory party and that the party was going to win votes by caring for the environment in the future. No wonder he has cancelled his visit to Scotland—he must have second-guessed the position that the Tory party in Scotland would take on this progressive bill, which will work in favour of Scotland's environment. Once again, the Scottish Tories have let down the environment. It is clear that they are stuck in the past. I add the SNP's thanks to everyone who has helped the committee—researchers in the Parliament, the clerks to the committee and the outside organisations who passed to members their advice and information. It is encouraging to see the environment back on the agenda, with more legislation that is going to help Scotland's environment before us today. The bill is significant, for the reasons that many people have given already. It makes perfect sense to incorporate environmental considerations in the decision-making process as early as possible to avoid problems occurring at a later stage. It is also encouraging that we will pass the bill today. The public sector will have to carry out environmental assessments of its strategies, plans and policies. Let us not forget that the public sector in Scotland accounts for 50 per cent of gross domestic product. In a couple of years the Government's budget will be up to £30 billion. Considerable expenditure will take place in Scotland, and, of course, that expenditure will impact on the environment. That is why it is encouraging that all the decisions and strategies behind that huge expenditure will have to take into account the impact on the environment.

Yes. I have a lot of sympathy with the point that the member makes. We have to have more joined-up policy in the Scottish Parliament. Tomorrow morning the SNP will be bringing a debate on energy, one of the themes of which will be the need for joined-up thinking on such big strategic issues. Many members made the good point that the bill will mean that there has to be a culture change in public organisations. We have to ensure that we do not walk away from the people who have to implement the bill after today's debate. We have had encouraging words from the ministers. There is going to be support and training for staff in the public sector; work will be done to identify the data that are required so that staff can carry out the assessments properly, particularly in relation to health; and guidance on a range of subjects will be provided. It is important to provide such support. It is a pity that we did not secure the gateway in the bill. Members tried to do so, but failed without the support of the Government. The theme that has run through the debate is the need for transparency and openness, particularly in the pre-screening procedure. We all welcome the fact that the Government has accepted the need to publish an annual report. Finally, to help Scotland's environment, it is one thing to have the public authorities on board but we also have to give attention to ensuring that the public get on board as well in the next few years. The public, not just public authorities, have to play a part. We have to encourage a change of behaviour on the part of the public to ensure that, when people make decisions in their everyday lives, they also think about the environmental consequences. When we reach that point, there will be a sea change in the way in which the people of Scotland treat our environment. The Scottish Parliament has been good for the environment, and this is another bill that is worthy of support. It again vindicates those parties—all parties bar the Tories—that campaigned for the advent of this institution. The Parliament needs more powers but at least it is making progress in some areas in which it has some powers. That is a good thing for Scotland. I urge Parliament to support this legislation.

I, too, warmly welcome the Minister for Environment and Rural Development's statement on the low risk that avian flu presents. I agree with him that the watchwords must be preparedness and prevention and not panic. As other members have said, thousands of jobs are dependent on the poultry sector in Scotland. As the sector's busiest time of the year approaches, with the festive period just around the corner, there is a lot of anxiety in the industry about the impact on sales. First, what further steps can be taken to ensure that appropriate advice gets across to the consumer? The FSA website may not be the most appropriate channel through which to communicate with most people in  Scotland. Secondly, can the minister give a guarantee to the keepers of organic or free-range status flocks who are worried that, if they have to move their flocks indoors, they may lose that status? As he is aware, that is a real concern to the sector. What reassurances can he give?

The Scottish National Party opposed this Sewel motion when it came before the Environment and Rural Development Committee on 22 June. Now that it is before the full Parliament, we appeal to members to reject it. There is no doubt that the coalition Government is abusing the Sewel mechanism. The architects of that mechanism expected it to be used sparingly, but remarkably we are today debating the 64 th Sewel motion to come before us in just six years, and we shall be debating the 65 th in a few minutes' time. Indeed, one academic referred in today's press to the Sewel motion process as "One that has eroded the distinctive ethos of the Scottish Parliament over the past six years". Those affected by the issue that we are discussing are appealing to the Parliament to take responsibility, not to pass the buck back to Westminster. Prior to discussions at committee on the impact on Scotland of the United Kingdom Government's Natural Environment and Rural Communities Bill, to which the Sewel motion relates, representations were made by users of Scotland's canal network, who are members of the Scottish Inland Waterways Association, on the proposal to establish a UK inland waterways advisory council. They do not want the Scottish Parliament to pass to the UK Government in London responsibility for establishing a UK body. Instead, now that we have our own Parliament, they want us to do what is right for Scotland and to legislate for the creation of a Scottish equivalent. Boat owners believe that an advisory body based south of the border will "not be sufficiently focussed to meet the needs of the waterways users in Scotland." I ask members to note that responsibility for Scottish waterways is devolved to this Parliament, but under the UK bill the advisory board will remain at UK level.  In short, it is clear that boat owners who use our canals do not trust a UK advisory body to look after their interests or to give Scottish ministers appropriate and informed advice on relevant matters, because the body will be based south of the border and the vast majority of its members will be from there. I quote from the written representation received by the Environment and Rural Development Committee from the chairman of the Scottish Inland Waterways Association, who wrote of the UK board that, "with 2000 miles of waterway to deal with in England and Wales they do not have sufficient interest or knowledge of the Scottish waterway system to devote the time or the effort needed to deal adequately with the situation up here." He went on to say: "Any council set up to advise Scottish Ministers and the Waterways Board on matters relevant to inland waterways in Scotland can only be fully effective if it is constituted in Scotland with members who are fully aware of the Scottish waterways situation, their beauty, their potential and the problems associated with their operation. This is not achievable with an English based body even with a token Scottish representation." To strengthen the case for opposing the motion, I turn to the revealing statement in the minister's memorandum to the committee. He said: "Given the difficulties in the short term of securing this change through Scottish legislation these powers might be best achieved by enactment at Westminster under the terms of the Sewel Convention, although the Committee is asked to note that this presents some complexities for the NERC Bill". The Scottish National Party appeals to the Parliament not to allow the minister off the hook or to abdicate his responsibilities by choosing a lazy, easy option through the Sewel process. Instead, he should listen to those who are directly affected by the bill and to those who elected members of the Scottish Parliament to legislate on their behalf. I appeal to the Parliament to reject the motion.

I note with interest that Labour members who have spoken in the debate have said that every time the SNP discusses oil, we look back to the past. In the few minutes that are available to me, I want to talk about oil, Scotland's energy resources and the future for Scotland. As other members have said—I am thinking in particular of Kenny MacAskill—Scotland has a second chance at its energy future, in particular in the case of the oil industry. I want to scotch some of the myths that are peddled by the unionist parties who sit in an unholy alliance on the other side of the chamber from the SNP. Their only interest is in protecting their future careers; they are not interested in doing what is best for Scotland. The message from the McCrone report of the 1970s is just as relevant today as it was when McCrone outlined the booming economy that Scotland could have had if we had had control of our oil revenues. A few weeks ago, I attended the offshore Europe 2005 exhibition and conference in Aberdeen, for which 45,000 delegates from around the world descended on Aberdeen to discuss the future of the North sea. There was a spring in their step. The North sea—in Scotland's territorial waters—is moving into a new era that gives huge potential for Scotland's economic future. The Labour Party always tells us that Scotland's oil industry is in decline, but British Petroleum has just announced that it is to build a brand new headquarters in Aberdeen. Cautious oil companies do not make multimillion-pound investments like that unless they have full confidence in the future of the oil industry. Even the Department for Trade and Industry's official statistics—and the DTI is the most  conservative body in Government—say that there are at least 30 more years of oil and gas in the North sea. Even the DTI is saying that for every barrel of oil that is extracted, another one remains to be extracted.

The simple fact that seems to escape Mark Ballard is that Scotland needs fossil fuels such as oil and gas if its economy is to keep going and not close down tomorrow. It will take 20, 30 or 40 years to switch to a low-carbon economy. Mark Ballard is telling the Scottish people that we cannot do anything about climate change unless we close down North sea production tomorrow and bring our economy—and, indeed, the economy of other countries—to a complete halt. That would lead to economic dislocation. The oil industry has to help Scotland's economy until we switch over to renewables. As I have said, that process will take decades. The difference between the SNP on the one hand and the Green party and the unionist parties on the other is that they want North sea oil revenues over the next few decades to go to London and not to Edinburgh, where they could be used to boost the country's economy. On the future of North sea production and renewables, a couple of weeks ago, I met representatives of Talisman Energy, which is the biggest independent operator in the North sea. They told me that, under the company's stewardship, oil fields that BP was supposed to close in the 1990s will continue to produce oil until 2023 and that other oil fields will pump oil and gas until around 2050. The industry has a huge future. That is why when we talk about oil and Scotland's energy potential, we concentrate not on the past but on the future.

Although I welcome many of the measures that have been taken, we need to take many more if we are to support the oil industry. Unfortunately, the UK Government in London sees the industry as a cash cow, not as a source of other skills and technologies that should be invested in. We must learn lessons from Norway. For the fifth successive year, the United Nations has  declared Norway to be the best place in the world to live. That is because the Norwegians use their natural and energy resources to boost their economy and to protect their people's interests. We should do the same in Scotland.

Will the member give way?

I congratulate Brian Adam on bringing this debate to Parliament and I commend the way in which he has effectively led the cross-party campaign in north-east Scotland. As well as the support of the Aberdeen office's staff, the campaign has enormous public support in Grampian. I also thank the Deputy First Minister, who will close the debate, for his letter to me of a few days ago, in which he vigorously defended the Aberdeen office and promised to fight for its future. This morning, some of us attended a Scottish Enterprise annual breakfast meeting at which we  were told of the importance of maintaining high-value jobs in Scotland and attracting new ones. This debate is about protecting 35 high-value, skilled jobs that already exist in the Aberdeen office. As the minister said, rightly, in his letter to me, we are talking about a centre of excellence for weather forecasts for the fishing and offshore energy industries. I will dwell on that issue for the next couple of minutes. Members should be aware that this small country of 5 million people accounts for one quarter of the European Union's waters and 12 per cent of the EU's coastline. We should remember that in the context of the other 25 member states of the EU. We face the prospect of our only weather forecasting centre that specialises in offshore forecasts for the fishing industry, for the offshore oil industry and, increasingly, for the renewables industry closing. That is ludicrous and it highlights how important it is that we save the office. We must also consider the effect on the renewables industry. One of the important facts that several members, particularly Brian Adam, mentioned is that those who work in the Aberdeen office are on first-name terms with people in the offshore industries and they have regular face-to-face meetings. When I visited the office with Brian Adam we spoke to one individual who now specialises in offshore renewables. People from throughout the UK call him to ask for his advice. As we all know, renewables are the future; so we must retain that local expertise and knowledge. Another fact that shows the importance of local knowledge is illustrated in a letter from Phil Taylor of Blanefield in Stirlingshire to The Herald on 24 June 2005, shortly after the announcement of a potential closure. Mr Taylor says: "I have direct professional experience of the work of the Met Office, and was privy to a difference of opinion between the Scottish forecasters and their counterparts in Exeter about the track of the 120mph gale in January, the storm that claimed five lives in the Western Isles. Before the event, the Met Office in Exeter believed the storm would track through the central belt; its colleagues in Aberdeen did their best to warn that it would cross Scotland further north. Aberdeen made the more accurate forecast. The difference in opinion was to do with 'local' knowledge. Lose that—and we are all losers." That sums up the importance of maintaining local knowledge in Aberdeen. Safety at sea is an issue that should be at the forefront of our minds. This evening, some of us are attending the annual dinner of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation in Edinburgh. If any of us asked the representatives of fishing communities throughout Scotland about safety at sea, they would all agree that it will be jeopardised if the local expertise that the Met Office has built up over so many years is lost.  My closing remarks to the Deputy First Minister are that when he was Minister for Transport and Telecommunications he managed to win some power from Westminster over the railways. We all welcome that. Perhaps now that he has responsibility for the issues that we are discussing this evening he will use his influence to save the Aberdeen office. Perhaps he can bring responsibility for weather forecasts to the Scottish Parliament, so that we can save the jobs at the Met Office. Closure would be an act of vandalism that would put lives at risk at sea.

I welcome this debate on an extremely important issue. I imagine that, over the Parliament's first six years, few members, if any, have not dealt with difficult planning issues in their constituencies and regions. This review of the planning system presents a real opportunity for the Parliament to make many friends in Scotland's communities. I also welcome the white paper's opening statement, which states that we are going to have a planning regime that is fit for purpose. I agree with the minister's comment in his opening speech that there has been broad support for the thrust of the proposals. Indeed, we support much of the white paper's content. That said, the proof of the pudding will be what happens when the proposals are put into practice and whether they make a difference on the ground. We must examine the outcomes that we want to achieve with this process. Some have said that the outcome should be a sustainable Scotland. Indeed, that is the case. Earlier, Christine Grahame asked the minister to clarify what would happen if an application to build a nuclear power  station in Scotland were to be submitted. I expected both ministers to get on their feet immediately to answer the point, but that did not happen. I ask the Deputy Minister for Communities when she sums up to lay out in simple and clear terms the exact process that would be followed should such an application be submitted. The people of Scotland want to know. The issue is important and is rising up the political agenda. There is a relationship between promoting renewables and energy efficiency and the planning system. We have the opportunity to incentivise renewables and energy-efficient projects. One incentive would be to fast-track applications relating to renewables, energy-efficient buildings or other environmental projects. That would be warmly welcomed by the renewables industry in Scotland. It would be to our benefit if such applications went to the front of the queue.

No. I am saying that a difficulty for many renewables projects is the length of time that the planning process takes. If we are to tackle climate change and global warming, we have to ensure that such applications are treated as a priority and are fast-tracked. Another desired outcome is sustainable communities. Housing is a subject dear to my heart, and I want to talk about the lack of affordable housing in rural communities—not only in the rented sector but in the private sector as well. In interventions, others have mentioned the lack of affordable housing throughout Scotland; I want to talk about rural Grampian in particular. The planning policy regime is causing a lot of ill feeling in Aberdeenshire. That feeling is replicated elsewhere in the country. A Monty Python sketch writer could not have come up with the current planning policy in Aberdeenshire. Will ministers tell us how that policy will change as a result of the planning review? In Aberdeenshire, if someone in a rural community wants to build a new home for themselves on the site of a ruin—perhaps a building that was occupied three or four decades ago—they are not allowed to unless there is a roof. Even if the applicant says that they will employ award-winning architects who will be sympathetic to the surrounding environment, it does not count; it does not count even if the applicant was brought up in the area where the ruin is and wants to move back there. There would be a lot of support throughout rural Scotland if those sorts of factors were taken into account.  On the other hand, if a developer comes along and wants to cram in some brick boxes on zoned ground with barely a hair's breadth between the buildings, they get planning permission because there is a rural housing crisis and a shortage of houses. Local authorities do not care about design, whether there is any space between the houses or the quality of life of the people who will live there. However, people will buy the houses because they are desperate. In places such as Aberdeenshire, some rural communities are being killed off and others are being ruined. Villages that had 50 houses in the past will now have 1,000 houses. Such villages are losing their identity and people's quality of life is being harmed. Planning policies have to be rationalised. I want to learn from the minister's summing-up how the proposals will impact on such situations. The leader in The Herald today was excellent. Many young people cannot afford to live and work in the areas where they were brought up because they cannot afford to buy a house. That is a ridiculous situation; in Scotland there is land as far as one can see. We must address these issues urgently and many people are hoping that the planning review will do so. Finally, on the link between ownership issues and planning, it is one thing to review the planning system, but that will not make the slightest difference if land is not made available. Across the country, landowners can go to bed and wake up the next day as multimillionaires without having lifted a finger. That can happen for a variety of reasons. For example, water and sewerage infrastructure, or a new road, might be put on a piece of land, increasing its value. If local planners colour in a bit of the local plan to indicate that the land has been zoned for housing, the paper value of the land zooms up overnight and the landowner, without lifting a finger, becomes a multimillionaire without any obligation to develop the land and get it on to the housing market. We must ensure that such land is released. That might require innovative measures such as land-value taxation. It might also mean that councils will have to have the powers to implement local plans. People are setting a lot of store by these proposals, but they will have to result in real change in Scotland's communities, particularly in rural Scotland. We need radical measures, and I urge that the outcome of the review be radical.

I will add a few comments to the many good points have been made by other speakers. I begin by congratulating my North East Scotland colleague David Davidson on securing the debate and by echoing the comments in which he paid tribute to the emergency services and the retained fire service in our rural communities.  Given that I first raised the issue of the challenges that the retained firefighting service faces soon after being elected in 1999, it is a matter of concern that, in 2005, we are back to repeat some of our anxieties. It is clear that there has not been a great deal of improvement in many areas of Scotland, including Grampian, which I represent. Forty per cent of fire incidents in Grampian are attended by the retained firefighting service and there are 33 retained stations throughout the region. When I phoned the fire brigage this morning, I discovered that there are 55 vacancies in the retained service, which represents about 12 per cent of the full complement. I am sure that the situation is the same in other parts of Scotland. Retained firefighters face a particular problem in delivering cover during the day. That is when the main pressures arise because many members of the service are at work. If they are not working locally, they are unable to respond to calls. Aberdeenshire faces a problem that is replicated elsewhere in Scotland—it has an increasing number of dormitory towns. Although people live in those towns, they might well work in Aberdeen, Inverness or another part of the country. That situation means that it is enormously difficult to get an adequate number of retained firefighters to respond to calls. As other members have said, one solution would be to get business on side. We should educate businesses about the advantages of having staff who are retained firefighters. It is an advantage to have staff who have additional skills, such as health and safety or first aid skills, that they have learned from the fire service and which they can use in their workplace. The service in Grampian told me that each retained station deals with between one and four call-outs per week. Given that an average retained firefighter who works from 9 to 5 Monday to Friday can expect to be called out only twice a month, the commitment is not as great as some employers who are reluctant to let their employees take part in the service think that it is. We need to get that message across. A few call-outs a month does not represent a huge commitment. We must educate employers and get them on board. As regards other solutions, the fire service tells me that the UK Government in London is publishing material to promote the service. The service does not yet know whether such material will be distributed in Scotland. I think that there is a good case for having a specifically Scottish public relations campaign, which would involve leaflets and other material being distributed throughout our rural communities and among employers. As Shiona Baird and others have mentioned, there is a case for getting more females into the  fire service. About 5 per cent of Grampian's retained firefighters are female. There are huge challenges in trying to attract more females into the service. The lack of child care provision is a big barrier to women volunteering, as is the lack of female facilities in stations. Adaptations would be necessary to address that. I congratulate David Davidson on bringing an important issue back to the attention of ministers and Parliament. I urge the minister to ensure that we will not have to come back in another five years to discuss the same concerns and challenges by doing a lot more to protect the retained firefighting service in our rural areas.

Does the minister believe that fuel poverty is about to escalate as winter approaches, particularly in rural areas where many households rely on oil for heating and cooking? In Aberdeenshire, 17,000 households rely on oil for those purposes. Given escalating oil prices, does he accept that there is a particular problem in our rural communities? Will he explain why the fund to which households could apply for a grant to change to alternative fuels was closed in the past few days? I understand that the Scottish community and householder renewables initiative has been closed and will not be topped up until next year.

That will cause major problems for households that want to change to alternative fuels as winter approaches and for the many companies that install alternative equipment.

I welcome the minister's comments about drug misuse in Scotland, but can she explain why, after the Executive's six years in power, drug-related deaths are on the increase? Is that not an indictment of the Government's failed policies to tackle drug misuse in Scotland over the past six years?

Does the minister agree that one way in which to bring dentists to the Lothians and to other areas of Scotland—such as Grampian—where there is a specific problem with a shortage of NHS dental services is to attract dentists from overseas to come to work in Scotland? Is he aware that, according to health officials, there is currently an oversupply of dentists in Sweden and 700 unemployed dentists in Germany? What steps is he taking to attract those dentists to come to work in Scotland to help to plug the gap in NHS dental services?

In light of the results of the referendums in the Netherlands and France, does the minister believe that we should use the UK presidency to attempt to bring Europe closer to the people of Scotland? Will he outline how he intends to do that? Does he agree that it is unacceptable that the Scottish Parliament, which, with its primary legislative powers, is one of the most powerful devolved Parliaments in Europe, has no direct say over the formulation of many EU policies that we are expected to transpose into Scottish legislation? That is one of the reasons why there is such a gulf between the people of Scotland and many European policies.

If the UK Government were to issue a white paper proposing to build a nuclear power station in Scotland, at what stage would the bill's provisions kick in?

I sense the trepidation in the chamber, Presiding Officer. For perhaps the first time in my political career, I agree with Alasdair Morrison. We must do something about the way in which we manage debating time in the chamber. I recall that, last month, two committee debates were squeezed into two and a half hours. The debate on promoting Scotland worldwide, which was sponsored by the European and External Relations Committee, was given one hour and five minutes even though the report took a year and half to compile, the subject was quite controversial and there was high demand for speaking time. I ask the Presiding Officer and the business managers to take that comment back to the Parliamentary Bureau. Two hours is perhaps a little too long for a debate such as this, despite the excellent speeches that have been made. We can all take pride in the fact that, during the first six years of the Parliament, we have discussed, debated and legislated on environmental matters many times. Many of those who fought for a long time for the Scottish Parliament did so because they believed that the best way of looking after Scotland's environment was to have our own Parliament here in Scotland. We argued that that would enable us to make decisions that were tailored to our needs and to look after our precious environment. In the past few years, we have made stringent attempts to mainstream environmental thinking and policy throughout all Government departments. In essence, that is what today's debate is about. The European Union gets a lot of bad press, most of which is perfectly justified. One area in which the EU is successful, however, is in spurring nation states and countries such as Scotland into producing environmental legislation. The reality is that EU legislation led to the bill that we are discussing today. The EU has a bad image, but we must remind people in Scotland time and again that it has been in the driving seat of environmental legislation, which we generally support. Alex Johnstone made a bizarre speech in which he appeared to say that the bill was unnecessary and damaging but that he would vote for it.

I think that that is what he said; he certainly voted for the committee's stage 1 report. If he is to vote on the bill, I suggest that he should show his true colours and vote against  it. His position in the debate was pretty unclear. Some of his statements were bizarre. The bill is not about gold plating; if anything, it is about green plating—that is green with a small "g", in case Mark Ruskell becomes excited. The bill will mainstream environmental thinking.

The member's comments are unjustified. We are discussing environmental considerations being taken into account at the earliest possible stage of policy development. During the committee's inquiry into climate change, we invited several ministers to give evidence at once on how they were climate change proofing Scottish Government policies. The ministers dissembled; they could not explain how they climate change proofed their policies. That concerns me, because climate change is a huge threat to Scotland and the planet. It is clear that ministers in the Scottish Government do not really take that into account when they decide policies on a range of issues.

I am glad that that is happening on some matters, but it is not happening on all matters. Housing policy provides a perfect example of an area in which no account is being taken in policy development of the impact on climate change. We must remember that the public sector accounts for more than 50 per cent of gross domestic product in Scotland. That is why it is important for the Government and public bodies to lead on environmental policy. They have a huge influence on how we treat our environment, because their expenditure is enormous. Many members referred to culture change. The culture change must happen at the root of Government, so that it can spread throughout Scotland. As many members have said, the committee's stage 1 report describes many concerns, a lack of clarity and confusion about the bill and what it will mean when it is put into practice. As many members from different parties have said, it is important for the minister to produce as soon as possible clear illustrations of how the bill will be  put into practice and what it will mean. For instance, when and how will strategic environmental assessment kick in? The confusion must be cleared up, not least for the many public bodies at the front line that will have to implement the bill. The committee heard from Scottish Water, which said—as other members have mentioned—that it is not responsible for strategies or policies, but that it simply delivers strategies and policies that have been decided by the Scottish Government in Edinburgh. Scottish Water's role must be clarified. Several members referred to the resource implications for public bodies. We on the committee—I speak as a committee member as well as for the SNP—heard about concern over likely costs for local government, demands on staff time and resources and lack of training. We welcome the minister's comment that training packages will be produced to help front-line staff to deal with assessments. As other members and the stage 1 report said, we do not want the gateway to be short lived. We hope that it will be established more permanently, because we must ensure that the application of strategic environmental assessment is consistent. Best practice must be followed and different public bodies must not implement SEA in different ways. We must have a cast-iron result on the implications for the environment. Several members referred to transparency. We must ensure that pre-screening reports, screening reports and all the other aspects are put into the public domain and that people can ask questions and find out information on every environmental assessment that public bodies have carried out. Public participation is important with regard to the impact of strategies, plans and programmes on the environment. That is why it is good that the report states that the public's response to consultations on assessments must be taken into account by public bodies that are putting together strategies. Finally—after seven and a half minutes—I want to refer to the issue of Scotland and the rest of the UK.

I am glad that the member raised that issue, as I was just coming to it. When the committee received the answer to the  parliamentary question on the implications of strategic environmental assessment for the potential to build nuclear power stations in Scotland, I thought that it clarified matters. However, the Scottish Parliament information centre has confirmed that if the UK Government issued a white paper on energy policy that included proposals to build nuclear power stations in Scotland, the strategic environmental assessment would not apply. The people of Scotland would expect an assessment to be carried out of the environmental implications of any proposal to build a nuclear power station in Scotland, as most people in Scotland would see the potential for nuclear power stations to be built here and the nuclear waste that would result from them to be a major threat to Scotland's environment. That is why clarity is needed. That issue goes to the heart of the matter. UK plans, programmes and policies do not have to go through the process—only Scottish plans, programmes and policies do. We cannot even get a Scottish energy policy because we do not have a Scottish strategy, and only strategies can be subjected to assessments. Despite calls from parties, non-governmental organisations in Scotland and others, we do not yet have a Scottish energy strategy, so we cannot even put such a strategy through a strategic environmental assessment. The bottom line is that all powers over Scotland's environment should lie with the Scottish Parliament, which could then conduct strategic environmental assessments on any issue—nuclear waste, nuclear power or whatever—that members think will impact on Scotland's environment, even the marine environment strategy that the minister is about to bring forward. Some 80 acts—many of which are reserved to London—cover Scotland's seas. How on earth can we propose a strategy in Scotland to protect Scotland's seas when powers over those seas are reserved to London? All those powers should be brought to Scotland. We could then properly pass laws such as the one that is proposed and assess the impact on the environment of all kinds of policies. That said, we support the general principles of the bill at stage 1, as we must use the Parliament's limited powers to the best of our abilities. Once we obtain more powers, we can really protect Scotland's environment.

In the final minute of his speech, will the member have time to make a fleeting reference to the environment?

I congratulate Rob Gibson on securing this debate and I offer my congratulations to the people of Norway and the Norwegian Government as they celebrate 100 years of independence. I know that they will celebrate well, because I am a graduate of the University of Stirling, and, when I was younger, I had the opportunity to meet many Norwegians as that is one of the universities in Scotland that many Norwegians attend. They were reputed to have the best parties on the campus; I suspect that part of the reason for that is that they were celebrating the alcohol prices in Scotland, which are cheaper than back home in Norway. As many have members said, Norway offers a good model for Scotland because there are many similarities, such as the size of our countries and our natural resources. Unfortunately, as Alex Neil said, that is where some of the similarities end, because while Norway has made the most of its natural resources, we have not done that here in Scotland. Although, as a devolved Parliament, we have limited powers, we can still use them to improve the quality of life in Scotland by learning what we can from Norway and other Scandinavian countries. In the league tables of standards of living in European countries, Norway always comes at the top and Scotland always comes  much further down.

Phil Gallie will be delighted to hear that I am about to move on to that subject. Norway offers a good model to Scotland because it shows the advantages of being a small country. A small country can be highly organised and can have a common purpose. Everyone knows one another, so in achieving that common purpose, a small country can be flexible. However, as Norway has demonstrated, small countries must have full powers if they are to make the most of their natural resources and their luck in terms of their natural bounty. We can learn lessons from the similarities between the natural resources of Scotland and those of Norway. I speak as a representative of the north-east, where the oil industry is important. When the Norwegians discovered oil, they set up Statoil, which is a nationalised company that runs the Norwegian oil industry. Much of the hardware in the Norwegian sector of the North sea is owned by the Norwegians, but the hardware in the Scottish sector of the North sea is owned by foreign companies. Norway also has an oil fund, which has been mentioned, whereas we squander our oil resources. As for sea fisheries, the Norwegians have rightly stayed out of the EU, partly—if not wholly—because of the common fisheries policy. That shows that good conservation of fish stocks can be achieved with full control of those stocks. Countries do not have to be part of the EU to do that. Despite the fact that we are the biggest aquaculture producer in the EU, our aquaculture sector is owned by the Dutch and the Norwegians, whereas companies in the Scottish sector own no one else around Europe. The thriving rural communities in Norway are not matched by our rural communities in Scotland. In Scotland, some people cannot afford even one house, whereas the norm in many parts of Norway is to have a second house in a rural area. I read a speech that the Norwegian environment minister made just a few months ago about carbon capture in the Norwegian sector of the North sea oilfields. Norway will lead the way on capturing all the carbon that is emitted throughout Europe. Scotland had the same opportunity, but as we do not have full powers, we are yet again not taking advantage of an opportunity. Finally—

The Parliament should consider joint initiatives with Norway, so that we can work together and learn from each other.

Today's debate has been excellent, as is always the case when the Parliament is outward looking. The G8 summit that will take place in a few weeks' time has been referred to as an unprecedented opportunity and as a turning point. Unfortunately, the G8's history is a litany of broken promises and unfulfilled pledges. There is a great deal of rhetoric, which always disappears into the  evening air after the summit has closed and shut up shop and the leaders have all returned to their palatial homes, wherever they might be. We all agree that the Gleneagles summit must be different. Scotland and the Parliament must play whatever role they can to ensure that that is the case. We want to ensure that Gleneagles goes down in history as the place where historic decisions were made that will make a real difference to Africa and to the global environment. The best way in which we can put Scotland on the map is to ensure that that happens. It is not about handing out brochures to 2,000 visiting journalists, however welcome that may be, but about ensuring that the right decisions are taken inside the summit at Gleneagles. The Parliament has been outward looking and internationalist and must continue to be so. Many members have made the point that after today's debate and the summit are over we must continue to return to these issues. It is with a sense of pride that MSPs and the rest of Scotland welcome the close interest that the Parliament has taken in international development over the past six years and, in particular, over recent weeks. It will continue to do so over the coming weeks. We have public support, because we know from their warm response to the tsunami tragedy that the people of Scotland care about what happens elsewhere on the planet. Increasingly, this country recognises that the fate of Scotland is tied up with the fate of the planet and that promoting Scotland is not just about securing benefits for Scotland, but about what we can give back. Historically, the high standards of living that we enjoy have been gained at the expense of poorer societies around the world. It is now payback time. There is widespread support in Scotland and around the world for the make poverty history campaign, which extends to 70 countries. However, in a few weeks' time the focus will be on this nation and the march in Edinburgh on 2 July. We welcome to Scotland anyone who wants to take part in peaceful protest. Those who have something else in mind are not welcome here. We are inviting people to come to Scotland to stand against injustice, not to buy things in our souvenir shops or to boost tourism figures. We want to speak with one voice and to ensure that as much pressure as possible is applied to the world's leaders when they meet at Gleneagles. The G8 website states: "Sub-Saharan Africa is the only region of the world that has got poorer in the last generation." Many members have spoken about how we can address that issue through debt relief, increasing aid and fair trade. We have heard calls for us to write off the debt that is a millstone around the  necks of so many countries in Africa, so that they can start with a clean slate. We want to see not just progress on debt relief at Gleneagles, but a breakthrough. On aid, the hypocrisy of many of the leaders who will meet at Gleneagles was summed up perfectly by the supplement to last Sunday's edition of the Sunday Herald , which quoted George Bush as saying: "This growing divide between wealth and poverty, between opportunity and misery, is both a challenge to our compassion and a source of instability. We must confront it." However, as the paper points out, in 2004 the level of official US development assistance was 0.16 per cent of gross national product. As we all know, the UN target is 0.7 per cent. At Gleneagles, there must be unanimity about meeting that target as soon as possible. We must ensure that the aid that is delivered is targeted at the right places. We must address the problem of hunger. If we can make hunger history in Africa, we can make poverty history. We must also tackle diseases and ensure that children, in particular, receive proper education. The Save the Children briefing that we received for this debate, to which many members have referred, states that the future of Africa lies in the next generation. We must ensure that aid does not go to tin-pot dictators in Africa but is used to feed, educate and care for the people in Africa who matter—those who are in need. Many members have spoken about the need for fair trade. Currently, Africa accounts for 2 per cent of world trade, despite the fact that it has 12 per cent of the world's population. Africa's share of world trade now is 1 per cent less than it was back in 1950—it is regressing, rather than progressing. We must ensure that the issue is addressed and that no strings are attached. One way in which the EU could perhaps repair its image with electorates throughout Europe is to get its own house in order, which it could do by not attaching conditions to trade liberalisation and not including water in the general agreement on trade in services talks, which the EU currently appears to want to do.

The statistics speak for themselves. Trade today is just as unfair—if not more unfair—than it was back in the 1950s. We cannot divorce climate change from tackling poverty in Africa because the world's poorest people depend on natural resources for food,  water and energy. They will bear the brunt of the catastrophic results of climate change because those will fall disproportionately on the poorer societies in the world—the developing nations in Africa. At Gleneagles, there is a moral imperative to address climate change. As members such as Mark Ballard and Sarah Boyack have said, the G8 countries represent 13 per cent of the world's population but are responsible for 45 per cent of greenhouse gas emissions, and each individual here in Scotland is responsible for the emission of 12 tonnes of carbon dioxide. We must address that. George Bush is wrong to say that climate change is a long-term threat. It is a threat here and now, because we are already committed to the next 20 years of climate change. The debate is not about aging pop stars or the eight leaders that will meet at Gleneagles; it is about saving lives in Africa and protecting the future of the environment.

Does the minister accept that there is roughly a year before the provisions have to be on the statute book? That means that there is plenty of time to withdraw the regulations, have proper parliamentary scrutiny of the proposals and ensure that we do not pass regulations that will hit vital Scottish industries.

I wish to speak against the motion that the Parliament agrees that the draft Water Environment (Controlled Activities) (Scotland) Regulations 2005 be approved. Time and again we hear pledges from ministers who say that they wish to cut red tape and not to impose needless costs on Scottish businesses. However, as became apparent at last week's meeting of the Environment and Rural Development Committee, at which we discussed the SSI, the regulations will do exactly what ministers keep telling us that they are trying to avoid doing. On the face of it, the regulations should be welcomed, because they seek to protect Scotland's water environment. However, high-volume users of water in Scotland, such as the whisky industry, the hydropower companies and other sectors, are up in arms about the regulations, because of the new onslaught of red tape through the introduction of a costly and unjustifiable licensing regime. High-volume users in Scotland do not necessarily damage our water environments, yet the point at which the costly licensing regime will kick in will be determined by the volume of water used by the companies concerned, not environmental risk. Even the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development, who attended the committee's meeting, accepted that high-volume users do not necessarily pose an environmental risk to our water environments. The purely arbitrary threshold of using 50m 3 of water from any one abstraction will determine when the measure kicks in.

Alex Johnstone makes a valid point. The minister admitted to the committee that, if we agree to the regulations today, a licensing regime will be imposed on high-volume water users, such as the whisky industry, which is responsible for 40,000 jobs across Scotland, before there is any assessment of the environmental risk. He told the committee that if, thereafter, an environmental risk assessment finds that the use of such high volumes of water poses no risk to the environment, the conditions of the licence can be relaxed, but surely the process should be the other way around—surely we should assess environmental risk before applying the licensing regime. The situation is illogical. If we approve the regulations, they will inflict unnecessary and costly red tape on the whisky industry and other sectors. Whisky distillers will be hit particularly hard, but they have used the same water sources for hundreds of years and they return the vast bulk of the water back to the rivers that they got it from in virtually the same condition as it was in when they took it. By refusing to agree to the regulations today, we will provide the Environment and Rural Development Committee and the Parliament with the opportunity for further legislative scrutiny. The committee was presented with the regulations on 25 May and we were told that we had to accept them by 30 May. There was no time for proper legislative scrutiny, which is an important role for the Parliament and its committees. I urge the Parliament to reject the motion.

The minister's comments will be viewed with some scepticism by parents in Aberdeenshire whose children attend the schools concerned. Does not he agree that it is a bit bizarre for him to be making those comments when the leader of Aberdeenshire Council, Audrey Findlay, was quoted on 11 May in The Press and Journal  as saying that her consultation process had gone pear shaped?

I thank the member for supporting the motion and will follow her comments about Carronhill. Will she agree that it was a bit bizarre for Mike Rumbles to say that the motion misleads Parliament when Aberdeenshire Council's leader, Audrey Findlay, was quoted in The Press and Journal on 11 May as saying that the consultation process had "gone pear-shaped"?

Will Mike Rumbles give way?

Does the member appreciate that I am not saying that Aberdeenshire Council is setting out to damage the rural economy or the educational welfare of the children for which it is responsible? I am saying that that could happen if the council goes down the wrong road. Surely Nora Radcliffe should support her constituents, many thousands of whom have expressed support for the future of St Andrew's.

I thank everyone who signed the motion—they were from all the parties bar one—and I hope that many members will take the opportunity to speak in this debate. The debate is about the welfare of children in Scotland who are attending special needs schools—especially in north-east Scotland—and our rural schools. It is also about ensuring that the educational welfare of our children is put before bricks and mortar. Many councils the length and breadth of Scotland face difficult decisions on the future of educational provision. A few months ago, Aberdeenshire Council launched 24 projects under its 21 st century school improvement programme, on which it is currently consulting. Many of those projects are welcome, but one or two are questionable and one or two are, I believe, indefensible. However, there is good news today. The education committee of Aberdeenshire Council met and a proposal to amalgamate four schools in  the Garioch area—Rayne North, Old Rayne, Chapel of Garioch and Logie Durno schools—has been reduced to a proposal to rebuild Logie Durno school, which effectively means that the other schools have been saved. I pay tribute to the campaigners in that area, who have achieved a significant victory today. I also pay tribute to the communities. I believe that the decision is a victory for common sense. I would like to think that it also indicates the power of Scottish National Party motions in the Parliament. One of the serious points about the Garioch schools proposal is that the parents at three out of the four schools went through the same process a couple of years ago, when the future of the schools, with the exception of Chapel of Garioch, was similarly up for discussion and a vigorous campaign had to be fought. Despite the fact that the schools have been saved before, they have been forced just a few months later to jump through hoops and the local communities have again had to launch vigorous campaigns against Aberdeenshire Council. That is unacceptable. I hope that the minister takes on board the fact that the timescale was so short. Once the axe that is hanging over a school is taken away, it should not be put there again a couple of years down the line. The cycle of uncertainty is damaging to the morale of staff and parents in the affected schools. I visited all the schools. Indeed, I went to Logie Durno a couple of days ago. The status quo is not an option for that school. A supposedly temporary portakabin has been in the playground for 27 years and older children have to cross the playground just to go to the toilets. The school needs to be modernised and I am delighted that the council has chosen to rebuild it. The issue of special needs has risen up the political agenda during the past few years; the delivery of special needs provision is certainly high on the agenda in north-east Scotland and areas such as Gordon, west Aberdeenshire and the city of Aberdeen. Indeed, in Aberdeen, a campaign is under way to save the well-respected Raeden centre, whose future is on the line. Many parents are concerned that splitting the current provision at Raeden across three sites in the city will mean that much of the expertise and the reputation that have been built up over a long time will be lost. The consultation options have been expanded for Carronhill School in Stonehaven as part of the Aberdeenshire proposals. I understand that Aberdeenshire Council's education committee has added the option of upgrading Carronhill School, rather than just closing it. That proposal, too, will now go to consultation, which is a small breakthrough for the campaigners in that part of the world, whom we wish well. A crux of the debate is the future of St Andrew's  special school in Inverurie. Currently, the school has more than 100 pupils, 40 of whom are autistic, with the others representing a wide variety of complex needs. The school has an excellent reputation and is only one of seven in Scotland accredited by the National Autistic Society. An enormous campaign is now under way in Inverurie and throughout Aberdeenshire to save the school, which has an excellent reputation. Despite the fact that the children seem happy there and the parents are extremely happy with the education that is provided for their children, the school is now facing closure. Until today, the only options that Aberdeenshire Council has given are the closure of the school and perhaps the establishment of two special educational needs bases at a local primary school and the local academy. I understand that the council has now added a new option for a stand-alone new build, on which it will consult. That is a significant breakthrough for the community and for the parents who have been campaigning to save the school. The campaign has attracted enormous public support. Almost 15,000 signatures have been gathered from across the local community—that speaks volumes about the school's reputation. When I visited the school a few weeks ago, I was stunned by the dedication shown by the staff. The head teacher has turned the school around. One of the parents refers to the school as an oasis because of the ethos that has been built up there and because of the contentment among the children who attend it. The head teacher and the staff are an inspiration and I pay tribute to them. I am talking about staff who come in during the summer to knock cupboards together to make more room for the children and who come in during their holidays to paint the school and undertake other modifications. That speaks volumes about the dedication of the staff in that school. The status quo is not an option. A rebuild is the best way forward, but the parents are concerned that it should not split resources and expertise among other sites. They believe that inclusion and mainstreaming are appropriate for some, but not all, children. In an e-mail, Owen Williams, whose two sons are at the school, told me: "The loss of St Andrew's School as a stand-alone institution would be disastrous for Paul and Niall. Neither Niall with his physical and educational difficulties nor Paul with his developmental and emotional difficulties would be able to deal with life in, or at close proximity to, a mainstream educational establishment." That is the crux of the parents' concerns. They want the current stand-alone situation to continue on a new-build site. I hope that the Parliament will support their sentiments.  What can the minister do? For a start, the consultation process has been vague and confusing and the fact that the council's options have been difficult to understand has caused the parents much needless distress over the past few months. The minister should investigate how the consultation process has worked in Aberdeenshire and how it can be improved. He should also review the inclusion policy to ensure that it is not putting undue pressure on education authorities such as Aberdeenshire to do something that might not be right for children. We should consider the economic and social impact of rural school closures, because I do not believe that authorities examine those factors hard enough when they contemplate closing such schools. I understand that, even though special circumstances must be taken into account, central Government has not issued specific guidelines for local authorities that are contemplating closing special needs schools. I wonder whether such guidelines could be issued. Finally, I urge the minister to use his influence to ensure that education authorities do what is best for children's educational welfare, not what is best for the school estate or for economics. I hope that the minister will reaffirm that number 1 priority this evening. I pay tribute to all the staff and parents who have been involved in the various campaigns over the past few months. As we have heard today, many inroads have been made. I hope that, after this debate, the outcome of the consultation, which closes at the end of September, reflects first and foremost the best interests of the children and the affected communities.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to measure the effectiveness of drug rehabilitation programmes in prisons. (S2O-6830)

I look forward to reading the results of the programmes in the bulletins. I am sure that the minister will share the concern that I and others have at today's reports about Cornton Vale prison, which reveal that 98 per cent of inmates are drug users. As she is aware, the situation in other prisons throughout Scotland is similar. What steps are being taken to measure the success of existing drug rehabilitation schemes in our prisons? What is being done to measure what proportion of those people who are released, reoffend and come back to prison are drug users? Does she agree that, if we made the issue a top priority in Scotland, we could not only slash crime rates but save many lives and much misery for our communities?

Pass the buck.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. As I was inadvertently delayed earlier, I was two minutes late in reaching the chamber and missed the time to ask my question, for which I apologise to you, to other members and to the Minister for Environment and Rural Development.

I, too, congratulate the committee on its report. As I sat on the committee for much of the evidence taking, I have paid close attention to the matter. However, it is a pity that we have been given only four or five minutes to speak on a report that has taken a year and a half to put together. There is cross-party agreement that we must promote Scotland effectively. As has already been mentioned, doing so has huge benefits for tourism and the wider economy; enables us to foster cultural and social ties with other nations around the world; and gives us political influence over some of the decisions that shape our lives. Moreover, having a positive image overseas can  help to foster self-confidence and give us a positive self-image in Scotland. Of course, the SNP believes that independence is the best way of supporting our country overseas. After all, that would give us status, respect and a voice on the international stage and would allow us to build an overseas infrastructure through which to make representations on behalf of our national interests. However, now that we have our own Government and Parliament, the SNP and others agree that devolution offers us tremendous opportunities to promote Scotland overseas. The key is to capitalise on the enormous international good will that exists towards this country. Indeed, members who travelled overseas to take evidence for the inquiry were struck by the reservoir of warmth that they encountered in the countries that they visited. I visited Paris and Dublin and other members visited other places. The great warmth for Scotland is clear to anyone who travels overseas. However, there is a feeling that, as far as representing Scotland overseas is concerned. Government ministers over the past six years have been too timid, overcautious and willing only to put their toes in the water. Much of the feedback that the committee received suggested that we are not capitalising on or exploiting the good will that I mentioned. For example, people sense that there has been a lack of co-ordination among many Government initiatives. Up to now, we have had Scotland in Sweden, Scotland in the Netherlands and Scotland in Catalonia and low-key, low-level trade agreements have been made with places such as Tuscany, Bavaria and other German Länder. During the inquiry, many organisations, particularly those in the business community, asked the committee about the overriding theme of all these initiatives; what they were trying to achieve; what has been achieved; and who follows up these visits and agreements. I am pleased that the committee report addresses those questions in some detail. Now the minister, too, must do so. As John Swinney said in his opening speech on behalf of the committee, the sensible way of addressing that lack of co-ordination is to have a dedicated European and external relations minister. Heaven knows what overseas representatives think when the minister with responsibility for these matters and his deputy are introduced as the Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform and the Deputy Minister for Finance and Public Service Reform. Indeed, our minister with responsibility for international development, who I believe is Patricia Ferguson, is the Minister for Culture, Tourism and Sport. Instead, we should follow other sub-national countries or stateless nations such as Flanders  and have our own ministers for European affairs or external relations. Such a move would offer political leadership and co-ordination. If we want to have a distinctive message and image, we need a distinctive overseas presence. That is what stateless nations elsewhere do. In the same way as there are Ireland houses and Flanders houses, there should be Scotland houses that would act as a one-stop shop, raise our profile and bring together everyone who represents Scotland overseas. The overwhelming feedback is that, over the past six years, we have been too cautious. Huge opportunities for Scotland remain untapped. We can exploit them to the full, for the good of our economy and our own self-confidence. I urge ministers not just to dip their toe in the water as they have done in the past six years, but to jump in and make a splash on behalf of Scotland overseas. If ministers choose to do that, even with the limited powers that they have under devolution, they will have the SNP's support.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it  envisages that the Parliament will be involved in consideration of any planning applications for new nuclear power stations. (S2O-6655)

Does the minister agree that the communities of Scotland and, indeed, the Scottish Parliament should have the ultimate say on whether new nuclear power stations are built in Scotland? Is it the case that he has attempted to grab new powers so that ministers can take those decisions and bypass the people of Scotland, who would not be allowed to object on the basis of need?

The minister mentioned the importance of the consultation process on St Andrew's School. Does he appreciate and accept that for consultation with parents to work and be effective, they must understand and have explained properly to them the options that are on the table from the local authority? If so, will he express concern about the vagueness and confusion about the exact options, which the parents find extremely distressing? Will he take the matter up with  Aberdeenshire Council, so that it clarifies the options for the future of St Andrew's?

I, too, congratulate Nanette Milne on securing the debate, which comes five years after a similar debate was secured by her colleague. Five years after we debated the issue in 2000, we are again calling for the A90 to be upgraded, particularly the stretch between Balmedie and Tipperty. I also want to speak about the road beyond that stretch, because we are talking about all of the A90 north of Aberdeen that is single carriageway. However, those of us who regularly drive on that stretch understand the frustrations that local residents have expressed. People in that part of the world have to drive because there are  virtually no other forms of transport available. There may be irregular bus services, but the vast majority of people must drive to work. In the five years since we debated the issue, the travel-to-work area for Aberdeen has expanded. As Nora Radcliffe said, Ellon has dramatically expanded. As a result, even more people use the roads, but the A90 has not been upgraded. Nanette Milne referred to the many accidents that have resulted from the increase in traffic, and all of us recall the day recently when there were two accidents on that stretch of the A90, after which many constituents contacted us about the lack of progress in upgrading the road. Such accidents create havoc for the thousands of people who try to reach work in Aberdeen and lives are put at risk. We could look further north and consider the north-east communities north of Aberdeen. A single carriageway goes beyond Ellon to Banff and Buchan. That is a crucial issue, as there are major industries in that part of the world—I refer to the St Fergus gas terminal, Peterhead power station, the fishing and farming communities and so on. The area is a major economic area, but it does not have major roads or a modern transport structure, which leaves it at a disadvantage. If the western peripheral route is built but the A90 north of Aberdeen is not upgraded, there is a danger of having some of the most modern transport infrastructure around Aberdeen joined to an antiquated single carriageway between Tipperty and Balmedie and north of Ellon. It would be madness to build the western peripheral route—which would perhaps come out at Blackdog—and have a single carriageway joined to it. My concern is that the western peripheral route will act as a magnet for new investment to the area, but areas in the north-east beyond could be stuck with a single carriageway and at a further economic disadvantage. Any new investment in the area could stay around the western peripheral route, where there will be economic advantages and easy transport links. That is a concern. We must remember that farming and fishing communities need more support. Today, hauliers and people involved in forestry, farming and fishing lobbied the Parliament. All of them suffer because of the single carriageway and they all seek a boost from the Government as a result of having to contend with other issues. They talked about the impact of the working time directive and rising fuel costs. Modernising the A90 north of Aberdeen would give a welcome boost to people in those industries. Members call on the minister today to give a definite timescale for decisions and good news. We want to know when investment will be  forthcoming. I plead with him to make the debate worth while and valuable by making an announcement that will progress the debate to the next stage so that we do not have to lodge similar motions to the one that Nanette Milne lodged. We do not want to be frustrated or have to come back to look for good news. I plead with the minister to give us and—more important—the residents who are affected and the communities in north-east Scotland good news.

I, too, welcome the report. I want to concentrate on the importance of drug rehabilitation in our prisons, which is a subject that I have raised time and again with successive ministers over the past six years. Drug rehabilitation must be put higher up the political agenda in Scotland because it is an area in which we can make a huge difference to communities and to people's lives. As someone who represents Grampian in the Parliament, I have been closely involved in addressing drug-related crime for the past six years. We must remember that over that period Grampian has had some of the worst drug-related crime statistics. The local police say that between 70 per cent and 80 per cent of crime in the region relates to drugs. The governor of the local prison at Craiginches says that more than 70 per cent of the prisoners are there for drug-related crime. If we really want to make a difference to people's lives and cut crime rates, drug rehabilitation should be much higher up the agenda. I suggest that delivery should be focused on the prisons, where there is a captive audience. I was very interested in a statistic from a study in England that revealed that 664 addicts had committed 70,000 offences over a three-month period. I would be surprised if equivalent figures north of the border were much different. One can easily argue that in Scotland tens of thousands of offences are committed by a small number of drug addicts in similarly short timescales year in, year  out. Why on earth are we not making the task of trying to cure such people of their drug habits while they are in prison a much higher political priority? That would enable us to break the cycle of crime, imprisonment and drugs and get rid of the revolving-door syndrome that we keep talking about. The case for drug rehabilitation stacks up economically. As I can never get Scottish statistics, I must again refer to statistics from south of the border, which say that it costs £3,500 per prisoner to deliver a drug rehabilitation programme in an English prison. The figure for a Scottish prison might be similar, but I do not know—one can never get such information out of the Scottish Prison Service or Executive ministers. It costs roughly £33,000 per annum to keep someone in prison in Scotland. The economic case for rehabilitation stacks up—that is not to mention the cost of drug-related crime to our communities, which would be cut if we were to cut the number of people who commit such crime. In my experience, the delivery of drug rehabilitation programmes in our prisons has been plagued—and, in some cases, continues to be plagued—by a number of issues. The report that we are debating is effective in highlighting the lack of availability of resources and drug rehabilitation programmes. That must be addressed, as must the high turnover among staff who deliver such programmes. I have come across statistics that show that addiction nurses leave every few months and have to be replaced, which in some cases leads to a halt in the delivery of programmes. I hope that that situation has improved over the past few months. Overall staff shortages in our prisons cause problems. I am aware that on several occasions rehabilitation work—not just on drugs, but in other areas—at Craiginches prison in Aberdeen has had to stop because the prison officers involved had to go and do escort duties. The recent report by the chief inspector of prisons for Scotland said that the drug-testing centre at Craiginches had to close for 176 days between 2003 and 2004. For 169 of those 176 days, the closure was due to the fact that prison officers had been diverted to escort duties.

I know that that issue has been addressed by the Government, but there are many other examples of staff shortages causing problems. The fact that we have overcrowded prisons and staff shortages means that adequate rehabilitation programmes cannot be delivered. That is why MSPs such as me bang on about why overcrowding and shortages of prison officers must be addressed if we are to carry out effective rehabilitation.  Drug rehabilitation works. I will again make use of English statistics because no Scottish ones exist. The Rehabilitation of Addicted Prisoners Trust, which delivers many of the rehabilitation programmes south of the border, says that only 16 per cent of the prisoners who graduate from its programmes are reconvicted, whereas 43 per cent of non-graduates of its programmes are reconvicted. Rehabilitation programmes work, so let us push the issue higher up the political agenda. That would make a significant difference to cutting crime in our communities and would save a lot of misery for the many families who have members who are drug addicts. For goodness' sake, let us have Scottish statistics and information. I ask the Government to start to measure the success of existing rehabilitation programmes so that we can find out how to improve them.

How does the minister measure the success of existing rehabilitation programmes?

Does the Minister for Environment and Rural Development believe that the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive should be consulted in any way by the United Kingdom Government on whether the son of Trident should be based on the Clyde?

Now that the lights have come back on, we can turn our attention to energy. To ask the First Minister what steps have been taken to provide guidance to local authorities on suitable locations for wind farm developments. (S2F-1602)

Can the First Minister confirm that new guidelines will be issued to local authorities to ensure that wind farm developments are sited at appropriate locations? Will he give a commitment that new guidance will be issued in the coming months, and not in a matter of years, given the huge concern that is being expressed by communities and developers the length and breadth of Scotland? Will he also explain how he intends to achieve his target of getting 40 per cent of electricity from renewable sources by 2020? Is he simply going to rely on onshore wind farms? What is he doing to promote other renewable sources?

What steps is the Executive taking to ensure that Scotland and the Parliament can participate in Europe, and not just Europe day? As the minister will be aware, the Government failed on most of its objectives in negotiating the European constitution. What new steps are going to be taken to ensure that the people of Scotland and the Parliament can directly influence decisions that are made in Europe that affect our everyday  lives?

Like everyone else, I welcome this debate and congratulate Des McNulty on bringing it forward. Once again, we should take pride in the fact that our Parliament has been outward looking since it was founded in 1999. We have had a number of debates on similar themes over the years and the subject of tonight's debate is one on which we can all unite. Trish Godman mentioned Burns suppers and I think that, if Rabbie Burns was around today, he would have something to say about the fact that the developed world is so wealthy while there is such chronic poverty elsewhere on the planet. We remember the sentiments of "A Man's a Man for a' that", which is the Parliament's unofficial anthem. This debate will help to add momentum to the run-up to the G8 summit in July, the twin themes of which are Africa and climate change. It will be good to see the heads of state coming together to discuss those issues. The world is getting smaller, but, unfortunately, globalisation has so far been about some countries economically exploiting others rather than about intervening to try to tackle poverty. When people come together in the future, the objective should be to tackle poverty and not to exploit economically countries in the developing world. Both themes—Africa and climate change—relate to making poverty history. Throughout the debate, many people will eloquently roll statistics off their tongues, but in the tsunami that happened a few months ago we saw how the most vulnerable communities in the world are hit hardest by such events. Of course, that brings to mind the issue of climate change. When we consider the devastation that climate change can wreak, we realise what a threat is posed to many developing countries. We know that climate change will mean warmer summers, wetter winters, extreme weather conditions and rising sea levels. We must remember that the wealth that exists in the developed world was built on the back of the developing world. The emissions that occur because of our prosperity in the developed world are causing climate change, which will impact on the whole world, but particularly on the poorest societies.  When we talk about making global poverty history, we have to think about how we will help to tackle poverty. Members have put forward many solutions, but we must remember that the developing world needs energy. That is perhaps the biggest challenge that it faces in the coming decades if poverty is to be tackled. Economic development requires energy, but at the moment many societies have problems with accessing it. On the one hand, we in this country have to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to limit the impact that climate change will have throughout the world. On the other hand, we have to help countries to develop economically so that poverty can be eliminated, and that means that they will need access to energy. Our water industry helped some of the Asian regions that were hit by the tsunami a few months ago. We can lend our expertise in that field, but we also have huge expertise in energy. If we want to help to develop the economies of developing countries, we will have to lend some of that expertise. Believe it or not, some of the world's experts on solar energy are based in Scotland. Of course, the potential of that form of renewable energy in the developing world is huge. Perhaps we should consider how we can use our energy expertise to help the developing world. I believe that that is an area in which the Scottish Parliament can contribute. In the run-up to the G8 summit, Scotland has an opportunity to make its voice heard. The people of Scotland will, no doubt, turn out in great numbers at the march in Edinburgh on 2 July. We should pay tribute to the many thousands of people in Scotland who, year in, year out, do their bit for the international community to tackle poverty overseas. As the response to the tsunami showed, hundreds of thousands of Scots want to do something to help and they are more aware than ever of the level of global poverty. In the run-up to the G8 summit, hundreds of thousands of Scots will have the opportunity to make their voice heard and to join the make poverty history campaign. At the summit, the world's leaders will have their opportunity to join the campaign and to make a real difference. We should all bring our voices together and put the pressure on in the run-up to the G8 summit in July.

The minister mentioned that he had visited a school. I invite him to visit St Andrew's School, which is a special needs school in Inverurie in Aberdeenshire. There is a huge amount of concern about the proposal to close that school and split it between two sites. Will he put it on record that the needs of children should be paramount and that education policy should not be driven by estates management, especially in the case of special needs schools? Will he look into the situation affecting St Andrew's School, which is causing great concern among parents?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to ensure that Scotland remains competitive with the new European Union countries in terms of jobs and business opportunities. (S2O-6216)

Will the minister assure the Parliament that the impact of the first year of European Union expansion on the Scottish economy will be assessed to ensure not only that we are responding to the threat of the increasingly attractive business opportunities that many global companies are finding in eastern Europe but that Scotland grasps the opportunities presented by EU expansion? On that theme, I turn the minister's attention to the situation that faces RB Farquhar, which is a very successful and well-respected family-owned manufacturing company in Huntly. It recently opened up its second factory in the Czech Republic and now the Huntly operation is struggling.

Will the minister take a close interest in the situation at RB Farqhuar and find out from local agencies what he can do to help to protect those jobs?

The minister will be aware that Craiginches, like many other prisons in Scotland, has a situation where the majority of inmates are drug misusers. How does she measure the effectiveness of the drug programmes that are delivered in our prisons? Do we measure the number of inmates who are given drug programmes but are then sent back to prison for drug-related crime, showing that the programmes did not work?

Will Nora Radcliffe give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister take an intervention?

During the previous debate, I noted the complaints that were made against the Scottish National Party for choosing to debate a devolved issue during a Westminster election campaign. I hope that all members are happy with the topic for this debate, because we have lodged a hybrid motion that covers devolved and reserved issues. That should ensure that we keep everyone on the Government benches happy. The debate is important. It is about protecting the future of our people in Scotland and our environment and it is about securing a safe and affordable source of energy to meet our future needs. Most of all, the debate is about creating a non-nuclear Scotland. The SNP was interested to note that, in the manifesto that was launched yesterday, Labour refused to rule out a new nuclear power station for Scotland. The Labour Party's obsession with everything nuclear continues, whether it is considering weapons of mass destruction on the Clyde or more nuclear power stations, which will create mountains of nuclear waste. As a result, all the signs are that Scotland has been lined up to become the United Kingdom's nuclear dustbin. Allan Wilson and his Labour colleagues might raise the spectre of new nuclear power stations for Scotland, but it is for the Scottish Parliament to oppose such plans, which is why we are having this debate. In recent years, many authorities have scouted for sites in Scotland in which they can store deadly radioactive waste. We have to lay down a marker today by rejecting the prospect of more expensive, polluting and dangerous nuclear power stations for Scotland. We have to say that this nation will not be used as a nuclear dustbin. It has been reported that 18 million cubic metres of soil and rubble are contaminated by leaks, spills and discharges over the past 60 years from the 30 sites throughout the United Kingdom. It is no wonder therefore that the vast majority of the public in Scotland are opposed to nuclear power. Only last week, the most recent opinion poll stated that 83 per cent of Scots oppose the nuclear option. One of last night's news programmes featured a tourism conference in Aberdeen at which many of the overseas delegates praised Scotland. They said that more and more people want to come to  this country because of our reputation for having a fantastic environment and for being a safe place to visit. What on earth would those people think if they knew that, of the 33 sites that are earmarked in the UK for high-level radioactive waste disposal, 22—or two thirds—are in Scotland? Those include sites in Caithness and Sutherland, in Argyll and Bute, in Ross, Skye and Lochaber, in West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine, in Banff and Buchan, in Gordon, and in North Ayrshire and Arran. Those communities deserve the support of the Parliament in order to ensure that they are not turned into nuclear waste dumps. A further seven sites have been identified in Scotland for low to intermediate level nuclear waste disposal. The Committee on Radioactive Waste Management estimates that 470,000m³ of radioactive waste will have to be stored, two thirds of which could make its way to Scotland. That dangerous radioactive waste would have to be transported on our road and rail network and in our sea lanes and so would pose many risks to our local communities the length and breadth of Scotland. If Scotland is turned into a nuclear dustbin, waste could be brought here not just from the rest of the UK, but from overseas. Under another Labour Government, Scotland faces the prospect of becoming not only the nuclear dustbin for the UK, but an international nuclear dustbin. Of course, the best way of dealing with nuclear waste is not to produce the stuff in the first place. Over the past 60 years, the civic nuclear industry has been a hugely expensive drain on the public purse. When we inherited the industry from the defence sector, which is where it started, we also inherited that sector's culture of open-ended budgets and secrecy. The Royal Society said last year that the cost of dealing with existing waste throughout the UK could amount to £85 billion. Another authority said that it could cost £50 billion to decommission the 19 UK sites over the next 25 years. According to a recent parliamentary question at Westminster, in the five-year period between 1997 and 2002, the Department of Trade and Industry subsidised the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority and BNFL alone to the tune of £11 billion. The public purse has had to pay a price tag of £150 billion over the past few years to run the nuclear industry and yet we have not even begun to look at the construction costs of existing nuclear facilities in Scotland and the rest of the UK, never mind the cost of building new nuclear facilities. Let us not forget that Sizewell, which was the last nuclear facility to be built in the UK, took 15 years to build and cost way over budget. It is estimated that the life-cycle costs of a new nuclear power station in Scotland would be £2.5 billion. In an age  of security concerns, do we really want to build new targets for international terrorists in Scotland, especially as it would cost an arm and a leg to protect those sites? Some members on the Government benches and some Tory members have said that nuclear power is needed to fill the energy gap. We should be talking not about an energy gap, but about a window of opportunity for the development of Scotland's renewables sector, which has enormous potential in relation to meeting our energy needs in the near future. Taking that opportunity would also help us to tackle climate change. This country possesses 25 per cent of Europe's wind and tidal resource and 10 per cent of Europe's wave resource. There is also fantastic potential for biomass, solar and other renewables technologies. If, over the coming decades, we were to spend even a fraction of the money that is used to subsidise the nuclear industry on renewables, Scotland could become Europe's energy powerhouse within a matter of years. It is unfortunate that the minister who is responsible for developing the renewables sector in Scotland is also the minister who is responsible for the promotion of nuclear power. The minister should get his eye back on the ball and start promoting renewable power so that Scotland can become a clean, green country. He should ensure that we develop the fantastic potential of renewable energy. The purpose of the debate is to let us speak with a united voice to ensure that the Scottish Parliament has the ultimate say on whether new nuclear power stations are built in Scotland and on whether this small nation is turned into an international nuclear dustbin. Once we get that say and get that power, we must say no to nuclear; we must say no to more nuclear power stations in Scotland and to turning Scotland into a nuclear dustbin. I urge the Parliament to support the SNP motion. I move, That the Parliament notes that the Committee on Radioactive Waste Management (CORWM) is due to make its final report in July 2006; notes that the decision on where to locate sites for the long-term storage of nuclear waste is likely to be taken shortly after that date and that a number of potential sites in Scotland have been identified; notes that the UK Government is clearing the way to build new nuclear power stations; further notes that the UK Government has agreed to accept and store nuclear waste from overseas; agrees that only the Scottish Parliament can take the decision to locate any sites in Scotland for the long-term storage of nuclear waste, and rejects the need for a new nuclear power station in Scotland.

Has the minister given thought to the grievances that owners of small businesses often express? They think that Government policy puts in place many measures that help householders in collection and disposal of waste, whereas small businesses are left to pick up their own costs. Are there plans to give more help to small businesses for collection and disposal of waste?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps have been taken to assess the impact of land availability on rural development. (S2O-5936)

The minister will be aware that demand for housing, particularly in rural areas, continues to outstrip supply; therefore, more land should be made available on which to build houses, as well as for other aspects of rural development. Is the minister satisfied that there has been diversification in land ownership in rural Scotland since the coalition came to power in 1999? Is he considering introducing any new measures, given that land availability is a serious problem in many areas of rural Scotland, which should be addressed? The Government has so far proposed two solutions. The first is a planning review, but planning helps only if land is put up for sale in the first place. The second is to make Forestry Commission land available for housing, but that is not appropriate in all areas. Can other measures be used to make more land available?

To ask the First Minister what progress is being made to encourage pupils to eat healthy food during school hours. (S2F-1552)

Many people welcome the fact that the issue is higher up the agenda in Scotland than it is elsewhere in the UK, where it has taken the sterling efforts of a celebrity chef to spur the Government into action. However, does the First Minister accept that Scotland has a long way to go to defuse the ticking time bomb that is the poor diet of many children in Scotland, especially in the light of last week's figures that showed that obesity is on the rise among under-18s in Scotland? Will he explain to parents in Scotland why, six years into devolution, nurseries that are funded by Labour councils in his back yard of Lanarkshire are teaching children how to buy burgers and fries at McDonald's? Does that ludicrous situation not make a mockery of his efforts and what is he doing about it?

For most of members' lifetimes, ever since the first nuclear bombs were dropped nearly 60 years ago at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the nuclear cloud has been hanging over us. It is clear that, as long as countries maintain nuclear arsenals, there will continue to be the threat that a nuclear holocaust will take place one day on the planet.  As Roseanna Cunningham rightly said, there is no need for Bush and Blair to go halfway round the world looking for weapons of mass destruction, because such weapons are right here on our doorstep. As Roseanna Cunningham said, one Trident warhead is seven times more powerful than the bomb that was dropped on Hiroshima, where 140,000 people lost their lives. A couple of weeks ago, Chris Mullin, the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, said in the UK Parliament that one submarine with 48 warheads is currently at sea acting as a deterrent. That one submarine—there are four in total—has the power equivalent to 336 Hiroshimas. We must bear in mind that, although the UK has only 200 warheads, the US, Russia and other countries have thousands between them. The Scottish Parliament has now been in existence for six years, and we must ask ourselves why on earth Scotland, a small country of 5 million people on the north-western periphery of Europe, is home to one of the world's deadliest nuclear arsenals.

We in Scotland cannot call on other countries to get rid of their nuclear weapons when we have one of the world's deadliest arsenals on our doorstep. When I last considered the geopolitical situation, other countries round the world were not queuing up to attack Scotland. If they are, that may be because we have Trident missiles here. I want to consider Scotland and its role in the world. At the moment, we waste a colossal amount of resources on maintaining the nuclear deterrent, or whatever we want to call it. One billion pounds a year—3 per cent of the UK defence budget—is spent on nuclear weapons. If the son of Trident comes about, it will cost a further £20 billion, which is the equivalent of £2 billion a year, to maintain it. We believe that the people of Scotland do not want that cash to be spent on nuclear weapons. They would rather it were diverted to dealing with social and economic issues here in their country. Over the next 10 years, the UK will pay £400 million to help the former Soviet Union to deal with its nuclear legacy. We all support that, but it gives an indication of the global cost of nuclear weapons.  I turn to the wider debate. Nuclear weapons are a legacy of the cold war, which finished a long time ago. Children who will leave school after the summer were not even born when there was a cold war—that is how long ago it was. Nuclear weapons are no longer relevant in our national security strategies. No matter how many submarines go round our seas loaded with nuclear weapons, they will not stop Osama bin Laden or other terrorists. They do not have a role to play in the 21 st century. Scotland has an opportunity to become a nuclear weapon-free country and to play a role in making the whole world nuclear weapon free. In 1998, the new agenda coalition, which was led by the Irish and launched in Dublin, began a campaign to achieve nuclear disarmament. Small countries can play a role in making the whole world nuclear weapon free. There is a growing trend towards establishing nuclear weapon-free zones around the world. At the end of April—just a week or two before the UK elections—all the countries that are involved in establishing such zones will get together in Mexico. Would it not be great if Scotland were independent and we could be represented at that meeting, to allow us to play our role in getting this part of the world to become a nuclear weapon-free zone? In his recent book "A Short History of Nearly Everything", which was a big success, Bill Bryson said that, if we were to translate the history of the world into 24 hours, the human race would appear on the planet only one minute and 17 seconds before midnight. Would it not be an appalling tragedy if the human race abused its technical knowledge to wipe out not only itself, but the planet? That is something that we must avoid. The Scottish Parliament, which represents the people of Scotland, must play its part in ensuring that it does not happen.

The member attacks the SNP for choosing a reserved issue for debate. If his party does not believe in debating reserved issues, why did it choose to debate nuclear energy during its debating time a couple of weeks ago?

Robert Brown will be aware that the Secretary of State for Defence said recently that after the UK elections, a decision will be taken on a successor to Trident. Is it Robert Brown's view that the UK Government should commission a successor to Trident?

I thank the minister for her statement and welcome many of the measures that are contained therein, which will also be welcomed by constituents in the Grampian region who are suffering some of the worst problems in this regard. Does she think that it is too late for many dentists who have gone private to turn back and return to the NHS, or is she confident that they will all do that? Will she also answer the question that Shona Robison posed: what fee will be paid through the NHS to local dentists for delivering free oral assessments?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it plans to take advantage of the United Kingdom presidency of the European Union in 2005. (S2O-5851)

Have any bids been made to the UK Government to secure high-profile ministerial events in Scotland in relation to the UK presidency so that we can showcase some of the expertise that we have in this country? Energy  comes to mind as one example. Were any bids made to the UK Government for hosting an informal council of ministers in Scotland? Such an event would bring all 25 energy ministers to Aberdeen so that we could showcase the city's role as Europe's energy capital. If such a bid has not been made, were bids made for events in other areas?

I want to talk about some local issues in primary and secondary schools in North East Scotland. There are two main high-profile issues in the area at the moment: education and dentistry. I am delighted that we will be talking about dentistry later today. It is disappointing that the North East  Scotland Lib Dems have not turned up for this debate, given that education is one of the biggest issues dominating MSPs' mailbags in the region. The education issue in the north-east relates primarily to Aberdeenshire Council's recently published 21 st century school improvement programme, which is a mixed bag of proposals, one of which is to invest about £200 million in school infrastructure in Aberdeenshire in the next 10 or 15 years. Of course, that depends on when the Minister for Education and Young People notifies the council of the funding stream. I would be grateful if the minister could tell us before the end of the debate when the funding stream will be coming along. The education officials in Aberdeenshire Council say that everything is up in the air until the Government gives them an indication of the timescales.

Yes. If I were a Lib Dem MSP for North East Scotland, I would be highly embarrassed to take part in any debate on education, given the unpopularity of many of the proposals that are being made in the north-east. No one is suggesting that education provision should stand still, but we have to be careful about such provision in rural areas and about special needs provision. One of the biggest issues, to which Alex Johnstone has alluded, relates to St Andrew's School in Inverurie, which has excellent special needs provision. It has an excellent reputation and is one of only seven schools in Scotland that are accredited by the National Autistic Society. A huge public campaign is being run because of the level of concern about its future. When Aberdeenshire Council announced its original proposals, the options were closure, closure or closure. Thankfully, the options now seem to have shifted to closing the school, upgrading it or having a new build. A recent survey of local parents found that 98 per cent wanted to rebuild the school or have it upgraded. A number of MSPs visited the school a few weeks ago. We were totally taken aback by the staff's professionalism and dedication. No one is arguing that the status quo is an option; the school has to be upgraded or rebuilt. However, there is clearly concern among the parents about the proposal to establish two new stand-alone units—one co-located with a local primary school and the other co-located with Inverurie Academy. Parents think that there is a danger that the education provision for the children will be harmed if they are not kept together in one school in order to  maintain the current ethos. We heard from the head teacher that the teachers come in over the holidays to create false walls for new classrooms because the building is so antiquated and that they have turned broom cupboards into new rooms for the kids. That illustrates the challenge for our education provision in Scotland, particularly in relation to infrastructure. There is a lot of public interest in the future of special needs schools in the north-east—not just St Andrew's School in Inverurie but Carronhill School in Stonehaven. A huge petition is circulating in the north-east and I urge the Minister for Education and Young People, Peter Peacock, to come to the area to visit those two schools and some of the other local primary schools. He should visit St Andrew's School in particular, which is a beacon of excellence in special needs education whose future we need to protect. I ask Peter Peacock to take that on board and consider visiting the area soon. Local managers in some of the secondary schools in Aberdeenshire, particularly the smaller rural schools, have expressed concern to me about the proposal to restructure management in the schools. The Government's objective is to have more flat management, more responsibility payments and faculties within secondaries. The changes will create difference not only between local authority areas but, in some cases, between secondary schools in the same local authority area. That is causing a lot of concern. One of the issues with rural secondaries, which in most cases are smaller than urban secondaries, is the fact that the principal faculty teachers in urban schools will be paid more than the depute heads in rural schools. That creates an issue to do with the recruitment and retention of senior managers in rural schools. Why would a principal teacher want to apply for a depute head post in a rural school when they would get paid more for staying where they were? Likewise, why would someone in a rural school want to keep their post when they could apply for a higher-paid post in an urban school? We have to address those issues and I would be interested to hear the minister's comments on them. On funding, I was interested to read the report by the Headteachers Association of Scotland, "Fair Funding to Schools", which was published a few days ago. It states: "at neither school nor subject level is any consideration given to the level of resourcing allocated by the education authority to the school or by the school to the subject." That relates to the comparisons between schools that the Government keeps using. It is important that when it compares secondary schools it takes into account the different levels of funding from each education authority; otherwise it will make  unfair comparisons. I ask the minister to respond to that point before the end of the debate. I turn finally to workforce issues. I support all the sentiments that Fiona Hyslop expressed in her speech. Stress continues to be a huge issue in our primary and secondary schools. I would like to know what the minister is doing to measure and treat it. Schools in the north-east are trying to recruit new teachers from Malta, because of the shortages in the area. That is not a long-term solution. We have to attract teachers in this country back into the classroom. That involves tackling discipline, but it also involves tackling stress, treating teachers and giving them a sense of self-worth and self-respect. I support the SNP amendment.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

The minister mentioned lack of supply, particularly in relation to first-time buyers, and affordability. Does she accept that although financial incentives to help first-time buyers on to the property ladder are useful, if the land is not available in the first place, all that the public purse will do is to subsidise landowners who drip feed the market with plots of land? What will the minister do to make more land available in rural Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive what sanctions it takes through the justice system against those who supply alcohol to, or purchase alcohol on behalf of, under-18s. (S2O-5699)

I am sure that the minister will share my concern about the number of under-16s—not just the number of under-18s—who are being discharged from hospital in Grampian following alcohol misuse. Not only is alcohol misuse on the increase, but Grampian has among the highest rates in the whole of Scotland. Clearly, those young people are accessing alcohol from somewhere. I welcome the minister's outline of some of the measures that can be taken. However, recent parliamentary answers show that the number of prosecutions against licensees, for instance, is very low indeed. Is she confident that the justice system is enforcing the law? Will she discuss the issue with all the various players in the justice system to ensure that the law is being applied?

The minister and her back-bench colleagues may be unhappy that the SNP has chosen this subject for debate. In her opening remarks, she said that she was surprised by the  choice. I explain to the minister and her colleagues that the reason why the SNP chose this subject for debate is that it is one of the biggest health issues in our constituencies the length and breadth of Scotland. The minister should perhaps bring the issue to the chamber more often, to let the country know what she is doing. I have been amazed by the number of people in Grampian who have contacted me on this issue in the past few years. At a meeting just last week, I spoke to a person who asked me—after we had discussed what we were there to discuss—whether I could tell her how she could access an NHS dentist. I then went to the University of Aberdeen to meet an academic to discuss the oil industry. At the end of the conversation, he said, "By the way, can you give me some advice on how to get an NHS dentist, because I've just been deregistered?" Dentistry is a huge issue in all our constituencies, which is why we have to discuss it here today. As John Swinney said, we are in the sixth year of devolution but we are still waiting for real progress. We are in the sixth year of this Labour-Lib Dem coalition and we now have our sixth deputy minister with responsibility for health who is charged with trying to sort out the mess in the NHS dentistry sector. Iain Gray was the first to have a go; then we had Malcolm Chisholm, Frank McAveety, Mary Mulligan and Tom McCabe; and now Rhona Brankin is at the helm. I know that it is a huge task to follow in the illustrious footsteps of those immense individuals who came before her.

I have to say that it would be helpful if the minister made more announcements to this Parliament, as opposed to going to the Daily Record . We might then have more of an idea of what the Government is doing. We hope that this will be sixth time lucky. The minister has the chance to succeed where others before her have failed. The people of Scotland are keen to move on and to get access to NHS dentists in their communities as soon as possible. The minister has not got off to a great start. One of her first actions was to allow the chief dental officer in Scotland to go part-time. That decision left dentists throughout Scotland completely perplexed. It was a sign of complacency. The minister is not taking the issue seriously enough.

That just shows how out of touch the minister is. She does not acknowledge the terrible message that has been sent out to patients and dentists in Scotland. At the height of the NHS dentistry crisis, she allows her chief civil servant to go part-time. The minister has to acknowledge the scale of the crisis. Many members have today tried to illustrate the crisis in constituencies throughout Scotland. Mike Rumbles, Stewart Stevenson and others have talked about the scale of the crisis in Grampian—a crisis that Andy Kerr, the Minister for Health and Community Care, denied existed on his visit to the area a couple of weeks ago. As Mike Rumbles quite rightly said, it is a crisis. There is no other word for it. Grampian region alone accounts for one third of patients in Scotland who have been deregistered from the NHS over the past few years. No dentist is currently taking on new NHS patients. The local helpline has been inundated with calls from worried constituents. Emergency dental services in Grampian and elsewhere in Scotland have become the first—and perhaps the only—port of call for patients who are trying to get dental treatment. Because they cannot see a local dentist for preventive work, patients are having to wait until the problem is so serious that they have to go to the emergency dental service at the local hospital. We have heard about the queues at Oldmeldrum, Stonehaven and elsewhere. A Hungarian who is resident in Aberdeen found that it was cheaper to fly to London, then to fly to Hungary for treatment, and then to fly back, than it would have been to pay for private treatment locally. The problem affects many rural areas, especially the Highlands, the Borders, Dumfries and Galloway and Grampian. People have seen their shops and banks close; now they cannot even get access to a local dentist. Salaried dentists are part of the answer—there should be more of them—but in rural areas that will not work unless a health board unit with a salaried dentist opens up in every community. We have to attract dentists back into the NHS. I want to touch briefly on the growing problem in hospital-based dental services, which creates more of a logjam for local dental practices. In areas such as Grampian, local hospital-based services are overstretched. There is only one orthodontic consultant to cover the whole of  Grampian, although there should be three. We heard about the family from Ellon who had to remortgage their house to get £3,000 for private orthodontic treatment for their 13-year-old son. Their son had been on the local waiting list for orthodontic treatment since he was nine. That is unacceptable; we have to address it.

Of course I welcome that, but I am trying to convey to the minister the scale of the crisis in NHS dental services—not just in local communities but in hospitals in some parts of Scotland. We have heard a lot about the benefits of oral health, and Eleanor Scott spoke about diet and other ways of improving oral health. If we are to deliver free dental checks, we need the dentists. There is no point in making pledges that cannot be fulfilled. That is irresponsible. The minister does not even seem to know how many dentists we will need in Scotland to fulfil the pledge to deliver free dental checks. We have to attract more dentists to work in Scotland and we have to train more dentists here in Scotland. At present, there are many more applications to dental schools than there are places. There is therefore scope to expand the training of dentists in Scotland. We may have to open new dental schools, because we have to ensure that more dentists are working in our communities. This Government has somehow—at a time of record NHS investment—allowed dental services to implode in many areas. The Tory party's legacy in Scotland was long dole queues; this Government's legacy will be queues of people trying to get basic access to NHS dentists in their communities. The minister should acknowledge that this is a huge crisis that should be top of her health agenda.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister or Deputy Minister for Health and Community Care will visit Grampian to gather information on the region's dental services. (S2O-5598)

I am delighted to hear that the minister will visit the region in April. She will find that national health service dental services are imploding and are facing a state of crisis, although the Minister for Health and Community Care appeared to deny that when he visited the area a couple of weeks ago. I say to the minister that dentists in Grampian are paying close attention to Scotland's two dental schools. They are very concerned by the situation at Glasgow dental school, as the General Dental Council has just released a report that is quite scathing and refers to "fundamental and ongoing problems". Will she use this opportunity to respond to that report and outline the steps that she intends to take to ensure that both of Scotland's dental schools can continue, so that the current shortage of dentists elsewhere in the country can be addressed?

To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions have taken place with the Department of Trade and Industry in London regarding the transfer of energy-related civil service jobs to Aberdeen. (S2O-5607)

I ask the Deputy First Minister to meet the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry in London to discuss the transfer of energy-related civil service jobs from London to Aberdeen, as it remains the case that a number of jobs that relate to offshore industry are based in London. Although the 55 jobs concerned were earmarked for relocation to Aberdeen, the DTI took a last-minute decision late last year, despite the fact that it had reserved office space in Aberdeen, to pull the plug on that relocation, to the huge disappointment of the people of Aberdeen and the north-east of Scotland, who want the city to be seen as Europe's energy capital. Will the Deputy First Minister acknowledge that that is a serious issue? Under the Lyons review, those jobs belong to Aberdeen, not London, so will he intervene to ensure that they are transferred as soon as possible?

The minister will be aware of a long-standing complaint from Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council, which are regularly at the bottom of the local government funding league. Does he accept that there are many indicators of need? Although deprivation is worth reviewing, the funding formula should be widely reviewed, not just one specific indicator.

On securing resources to tackle energy efficiency, the climate change levy is, of course, collected throughout the United Kingdom. Has there been any attempt to measure how much has been collected in and returned to Scotland through energy efficiency measures?

Given the impact of climate change, the cost of energy for households in Scotland today and the scandalous level of fuel poverty in Scotland, it does not take a genius to work out that the Parliament will debate energy and environmental matters time and again over the coming years. If we compare just the past few months with the first four years of this Parliament, we find that we have had energy debates sponsored by the Conservatives, the Scottish Green Party and the SNP; a climate change debate has also been sponsored by the Executive. That indicates the direction that the debate is taking in Scotland and the wider world. However, we have to inject a dose of reality into the debate because we live in energy-rich Scotland where, at present, tens if not hundreds of thousands of people suffer from fuel poverty. That is a national scandal. I noticed a couple of stories in the press this morning, one of which was a comparison between Westminster and this Parliament in terms of the hot air that is produced. The result was that less hot air is produced by this Parliament—something that the SNP has been trying to tell other MSPs for a long time. The other headline in today's news was the profit announcements by a number of companies in the UK. Centrica plc, which owns Scottish Gas, has announced profits that have increased by a lot more than was expected, yet it has fewer customers. That tells us that the company is squeezing more profit out of a smaller customer base and that its customers in Scotland are being fleeced. That is why so many people are moving into fuel poverty and we have to do something about that in this Parliament. The Government has set a target to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 60 per cent by 2050. As the minister and others have said, it is hoped that we will get halfway to that target by improving energy efficiency. That illustrates why  energy efficiency must have a much higher profile in the energy debate in Scotland. As many people have said, we can improve energy efficiency through measures such as demand reduction, better buildings, more energy-efficient equipment in our businesses and households and energy efficient heat and power supplies. Those measures will bring economic benefits to Scotland by creating green jobs and they will enhance energy security in Scotland, which has not yet crept into the debate. Energy efficiency enhances energy security for a country. With regard to the environment, energy security will cut emissions, and socially, as many members have said, it will help us to tackle fuel poverty. There is a huge way to go, however, and we should not become complacent or congratulate ourselves on steps that have already been taken when we have not done enough and a huge task remains before us. I contacted Communities Scotland yesterday to speak about the local authorities that have not submitted a fuel poverty strategy as they were supposed to do by March 2004 under the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001. In February 2005, Aberdeenshire Council, Dumfries and Galloway Council, East Ayrshire Council, Midlothian Council, North Ayrshire Council, Scottish Borders Council, Shetland Islands Council, South Lanarkshire Council and Western Isles Council, which cover some of the coldest parts of Scotland, had still not submitted their fuel poverty strategies to the Government via Communities Scotland. Given that we are in that ridiculous situation, we cannot stand here today, congratulate ourselves and say that we are making huge progress. I urge the minister to speak to those local authorities, because their lack of action is not acceptable. Only a few local authorities in Scotland have dedicated officers working on fuel poverty or on the Home Energy Conservation Act 1995. That situation must be addressed, because local authorities are cash-strapped and unable as a result to play their full role in tackling fuel poverty and improving energy efficiency in Scotland. If there is one message that I ask the minister to take away, it is, "Please speak to our local authorities and give them more support." Building standards have been a major issue in the debate. As I said, the UK Government's target is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 60 per cent by 2050. As part of our climate change inquiry, a witness told the Environment and Rural Development Committee yesterday that Switzerland has adopted a target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 90 per cent—not 60 per cent—and that it plans to achieve that by one major route, namely better building standards. We must learn from other countries, because the  appalling standard of much housing in Scotland contributes to our energy inefficiency and addressing that must be our priority. I urge members to support the SNP amendment.

I agree whole-heartedly with the member's comments about the architects' initiative. Does she agree that the rest of the construction industry, including the people who build homes, as opposed to those who design them, must participate in that initiative?

I am sure that the minister recognises that we will have to do a lot of work to get a greater share of the world's R and D work on alternative energies and clean technologies. Has he conducted a study of our share of that R and D compared with the share that is being achieved by our competitors, which also want to be the renewable energy capitals of Europe? What steps is the minister taking to attract private sector energy-related research to Scotland? Shell has written to me to confirm that by the end of 2005 it will have invested £1 billion globally in developing renewables, but it will not spend one cent in Scotland. Some offshore companies are taking cash out of the North sea but refusing to invest in R and D in Scotland.

Does the member suggest that we should close down the North sea before we develop alternative energies, or should we develop alternative energies first?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

rose—

Will the member explain why he thinks that a fund that has reached £89 billion is a failure?

rose—

It is disappointing, if not predictable and depressing, that of all the amendments to the motion only the Government's does not mention the oil industry. That is bizarre, given that everyone knows that the debate is about Scotland's economic future and the role of the oil industry in it. The industry is one of the biggest spenders in the Scottish economy, yet the Government never mentions it in debates; nor does it carry out any initiatives in relation to the development of that vital sector. The industry is one of our biggest employers and is responsible for spawning some of Scotland's most successful entrepreneurs and biggest private companies. Of all the bigger private companies in Scotland that did not come out of the industries that were privatised, the oil industry has supplied the biggest and most successful. I urge the Government to start paying attention to it. On the wider economic debate, the most successful nations in Europe and elsewhere in the world are countries of a similar size to Scotland that have fewer resources than we have. Surely it is about time that we had consensus in the chamber about the need for us to learn lessons from those countries.  The debate is, in essence, about the future opportunities for Scotland. Of course the SNP will say that we should learn lessons from the missed opportunities that Scotland experienced in the past. Scotland should be up there with the other economically successful nations in Europe, such as our neighbours Norway and Ireland or the others that are performing much more successfully than Scotland is. We won the jackpot in the 1960s when we discovered the black gold in the North sea, but, unfortunately, we have stood back and allowed the UK Government to squander £203 billion in oil revenue since then, despite the fact that Scotland continues to suffer the same old social problems and lag behind the rest of the UK economically. We should have used our natural resources as the springboard to get Scotland to the top of the league. Control over revenue from the oil industry has not passed to this Parliament and we do not even have some of the leading civil service jobs relating to the North sea, which are still based in London. That is a shameful and ludicrous situation that no other small country would accept. Contrast Scotland's position with that of Norway, which this year celebrates the centenary of its becoming independent. The Norwegians with their vision and foresight set up their oil fund in 1990 and starting putting cash into it in 1996. Today the fund for future generations is more than £89 billion.

No. The fact is that Norway has utilised and taken control of its oil revenues. Scotland should learn a lesson from that. I remind members that in 1978—some of us are too young to remember back then, but others have good memories—the Labour Government published its white paper on the challenges presented by North sea oil, in which it said that it would consider setting up a specific oil fund. After careful thought it decided to abandon the idea, because people might get confused about whether projects had been funded by general taxation or by the oil fund—a weak and lame excuse indeed. Just think—if the idea had been taken up, we could be sitting on a multibillion pound fund today.

That is a good point. The opportunity still exists for Scotland to reap the benefits from the North sea. The oil industry,  which always makes conservative estimates, said that £6 billion would be poured into Gordon Brown's coffers in 2005, so a lot of opportunity remains. The predictions that were made in the 1980s had to be revised in the 1990s and the predictions that were made in the 1990s now have to be revised in the 21 st century. That is the story of North sea oil—we always have to revise our predictions upward. Gordon Brown has had to revise his forecasts of oil revenues upward every time he addresses the issue. Are we going to continue doing that for the next 20, 30 or 40 years? Some of the oilfields that were expected to peak in 1992 are now not estimated to peak until 2009. The industry has a huge future and presents Scotland with a huge opportunity. We have not even begun to exploit the developments in the west of Shetland.

I am sorry, but I do not have much time left. Let us not forget that there is more oil left in the North sea than has been extracted and that 95 per cent of the reserves are in Scottish waters. If we had control over our own waters, we would have 95 per cent of the revenues. I want finally to address the environmental argument. The oil industry in the north-east of Scotland is responsible for trying to move us into renewables. We are transferring the skills from the oil industry to the renewables sector and it is ironic that the oil industry is playing the biggest role in trying to cut emissions, which perhaps the Green party will acknowledge. We have even more potential to help cut emissions. The issue of capturing carbon from oil and gas is on the agenda. The oil companies will lead the research into how we can capture the carbon, transport it and return it to store in the fields where the oil and gas came from. We have to support the industry, because it will help us to cut emissions in Scotland. I wish that the Greens would get their heads out of the clouds, come back down to earth and acknowledge the realities that we face. Research and development has been mentioned. It is difficult to explain how we are losing out and why the minister is not paying any attention to the issue. Shell is going to spend $1 billion by the end of 2005 on developing renewable energy. Not one cent has been spent on Scotland. Given the trillions of dollars that will be spent, we have to capture that investment and make the most of the North sea oil industry for Scotland's economic future.

Will the member give way?

The member will be aware that the oil industry has just announced that it expects to invest £35 billion in developing the North sea over the next five years. Can she reconcile that fact with her statement that there is a decline in North sea oil and that all the major companies are withdrawing?

Will the member give way?

I am sure that most people in the chamber would agree that we would have done things differently if Scotland had been  independent in the 1960s when oil was discovered in the North sea. The member seems to suggest that she wishes to nationalise the offshore industry. How much would that cost and where would she get the money from?

How much would that cost?

The member will appreciate that, because of the lack of alternatives, 90 per cent of global energy use in the future will be met from fossil fuels. Does she propose that we should reduce oil exploration and  production in the North sea in the coming years? If so, in which year will she choose to shut the taps on the North sea?

I am slightly confused by Mr Fraser's party's position on financial independence for the Parliament. Will he go on record and say whether he believes that the Parliament should have responsibility for oil revenues?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to support sports co-ordinators serving rural schools. (S2O-5115)

I understand that schoolchildren in Aberdeenshire and other rural areas of Scotland are losing out because of the cost implications of delivering that service in rural areas. As the minister will appreciate, there are two extra factors to consider in rural areas. First, the cost of transporting children is higher. Secondly, the sports co-ordinators have to spend extra time travelling between schools because they serve a cluster of schools at one time. Will the minister tell the chamber whether those factors have been taken into account? If not, I would be grateful if she would do so, because schoolchildren in rural areas are losing out.

To ask the First Minister whether any new measures will be introduced to assist first-time buyers. (S2F-1386)

Does the First Minister accept that the affordable housing crisis in Scotland is not only about accommodation for rent, but about the fact that many first-time buyers, who are mainly young people, are unable to get a foothold on the property ladder? Will he express concern in response to last week's report by the Bank of Scotland, which shows that in four out of five towns in Scotland first-time buyers—mainly young people, who are the lifeblood of those communities—are often unable to afford property in their communities, where they were raised and where they want to continue to live and work? Will he comment on the potential role of publicly owned land in addressing the problem, so that first-time buyers can afford to purchase property in their own communities?

The minister's amendment suggests that any decision on nuclear power will be taken only on the basis of waste management issues. Will he confirm that economics and other dangers must also be taken into account before any decision is taken?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

rose—

It gives me pleasure to speak to the SNP's amendment and to respond to the Tory party's bizarre motion. I am not sure whether it helps or hinders the political careers of Allan Wilson and John Home Robertson to be commended in a Tory party motion. Perhaps that illustrates the convergence between the policies of the Labour party and the Conservatives these days. In the blue corner, we have the flat earth society—the dinosaurs who are stuck in a past age. The Conservatives appear now to oppose wind energy in Scotland full stop. Only last week, Alex Johnstone's publicity in the Scottish press was calling for national guidelines for wind farms, which is a sensible proposal—many of us are calling for those.

The member is talking nonsense. The Conservatives have lodged a motion that makes no mention of the call for the  Scottish Executive to issue national guidelines. The Tory party is exploiting genuine concerns expressed by many in Scotland who are worried about a proliferation of wind turbines in their communities without their having a real say on the matter. There is a genuine issue, which the Government must address. That is why the Enterprise and Culture Committee called for national guidelines and why this week Highland Council has expressed sheer frustration about the lack of such guidelines.

The Conservatives have moved from a position of calling for national guidelines to a motion that says that they are opposed to wind farms and support nuclear power. They are hardening their position all the time to exploit the genuine concerns that are expressed by many communities around Scotland. It is a pity that Alex Johnstone did not attend the meeting a couple of evenings ago of the cross-party renewable energy group, as he would have heard from some of the communities that have established community-owned wind farms about the tremendous benefits that they have gained. At that meeting, we heard from the Fintry renewable energy enterprise group, which has wind turbines that are owned and run by the people of Fintry. People there will have cheap energy and will be able to tackle fuel poverty in their community and to secure their income streams. They are getting the benefits that can arise from collective ownership when the wind turbines are owned by the local community. The community now wants to become carbon neutral. If Mr Johnstone lived in that community, he would be out with his sandwich board to protest against the establishment of local wind turbines.

I am trying to explain to the Conservatives why they should not oppose wind energy. It is blatantly obvious from the motion that that is their position. The cross-party group heard from the Castlemilk and Carmunnock community urban wind farm  initiative. That fascinating initiative intends to exploit the tourism potential of the wind turbines in the community, to establish a visitors centre and to get an income stream for the community. We also heard from Gigha Renewable Energy Ltd, which hopes to make £75,000 profit every year from the wind turbines. That profit will go back into the local community. The community also hopes to supply two thirds of its own electricity needs. Wind energy must be part of an energy mix. As other members have said, we must meet our international obligations. Currently, only four European Union countries have a worse per capita record than Scotland does on greenhouse gas emissions. That is an appalling record, so we must take some hard decisions. Wind energy may currently be the only commercially viable renewable sector, but we must ensure that others come on stream. There must be more Government support for marine renewables. Biomass and hydrogen must also be developed. Other countries are racing ahead of Scotland on hydrogen. BP has this week established its second hydrogen fuelling station in Singapore. The private sector gets no encouragement from the Scottish Executive to carry out similar initiatives in Scotland. That is very unfortunate, because it means that we are falling further and further behind. I will now turn to the red and yellow corner. Once again, we are getting mixed messages about nuclear power and future support for nuclear technology from Labour and the Liberal Democrats. Allan Wilson, the minister responsible for promoting renewable energy in Scotland, has gone public with his support for nuclear energy, despite the fact that his amendment gives the impression that the Executive is sceptical about the issue. I do not see how the renewables sector in Scotland can have trust in the minister. Allan Wilson is not an average back-bench Labour MSP; he is the minister with responsibility for promoting renewables in Scotland. He should be throwing all his weight, his effort and his enthusiasm into promoting that sector, not the nuclear industry. The widespread consensus in Scotland is that nuclear power is costly and dangerous. International opinion is also moving against nuclear power: Belgium, Sweden and Germany are all phasing it out. Even the Kyoto protocol does not classify nuclear energy under its clean development mechanism.

I am sure that the minister is well aware of the widespread concerns about how we dispose of nuclear waste in Scotland. We do not want toxic dumps to be created in Scotland.  The Scottish National Party and many others in Scotland will oppose vigorously any proposal to establish nuclear power stations on Scottish soil. It is not only the minister who is putting obstacles in the way of the renewable energy sector's efforts to become Scotland's main supplier of energy. There is also a ridiculous proposal from the UK Government to impose on Scottish renewables projects a charging scheme for access to the national grid. That will discriminate against Scottish projects and will pull the rug from under their feet. A proposal was on the table to charge Scottish projects £24 per kilowatt to access the grid, whereas renewables or other projects south of the border would be subsidised to the tune of £6 a kilowatt. The minister must give a commitment today that he will fight the proposals tooth and nail so that we can realise our renewables potential in Scotland. It is bizarre that the Executive and the Tories are talking about supporting nuclear power when Scotland has the biggest potential among all European countries to become the leader in renewable energy. It has 25 per cent of the wind power potential.

I apologise for not being able to give way. We must ensure that this time we do not miss the jackpot. We have already had an energy jackpot from oil and gas, but London has taken all the revenues—it even keeps some of the leading civil service jobs that deal with the North sea industry, rather than basing them where they belong, in Aberdeen. This time around, we must ensure that the Government and all of Scotland are on board so that we can claim the energy jackpot, which this time will be the renewable energy jackpot. The oil and gas sector is not a lost cause in terms of revenues. This Parliament should have control over energy policy, just as Parliaments in other small countries have. I contrast Scotland with Norway. Norway has benefited from its oil resources and it has become a rich society as well as a rich country. The United Kingdom Offshore Operators Association will today say that it projects that it will give £6 billion to the London coffers in 2005. Let us try to get that money up here to Scotland. Let us transfer responsibility for energy policy and the revenues to this Parliament so that we can change Scotland for the better and meet our international obligations on cutting carbon emissions. I ask members to support the SNP amendment.  I move amendment S2M-2320.2, to leave out from "is concerned" to end and insert: "believes that Scotland is well placed to be Europe's energy powerhouse given our massive energy resources; believes that onshore and offshore wind energy is an important element in a balanced renewables policy but that the development of other renewables must be accelerated; shares the frustration expressed by many others, including Highland Council and the Parliament's Enterprise and Culture Committee, who are calling for a national strategic framework for wind farm developments; calls on the Scottish Executive to ensure that the UK Government does not introduce any charging scheme for access to the grid that discriminates against renewables in Scotland; believes that no new nuclear power stations should be built in Scotland, and calls for the Scottish Parliament to have control over energy policy and oil and gas revenues."

Does the minister appreciate the concern in the renewables energy industry about the fact that the minister with responsibility for promoting renewable energy has publicly stated that he supports nuclear energy? How can he reassure Scotland's renewables sector that he will not adopt a half-hearted approach to promoting renewables?

Does the minister not appreciate that, if everyone in the chamber feels that the environment is a good enough issue to devolve to Scotland because it is best handled here, and if there is consensus that energy policy is central to our environment policy, then the same rationale should be applied and energy policy should be decided in this Parliament?

Does not the member's plea to the DTI vindicate the SNP's argument that all energy policy should be transferred to the Scottish Parliament so that we can have a proper and comprehensive energy policy?

We all have in our constituencies excellent examples like those to which Christine May referred. Does she agree, however, that the Government should show more leadership? The minister gave me a parliamentary written reply that said that only "4.4 per cent of the energy used for heating the 14 largest Scottish Executive buildings was generated from renewable sources." — [ Official Report , Written Answers , 14 January 2005; S2W-12711.]  Is not that rather pathetic?

Does not the member accept that there is a role for Government regulation, albeit that individuals also have to take responsibility for cutting emissions? The landfill tax was a crucial way of reducing methane emissions. Does the member not accept that if there had not been targets and regulation in that regard, such emissions might not have been reduced?

The SNP welcomes this important debate and the consultation that the minister has launched. Many people think that climate change is a bigger threat to the planet than global terrorism. The minister was right to say that it is currently the biggest threat to the planet. In recent times, we have all witnessed the tragic consequences of the power of nature. That shows how carefully we must treat the planet. Climate change modelling is not precise, but we can all agree that the earth is getting warmer, which has huge implications for the planet. If anything, scientists have underestimated the scale of climate change. They have only just begun to investigate the consequences of the global carbon cycle—the way in which the planet handles  carbon, rather than simply the level of emissions that are produced by human activity. We have learned about the warming and drying of the Amazon basin, which means that one of the world's biggest and most important carbon sinks is being eroded. The trees in the Amazon basin are dying, which is releasing carbon into the atmosphere. At the same time, the permafrosts in North America, Asia and Europe are melting, which is also releasing carbon into the atmosphere. Because our oceans are getting warmer, they are unable to absorb and dissolve carbon as they have in past centuries. The most recent studies indicate that, even under business-as-usual conditions, we must revise the prediction for the increase in the planet's temperature by 2100 from 5° C to 8° C. We may all have underestimated the scale of this problem.

The one thing that I can guarantee the member is that the SNP has much more realistic and ambitious plans on the issue than his party will ever have. The medium-term impact in Scotland will not be as great as elsewhere in the world, but it will still be significant because our infrastructure could be wrecked by storm damage and flooding, as we have seen in recent times. Biodiversity will also be disturbed in Scotland. In Scotland, our sea temperatures have increased by 0.3° C over the past 100 years. That has huge implications for people who make their living from the sea. We can agree that human activity plays a crucial role in warming the earth's atmosphere and that it is accelerating that trend. Human activity could be the straw that breaks the camel's back. That is why it is so important that we take every measure possible to cut emissions from now on. Unfortunately, despite the modest progress—which we welcome—that has been made since this Government was established in 1999, we are left in the shade by almost every other country in the European Union. If Scotland is treated as a separate country, only four other countries out of the 25 member states of the EU have a worse record than Scotland on carbon emissions.

The Parliament's research service gave me the figures. When I saw the figures, I was disappointed by them, so they were checked three times. I assure the minister that, unfortunately, they are accurate. The key issue that faces the Parliament is how we mitigate and adapt to climate change. We all recognise that we have to change the way in which we live our lives and operate as a society. Scotland can make a difference. We must put our shoulder to the wheel internationally. The first priority must be to change energy generation from fossil fuels to renewables. The energy sector in Scotland is responsible for a third of emissions. A fifth of that energy is used for electricity. The emissions from electricity went up by 18 per cent in Scotland at a time when such emissions went down by 21 per cent in the whole of the UK. Over the past 10 or 12 years, the energy sector's emissions have increased by 7 per cent in Scotland, yet Scotland is the country with the biggest renewable energy potential in the whole of Europe. We have 25 per cent of Europe's wind energy resources, 25 per cent of Europe's tidal resources and 10 per cent of Europe's wave resources. This Government is presiding over a situation in which the country with the biggest renewable potential in the whole of Europe has one of the worst trends in emissions of greenhouse gases.

The key factor is to reduce Scotland's emissions, which we can do if we realise Scotland's renewables potential. The marine renewables sector is crying out for more support. There are calls for a test component platform, a combined wave and tidal tank and many other developments to get renewables projects in Scotland up and running. We need support from the Government to make those projects a reality. We must also stop London introducing charges for the grid that discriminate against Scottish renewables projects. We must  develop a hydrogen strategy for Scotland so that our vehicles can have clean fuels and we must develop the biomass sector, the solar sector and so on. We must also sort out the mess that has been created by the lack of strategic guidelines for wind farms throughout Scotland. That causes huge problems. In the recent debate on forestry, we heard that the planting of new forests in Scotland has declined over recent years. We must reverse that trend if we are going to tackle this issue. We must also attract more research and development to Scotland. We must ensure that action to mitigate climate change does not undermine economic growth in Scotland; it could provide a huge economic opportunity for Scotland if we can grasp our renewables potential and make progress on those other matters. The Scottish Executive is responsible for 25 per cent of gross domestic product in Scotland. Public sector expenditure in the whole of Scotland is responsible for 50 per cent of GDP. The Government can take a lead through procurement policies and changing the behaviour of its organisations and departments. It should take a lead so that the rest of Scotland can follow. We have to have a strategy to ensure that Scotland can adapt to climate change. Let us not forget that this country is already committed to 20 years of climate change. There ain't much that we can do about the next 20 years. We will feel the impact of the measures that we take now post-2025. It is our responsibility to ensure that we fulfil our obligations to future generations and protect our environment. As the minister's consultation document says, many of the powers that will enable Scotland to have an effective and meaningful climate change policy are reserved to the London Parliament; we have to get those powers up here so we can make a real difference. I urge the Parliament to back the SNP amendment. I move amendment S2M-2275.1, to leave out from "notes" to end and insert: "is disappointed to note that a comparison of our per capita greenhouse gas emissions with the United Kingdom and the other EU member states shows Scotland with the fourth highest level of emissions; urges the Executive to adopt ambitious targets in relation to its relevant devolved responsibilities and to take necessary steps to ensure Scotland is able to mitigate and adapt to inevitable climate change; recognises that greenhouse gas emissions can be reduced by a range of measures, including the acceleration of renewables projects, energy efficiency, increased forestry cover, promoting research and development of clean technologies, and greater promotion of public transport, but recognises that, in order to effectively tackle climate change, Scotland requires the powers enjoyed by independent countries, including powers over fiscal, energy, aviation and foreign policy."

Will the minister give way?

The minister talked about the possibility of expanding energy efficiency measures. As I understand it, the Government of Scotland may have the responsibility for promoting energy efficiency, but the regulation of energy efficiency is reserved to the London Government. Is that not the case?

In closing the debate for the SNP, I start by echoing the comments of Nicola Sturgeon, Tavish Scott and other members. We are debating an international disaster, but many communities and families in Scotland have experienced disasters over the past 48 hours. Our thoughts go out to families that have lost loved ones in that period. The debate has been excellent. It has been characterised by consensus and unity and has not been party political. The SNP is happy to reflect on the suggestions that other parties have made in the past few minutes. We have made every effort to produce a motion for the debate that attracts unity, and we will be happy to continue our efforts between now and decision time. Our business manager will certainly be happy to speak to business managers from the other parties.

I do not think that anyone wants the debate to be marred by such an argument. Our party has said that we are happy to speak to others before decision time at 5 o'clock. For many of us, boxing day 2004 and the few days after that will for ever be associated with the harrowing images that we witnessed on our television screens. We saw mountains of sea pushing aside everything before them, caught on digicams that were carried by holidaymakers in Thailand and other places. Those images will stay with us for many years to come. There were images of orphans who had lost their parents and other members of their families and of parents whose babies had been swept from their arms. We all witnessed the overall scale of the devastation. The event brought home to us that mankind will continue to be at the mercy of the natural environment despite all the technological and scientific advances that the human race has made in the past few centuries. The other lasting impression is that we now recognise more than ever before the gulf between the rich and the poor, and the gulf between wealthy and poverty-stricken societies. Even before the tsunami, Aceh had only one hospital and 49 per cent of the population had no access to clean water—other members have mentioned that. Some 40 per cent of the population had no access to health services. As Patricia Ferguson said, poorer communities throughout the world are much more vulnerable to such natural disasters. In a time in which there is war and corruption in many countries, the disaster brought home to all of us that there is an enormous reservoir of human compassion in the world. The public response in Scotland and the rest of the world has been extraordinary—indeed, many Governments have found themselves playing catch-up with respect to the public's generosity. We may never know why there has been such a response. Perhaps it is the result of the sheer scale of the disaster, or of 21 st century communications that mean that we can all witness exactly what is happening. However, the motives are irrelevant. The disaster could be a turning point in international aid and giving. The SNP's aims in the debate have been clear. We want to express sympathy and support for the communities in Asia that have been affected and to pay tribute to the many people in Scotland—to individuals and those in aid agencies and companies—who have done what they can to alleviate the suffering in Asia. Of course, the aim has also been to discuss how we can continue to give short-term support and save lives in the coming weeks and months through providing clean water, sanitation, medical care, shelter and so on. We all agree that we must turn our attention to  how Scots can best contribute to the long-term reconstruction of the communities that have been affected. There has been much talk about the contribution that fishing communities can make, and we welcome the task force that the Scottish Government has set up to help to achieve that. Fishing is one of the few economic lifelines in many vulnerable communities. We have all been shocked by the sight of large fishing boats being tossed about like toys on the main streets of communities in Asia. Many people from our fishing communities in Scotland are lining up to offer help. Stewart Stevenson has told me that one net maker has been in touch with him in the past 24 hours with an offer to supply nets. We must remember that a Sri Lankan fisherman has said on television that it would take him one year's work as a labourer simply to get the cash to replace the nets that he lost in the disaster. The British Geological Survey has been proactive. It will conduct a meeting and bring together its international counterparts to find out whether they can come up with ideas about early warning systems. In Scotland, there are many people behind the scenes who do not get publicity, but are doing what they can to help in the crisis. Many members have suggested that a good way forward is a one-stop shop for members of the public who want to offer materials and services. That is an important point. People know how to give cash, but some people want to volunteer services and materials and do not know how to do so. A one-stop shop would therefore be valuable. Part of the key to the long-term reconstruction of the communities in question and other communities elsewhere in the world has been referred to by many members, the SNP's motion and other motions. We must make poverty history. We have the financial resources, the drugs and the scientific knowledge to tackle poverty throughout the world. The challenge that all of us in Scotland and elsewhere face is harnessing those resources to tackle and eliminate poverty in a developing world. This year—2005—was going to be dominated by the international development agenda. It will be dominated by that agenda even more as a result of the added momentum that has arisen from the disaster on boxing day. The G8 summit will be hosted in Scotland, and poverty in Africa and other issues will be addressed. Such issues are high up on the agenda. In September, the UN special General Assembly will meet to review progress towards meeting the millennium development goals that were set in 2000. The aim is to halve the global population that lives in poverty by 2015. Many members have talked about trade liberalisation. The World Trade Organisation will meet in December. There has been plenty of talk  and hot air before, but we agree now that action is needed. There should be no more giddy rhetoric that ends up in sheer disappointment. Scotland is a small country, but it can play a role. We can add our voice to the cause and take practical steps. We welcome some of the steps that were outlined by the First Minister yesterday and that have been outlined by Patricia Ferguson today. Helping to create good government in many developing countries will lead to better education and health care and a better standard of living in them. Therefore, the Parliament and the Government have a responsibility to work in partnership with civic Scotland to reinforce current efforts and find out what more we can do in the coming period.

It is important that we do not mar the debate by getting into that argument. We have already said on the record that, before 5 o'clock, we will discuss with the other parties how we can resolve the issue. Yesterday, the aid agencies were in the Parliament to meet MSPs. A number of themes that emerged from the briefing have been echoed by members from every party. The aid agencies said that they do not want the disaster to distract our attention from other causes around the world—Michael Matheson and many other members mentioned those crises. Currently, there are 14 other major humanitarian crises in the world—in the Congo, Sudan and in other countries—that we cannot take our eyes off, and the aid agencies do not want aid to be diverted from existing aid budgets to the disaster. Aid must be over and above existing commitments. The message that we must send to the public is that although they have been extremely generous over the past week or two, that generosity must continue. Local people in the countries that are affected must be at the heart of the reconstruction. Many members, including Des McNulty and others, made that valid point, which was echoed by the aid agencies. Once this particular disaster leaves our headlines, we must continue to help out. Let us remember Afghanistan and how it left the radar screen when it was out of the headlines. Although it is difficult to imagine good coming out of the tremendous disaster that took place little over two weeks ago, 2005 can be a good year for the world. We have our own—albeit young—Parliament, and our own Government, and we have united around action that we can take in the  Scottish Parliament to ensure that 2005 is a good year. I urge members to support the SNP motion, or a motion that can unite us, at 5 o'clock.

The minister will appreciate that many people in Scotland want to contribute not just cash but services and materials to the appeals. Most people know how to contribute cash, but not many know how to contribute the other elements. Has the minister turned her attention to that matter? Is there any solution that will allow people to get such help to the right places?

I warmly welcome the First Minister's statement and echo his tributes and comments. I particularly welcome his comment that Scotland is in this for the long term. Has the First Minister had conversations with the aid agencies about establishing a one-stop shop that can be visited by members of the public who wish to offer services or materials and are not sure how to go about doing so? I also warmly welcome the First Minister's announcement that a fishing task force will be established next week, and his support for that. Will he support continuing discussions with the European Union to ensure that any decommissioned fishing vessels in Scotland or elsewhere in Europe are not scrapped but are made available to countries that are in need, if that is deemed appropriate?

Good girl.

The First Minister will be aware that at next week's fishing talks, Scotland's fishing communities will once again be at the mercy of the unworkable and failed common fisheries policy, which is why after First Minister's question time the Cod Crusaders will hand into the Parliament their biggest ever petition, in which 160,000 Scots call for Scotland to come out of the common fisheries policy. In relation to next week's talks—

Will the First Minister ask the Prime Minister to permit Ross Finnie to officially lead the UK delegation in Brussels? At least that would increase our chances of getting a good deal for Scotland. Given that we have led on education and health talks in the past and given that Scotland has 70 per cent of the UK fishing industry, why can we not lead on fishing?

There is no great disagreement between me and the member. Members have mentioned the stocks that are fished by Norway, Sweden, France, Germany and England. We are, of course, talking about the Scottish stocks in this debate. The two most crucial Scottish stocks for the white-fish and shellfish fleets are prawns and haddock, which are robust according to the scientists.

I accept that, but this is a Scottish debate.

Will the member give way?

Will Tavish Scott give way?

Will Tavish Scott give way?

Can the member explain how the CFP policy that was implemented in 2001, when the cod area was closed and the Scottish fleet was forced to capture the immature haddock stocks, was a pro-conservation policy? If the fleet had not voluntarily tied up in 2001, we would not have the bumper haddock stock that we have today.

The member said that power has been devolved under the CFP. Will he say how that has happened, because there is no evidence for it?

Those of us who represent fishing communities have watched painfully the misery that has been heaped upon Scotland's fishing communities over the past few years. Perhaps one of the most illustrative explanations of the impact that that has had came in answer to the recent parliamentary question that my colleague Rob Gibson asked Mr Finnie. Mr Finnie said that the reduction in the catching sector in Scotland since 1999, when the Government took over fishing, has been 22 per cent, and that the reduction in fish-processing related employment since 1999 has been a massive 54 per cent. That is a stark illustration of the impact that the policies have had on our fishing communities. Over the past two years, half of our white-fish fleet has been sent by the minister to scrapyards in Denmark. The fleet's time at sea has been cut in half over that period, while successive madcap policies emanating from Brussels have made life impossible for many of our fishermen and have been anti-conservation. Thousands of livelihoods throughout Scotland still depend on fishing, including livelihoods in the catching sector, the processing sector and the onshore sectors. Those people are anxiously awaiting the outcome of the 72 hours of horse-trading that they are in line for in the run-up to Christmas this year. For the first time ever, 25 states will get around the table at the fishing talks. Many of those states are landlocked, and have no fishermen and no real interest in the future of EU fishing policy. However, those countries have more say over the future of our western waters or the North sea than our fishing communities in Scotland have. Neither MSPs nor anyone else in Scotland believes that that is a sensible way to run the fishing industry. It is certainly not the right way to treat those who put their lives at risk at sea to bring food to our tables.

I would be amazed if the member could point to tax money that comes from those countries to help Scottish fishermen, given that our tax money helps to build new boats for other fleets while we scrap ours. The member should do some research into fishing policy. We certainly hope that the minister's optimism, which appears to be genuine, bears fruit and is justified, but we remember what happened last year. After last year's talks, the minister triumphantly waved a piece of paper that he said had secured a good deal for Scotland, but he had then to return twice to Brussels with his tail between his legs to renegotiate the deal that he  had secured because it had so many strings attached to it that the industry was tied in knots and was unable to take advantage of it. The deal did not give the industry the time or the space at sea to catch the increased quota that the minister claimed to have secured. This year, there must be no unintended consequences of the talks in Brussels. Indeed, it is payback time. Our industry deserves a reward for all the sacrifices that it has made in recent years but which have not been demanded of other fleets that fish for the same stocks in the same waters. Two conflicting pictures of the state of stocks in the North sea have been painted, so we should put on record the true picture. A picture of doom and gloom has emanated from several reports from so-called authorities. For example, the Downing Street strategy unit, which is Tony Blair's own private unit, not only filled its report with flaws—such as its count of the number of white-fish boats in Scotland—but proposed that the white-fish fleet be cut by another 13 per cent and that 30 per cent of the fleet be tied up for several years without compensation. That would kill the fleet stone dead, so the minister must reject that report. Another report that has dominated the headlines over the past couple of days is the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution's report, which is full of sweeping generalisations and out-of-date science. The minister must ensure that Europe is aware that the royal commission's report is full of flaws. It is disgraceful that the report's authors are in Brussels this week to persuade the European Commission to close 30 per cent of Scotland's seas. To play politics in that way with the livelihoods of so many Scots should be condemned by every party in Parliament. The real picture is actually quite rosy. We must rectify the public perception about fish stocks and give hope to the industry.

Robin Harper will no doubt contradict that.

Of course we must take the ICES evidence into account, but the ICES advice is rejected not only by the SNP but by the minister,  who said that he questions the figures and that they might be flawed. Even the European Commission has rejected the ICES advice after carrying out its own audit of it. The member should give accurate information so that the people of Scotland have the right perception of the situation in the North sea. The situation is that haddock stocks are at record levels. The staple white-fish stock for the Scots fleet is at a 30-year high, but only 120 Scottish boats are left in the North sea. All the other boats come from other countries. Prawn stocks are also robust. We need an increase in the prawn quota, given that the minister's scientists and others have proven that the fishery involves a low cod bycatch. The monkfish quota must also be increased dramatically. As we speak, Europe's ludicrous policy makes our fishermen off the west coast and in the North sea throw dead monkfish overboard, despite the fact that it is one of the most valuable species at this time of year—the run-up to Christmas. That is perhaps one of the biggest indictments of the common fisheries policy. The state of pelagic stocks is also good. We regret the cut in the mackerel catch; indeed, we cannot quite understand why that has happened. Many people in the pelagic sector think that it is a bit of a blow. Generally speaking, those extremely valuable stocks are healthy.

I simply point out to the minister that pelagic stocks are generally healthy, which is why there was a small cut in one quota and an increase in this year's herring quota. I appeal to the minister to ensure that any increase in quota that is secured at the forthcoming talks must go to active sea-going fishermen who make their livelihoods out of fishing the North sea and the waters off the west of Scotland, not to people on-shore who will not go to sea and will simply hold their quota.  As far as fishing management is concerned, all other fish in the North sea appear to be subservient to cod. In that respect, we welcome the rollover in the cod quota, because that is vital for a mixed fishery and to progress in decoupling cod management from other stocks. However, I must point out that some fishermen in the southern North sea who are using 80mm mesh and catching tons and tons of juvenile cod as a bycatch have not been hit by the same draconian measures that our fleet, which uses the biggest—120mm—mesh in the North sea, has been subject to. I hope that, when he winds up, the minister will explain why he has not tackled that issue. Indeed, when I spoke to his senior scientist this morning, he acknowledged that juvenile cod is caught as a bycatch in the southern North sea but could not explain why nothing had been done about it. Given that our fleet has been expected to take all the pain in the northern North sea, that situation is disgraceful. Although climate change and industrial fishing must be addressed, we have to put the issue of closed areas on the back burner. We cannot have the situation that we had last year. Because ministers wanted to go home early for Christmas, the names of some closed areas in the North sea were written on the back of an envelope and presented to them. The minister fell into that trap last year when he failed to speak to the fishermen who were nervously pacing the corridors outside Parliament and wondering what was going to happen to their livelihoods. He signed on the dotted line and presented those fishermen with an unjustifiable set of closed areas that had to be renegotiated. [ Interruption. ]

Closed areas lead to displacement at other points. We have to sit down with the industry, discuss various measures such as real-time closures and reach agreement. Finally, the minister, who is responsible for 70 per cent of the UK fishing industry, should lead the talks on behalf of the UK in two weeks' time. Too much is at risk for Scotland. He should officially lead that delegation—at the moment he is not even mentioned in the minutes that are produced after each council meeting. Three Belgian ministers and two Danish ministers are acknowledged and only the UK minister appears in the minutes in the list of attendees at the Council of Ministers. This country is western Europe's biggest fishing nation. The situation is a scandal and has to change. Scotland needs to have its own voice at the top table in order to secure a good deal for its fishing communities. I move amendment S2M-2129.2, to insert at end,  "; recognises the healthy abundance of many stocks vitally important to Scotland, including nephrops, monkfish and the record haddock stocks, and calls for a management regime that provides adequate fishing opportunities for the fleet in light of this encouraging situation; notes that the general state of stocks in Scottish waters demands proper examination in light of up-to-date science and the views of the fishing industry before any further drastic and unworkable management measures are foisted on the fleet; believes that recent events further illustrate the flaws in a Common Fisheries Policy in which many Scots who support sustainable fishing policies have lost faith, and therefore calls for control over our fishing grounds to be returned to Scotland."

Will the minister give way?

I thank the minister for taking both interventions. Is he aware that the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution will lobby the European Commission in Brussels this week on its flawed report? Will the minister take action to ensure that European officials are aware of the flaws in the report?

Will the minister explain how on earth the Baltic states that joined the EU recently managed to secure quotas for deep-sea species in waters that have traditionally been fished by Scottish vessels, despite the fact that our industry was assured that that would never happen?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is a good use of public resources for local authorities to compete in the private housing market for homes rather than build new local authority-owned properties to meet their obligations under homelessness legislation. (S2O-4305)

All members support the recent homelessness legislation that will ensure that homeless people have access to temporary accommodation. However, the public in Aberdeenshire have raised concerns because the council there has just spent £0.5 million on buying six houses in the private market, competing against local people. Does the minister accept that that shows that there is a council housing crisis? Surely it would be cheaper, more sensible and a better use of public funds for councils to build council housing to help people who need a roof over their head than to compete in a market in which housing is already in short supply.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to change the funding formula for health services in the Grampian area in the next three years. (S2O-4306)

The minister will know from a recent parliamentary answer that he gave me that two years ago Grampian received the third-worst funding settlement in Scotland per capita for health services, last year it received the second-worst funding settlement in Scotland and this year it received the worst funding settlement in Scotland. That is despite the fact that, although Grampian has perhaps the most efficient health board in the whole of Scotland, it has some of the longest waiting times in Scotland.

NHS Grampian could be about to run up a deficit of around £13 million. Does the minister accept that the current formula does not reflect need for patients in Grampian? Will he initiate a review to ensure that the formula used reflects need and takes into account the pressures that are experienced by medical staff and patients in Grampian?

The fact that, since 1999, we have discussed this important and perhaps uniquely Scottish industry several times in the chamber says a lot about the value of a Scottish Parliament. A couple of weeks ago, I read in the newspapers that eating oily fish gives people bigger brains. After listening to some of the speeches this morning, I certainly think that there is a case for putting more oily fish on the menu in the Parliament's restaurants. It must work; after all, Fergus Ewing said that he had salmon for his starter and main course last week, and everyone in the chamber will agree that Fergus has a pretty big brain.  We have reached consensus on other issues, particularly on the value of the aquaculture industry to Scotland. As the minister pointed out in his opening speech, it is worth half a billion pounds a year and accounts for 10,000 jobs in western and northern coastal communities. Moreover, we must not forget that it also secures jobs in processing factories in Annan, Fraserburgh, Shetland and other parts of the country. Jim Mather raised a very good point about concerns over the ownership of the industry. Although Scotland is a major aquaculture producer, Norway tends to own much of our industry. Similarly, although we are the biggest oil and gas producer in Europe, Norway owns more of our industry than we own of its industry. Government needs to learn some hard lessons on these matters. Members have also expressed a unanimous view about other industry pressures such as the lack of investment in recent years, current low prices and oversupply in the European Union. In that respect, the SNP welcomes the minister's announcement that he is pursuing further safeguards to ensure that there is a level playing field for Scottish producers in Europe. Other members have referred to the health benefits of eating oily fish and other aquaculture sector products. That said, we must ensure that we act as responsible politicians and I appeal to all MSPs to think twice before they make comments to the press that might fuel any media scaremongering. Such conduct does no one any favours. After all, the whole purpose of the FSA is to ensure that we receive independent advice on these matters. As a result, if we have any concerns about the health effects of Scottish food products, including farmed salmon, our first call should be to the FSA for its advice, not to the press.

The SNP's position on this matter is well documented. In any case, the system is being changed, so the parties that have questioned the regime have been vindicated. Given that Scotland has one of Europe's worst health records, we must promote healthy eating and farmed salmon has a key role to play in that respect. We must ensure that the Minister for Health and Community Care works with the rural development ministers to promote the many healthy Scottish food products. Indeed, fish products are top of the list. However, although we  are one of the world's most famous fish-producing nations, we eat almost the lowest amount of fish per head of population. That ironic and unhealthy situation must change, and the Executive must do more to promote the eating of fish. Debates on aquaculture are always characterised by arguments about the environmental situation, and quite rightly so, because certain genuine concerns have to be addressed. The SNP welcomes all the steps that the aquaculture industry has taken to do so, because it is important that all producers are sustainable and adhere to the strictest environmental standards. We also welcome the comments about the code of practice, which the industry is considering and which we hope will be introduced as soon as possible. Every producer should sign up to that code and it should be made clear if anyone does not do so. Products must be clearly labelled to ensure that people know about the environmental and welfare standards that producers must adhere to. The matter of sustainable fishmeal is crucial not only for the global situation, but for the Scottish commercial fishery and it must be addressed. Fish offal that can be used for feeding in the Scottish aquaculture industry will always be produced in Scotland, but we must ensure that wider industrial fishing is addressed because it damages Scotland's commercial fishery. I will consider two further issues. The first is regulation. Since 1999, the SNP has called for regulation to be streamlined so that the industry can be more competitive. We have waited six years for that and we are still waiting. It is a pity that the Government has dragged its heels and it is ridiculous that the industry must deal with 10 statutory bodies, 63 pieces of legislation and 43 EU directives. We need a one-stop shop. Let us not forget that time is money. If we get a one-stop shop, we can save time and make the industry more efficient. Secondly, the Crown Estate issue must be addressed. It is a throwback to a past age, which causes real costs and problems for the aquaculture industry. It is ridiculous that more has not been done about that before now. Shellfish cultivation is also important because it offers huge potential for the aquaculture industry. It is environmentally benign and it is sustainable and profitable—it should be encouraged. I have visited and spoken to shellfish farmers in Shetland and Skye. They, too, can sustain employment in our rural and coastal communities. Therefore, I support members' comments about promoting and protecting the interests of shellfish cultivation. Aquaculture has huge potential for Scotland, but it must be environmentally and economically sustainable, and it must have the Government's continuing support.

Is the member suggesting that if Lewis Macdonald had the powers to negotiate in Europe with the Norwegians and others he would be incapable of doing so?

I too congratulate Brian Monteith on his motion. I am sure that if the Labour members had known that he was going to make a decent speech for once in his life they would have turned up in huge numbers. Given Brian Monteith's opening remarks, I will take great pleasure in rubbing in the fact that I was one of the five members who were under the age of 30 when they were elected in 1999. It is fair to say that the Scots are not the most confident people in the world and perhaps encouraging people to debate is one way of boosting confidence. When we speak to people about being a politician, many say that they hate the thought of having to stand up and speak in public or debate in forums such as the Scottish Parliament. I realise that the inability to do so has not stopped some people getting elected—

That is right. However, we can all identify with that. The people of Scotland are not that confident. I remember hearing a presentation from a civil servant a few months ago about a project on Scottish confidence that the Executive had undertaken. I was surprised that the project has never really been aired in public, because the presentation, which was based on really deep research, was fascinating. It showed a European league table of young people and their level of confidence. Scots were pretty far down; incidentally, the Greeks topped the table with the most confident young people. We have a lot of work to do. It is important that we encourage people at as young an age as possible to express themselves and speak in public. My wife told me that in some nurseries, children are being encouraged to talk about their favourite toy, just to get them talking in front of other people. In primary 6, children are asked to choose a topic on which to conduct a debate in front of the class. We want to encourage those sorts of activities. We know that there are many advantages to encouraging debating in schools, many of which Brian Monteith outlined, such as increasing young people's confidence and self-esteem, enabling them to work as a team, improving their  communication and presentation skills and critical thinking and enabling them to understand the power of argument and both sides of an argument. It also serves the citizenship agenda that is coming into classrooms, as it gives young people the opportunity to research debate topics, learn about how their society and country works and learn about social and political issues. For those reasons, the English-Speaking Union's initiative in North Lanarkshire should be supported. If it is successful, I hope that it can be spread throughout the country. I understand that the minister is putting cash towards the project, which we welcome. I have written to Aberdeen City Council and Aberdeenshire Council to see whether they are interested in following that example. My parliamentary assistant, Mark McDonald, is a former president of the Scottish Students Debating Council and has a successful debating background. He went to a state school, but it is worth noting that only one of the five-member school team that will be representing Scotland in the world debating championships this year is from a state school and last year none of the team members was from a state school. I hope that the minister will address that important point. It is clear that there is a huge gap between the culture in the independent private schools and that in the state sector. If we are to boost the confidence of children throughout Scotland we will have to address that issue in the state sector. The question relates not only to the cultural issue, but to the funding issue. Many state schools do not have the cash to send teams to competitions elsewhere. Perhaps the minister could address that too. It is appropriate that we are debating debating in the chamber because the Parliament has a role to play on the issue. Since 1999, 24,000 children have visited the Scottish Parliament to watch the debates and take advantage of our education service. There are nearly 800,000 children in Scotland, so we have a long way to go before they have all visited us. However, it is in all our interests to get as many children as possible through our doors to let them see how things work. If they visit, I hope that they go and try debating in their towns and schools. We can help to boost people's confidence in Scotland.

Does the minister accept that one way in which we could divert young people from substance misuse is to expand the provision of youth facilities throughout Scotland? Does she accept that in some communities, in particular rural communities, there are often no such facilities? Should not the Scottish Executive conduct an audit of youth facilities in Scotland?

In his opening speech for the Labour Party, Scott Barrie said that, according to the partnership agreement, the coalition would speak to the supermarkets. The idea of a summit with the supermarkets, convened by the minister, seems to be a sensible way of doing that. Will the minister explain what communications he has had with the supermarkets about many of the issues on which there is consensus in the chamber? During the past few years, there seem to have been no formal meetings with the supermarkets in Scotland.

I am talking about formal, joint meetings.

Will the member give way?

I thank the member for taking an intervention. I clearly have something that Robin Harper does not have.  I remind Nora Radcliffe that she represents one of the most agriculture-dependent constituencies in not just Scotland but the whole of the UK and her constituents would welcome an investigation by the minister into what happens to every pound spent on groceries between the plough and the plate. Would she support such an investigation?

The member said that the Executive has pledged to work with the supermarkets. Can he provide us with information on what has happened to fulfil that pledge?

There is no doubt that the supermarkets, thanks to their ingenuity and chilling business acumen, have changed the way in which we shop, eat and think in this country. Their phenomenal  growth has seen the likes of Tesco reach the stage at which sales in the UK have reached £13 billion. Yesterday, we heard that the Government is investing £2.1 million to develop the marine energy sector in Scotland. That would not even pay the salary of Tesco's chief executive, which is nearly £3 million. In 2003, it was said that he received 255 times the average income of farmers in the United Kingdom. The supermarkets will be with us for the foreseeable future and consumers are voting with their feet, which is why supermarkets are so successful. People are work obsessed and impatient and they like convenience, which is why they use supermarkets. They like to be able to buy fresh fruit and DVDs round the clock. They can shop for whatever they like whenever they like. They can buy economy or luxury lines in-store or online. Consumers just want quality, safety, choice and low prices, and as far as they are concerned, they can have that from their supermarkets. However, all good things have a price. We have in-store bakeries, pharmacies and meat and fish counters, which have taken their toll on the high streets in our towns and villages throughout Scotland. That is why many high streets are littered with "To Let" signs and boarded-up windows. We are all aware of the recent study that said that every time a new supermarket opens, 276 jobs are lost locally. Supermarkets take advantage of global food production, which also has a cost, because they go for the cheapest rather than the closest source, which runs up food miles. That has environmental consequences. The crux of today's debate is the power of the big four supermarkets and their impact on Scotland's primary producers. As has been said, the big four control 75 per cent of grocery retail in the UK and Scotland. That leaves suppliers in a vulnerable situation, because they have fewer customers and more purchasing power is put in the hands of fewer supermarket giants. Many people in Scotland believe that that has resulted in some supermarkets abusing their power and being viewed as the private sector's bully-boys. The supermarkets have soaring profits and someone must pay to allow them to make those profits. At the top of the list are suppliers. Primary producers are at the bottom of the food chain—it is a David and Goliath situation. In 1999, the Rural Affairs Committee took evidence from an economist who told us that only 15p in every pound that is spent on groceries in Scotland goes to the farmer. We must investigate what happens between the plough and the plate. The SNP urges Ross Finnie to investigate the situation locally in  Scotland to find out where money goes and what role supermarkets and everyone else play in the food supply chain. We urge him to say that he will do that. Milk provides the most topical illustration of what is happening. I have read the executive summary of a Milk Development Council report that was published in August, which says: "Over the past ten years farmgate prices and farm margins have fallen, dairy processor margins have remained fairly constant, while retailer margins have increased across all products." The NFUS has said that a quarter of family farms in Scotland went under in the past five years, which has a knock-on impact on the rest of the rural economy and not just on farms. That is a problem. We must protect our primary producers, because we need food security in Scotland, as well as Europe and the rest of the world—that rarely comes up in debate. The current climate favours supermarkets and we must consider how we can tip the balance in favour of suppliers. The code of practice is one avenue for achieving that. The SNP is sympathetic to the sentiments in the Green party's motion and supports the campaign by the NFUS and others to strengthen the code and appoint an independent overseer. However, we must be realistic. Even if an independent overseer is appointed and people are given anonymity, people will not complain, because of the imbalance of power between supermarkets and suppliers. No matter what the circumstances are, supermarkets will always be able to track the source of a complaint. The danger that suppliers will be blackballed always exists, so we must be realistic. The Green party's motion is pretty naive, because it does not offer a wide range of solutions. If we want to empower suppliers and primary producers, we need Government help through public procurement, so that our suppliers do not have just a few customers but have diversified customers, which include the national health service and education institutions. We need a report from the minister on the extent to which public procurement assists local suppliers. A requirement to cut packaging would also incentivise the procurement of supplies from local sources. It is important that consumers have the information with which to make informed choices. Labelling is one way to achieve that. If the consumer is informed, they will make better choices. If they know that produce has better welfare standards and is local, they will be more likely to buy it. Providing that information is one way to help suppliers in Scotland.  Supermarkets must compete against one another not only on price—that is not as much of an issue as it used to be—but on welfare standards, freshness, traceability and ethically clean food. If they do that, Scotland will have a huge opportunity, because that will create a win-win situation for Scottish suppliers, which can tick the boxes for all those criteria. Not only Governments, but consumers, can put pressure on supermarkets. The debate about genetic modification meant that all the supermarkets took genetically modified foods off their shelves because of pressure from the public, and not just from the Government. We must consider vertical integration and expanding co-operatives. I am pleased that the minister mentioned that. We ask the minister to convene a summit of supermarkets in Scotland at which he will speak to them directly about all the issues that have been discussed in the debate. It is well within the minister's power to do that, so why does he not go ahead and do it? At least that would offer one way of discussing the issues with supermarket heads. In the past few years, I have pressed the minister in the Parliament to hold such meetings, but few have taken place. Now he has the opportunity to have them. The over-30-months scheme is affecting the beef sector in particular. The Food Standards Agency gave advice months ago that it is safe for such meat to re-enter the food chain, but we still wait for the scheme to be scrapped. One reason why the beef sector cannot increase its profitability is that it can give beef only to supermarkets. If we can reopen our overseas export markets, suppliers will be able to obtain a better price for their beef, which will allow them to increase their profitability. It is imperative that there is an end to the dithering and delay and that the minister ends the scheme as soon as possible.

If I were the minister, I would ask myself what the purpose of establishing the Food Standards Agency was. Its role is to give the Government independent advice. The Government has ignored and sat on that independent advice for the past 16 months. Surely it should listen to the Food Standards Agency, which it established to give it independent advice.  The Government can address many issues to help suppliers and our farmers in particular. It would help if the minister pulled his head out of the sand and started to be proactive to address the situation, which is a huge concern in rural Scotland. We must do something about it. We have some powers—it is a pity that we do not have more—and we must use them. I urge the minister to take on board and act on some of the proactive and productive ideas that arise from today's debate to help our farmers. I move amendment S2M-2056.1, to insert at end: "recognises that the behaviour of supermarkets can be influenced by pressure from informed consumers as well as the government; calls for a Scottish Executive investigation into each sector's share of the profits between the plough and plate and particularly the farmer's share of every pound spent on groceries; further calls on the Scottish Executive to convene a supermarkets' summit to discuss ongoing concerns; recognises that the more local produce on supermarket shelves and less "food miles" the better it is for the environment and costs; supports a public procurement policy that ensures where possible food is sourced locally; notes that the beef sector's profitability can be increased by scrapping the Over Thirty Months scheme in accordance with Food Standards Agency advice, and calls for this to happen."

Will the member give way?

The member attacked the nationalists.

Will the member give way?

The debate is valuable because, unlike the curmudgeons on the Tory seats, it points the way forward for Scotland. I cannot believe how grudging their amendment is: "insert at end 'but urges the Executive to ensure that such green jobs are not created at the expense of jobs in other sectors of the Scottish economy.'" That is from a party that has voted against a smoking ban, breastfeeding and land reform, and is not that keen on creating green jobs in Scotland. We must give an important message to the Tories, which is that if we do not create green jobs, every other country in the world will, and we will end up having to buy in their technologies.

Any person outside the chamber who reads the Tories' amendment will notice that it is not exactly a ringing endorsement of green jobs. The Tories should waken up to the pressures on Scotland in the 21 st century. The debate is not just about creating jobs, but about the environmental imperative that faces Scotland. For example, if Scotland was an independent country, only five other countries in the European Union would have a worse record for CO 2 emissions than Scotland. Of the 203 countries that the United Nations has measured for CO 2 emissions, only 22 countries have a worse record than Scotland. That is why the debate is so important.

I think two things about that. First, the minister made a good point about cutting CO 2 emissions by having direct routes, which is important not only for tourism and the Scottish economy, but for Scotland overall, because the public desire such routes. Secondly, we must invest in clean technologies, which would affect aviation fuels and other issues. I will come on to that in a few moments.

I have given way two or three times already. I will come back to Mr Ballard later. The issue of what is and is not a green job is important and is not merely an academic exercise.  However, we must also know how many green jobs there are in Scotland. When I ask Scottish Enterprise Grampian how many renewables jobs there are in Grampian—after all, we are trying to swap from being solely reliant on oil and gas to having a diversified economy that is reliant also on renewables for jobs—it cannot tell me. It is important to know how many green jobs there are in Scotland because, if our economic strategy is to be based around green jobs, we must know where we are starting from and we must be able to measure success in the coming years. I make the important point to the minister that we should measure how many green jobs we create in Scotland compared with how many we have just now. Many areas in which we can create green jobs have been outlined in contributions to the debate and include outdoor recreation, renewables, energy efficiency, waste management, the decommissioning of offshore installations and nuclear installations, transport and carbon sequestration. If we secure a lead over other countries in those areas we can create thousands of green jobs in this country. It is important that we debate where Government and the public sector should intervene to ensure that we get ahead of other countries. Public procurement has been mentioned and is important, but perhaps the renewables sector presents our biggest opportunity to become Europe's greenest country. It is important that the new technologies that will be developed in the coming years should be owned in Scotland. A disadvantage of the wind energy sector is that wind-turbine technology must be imported from other countries, such as Denmark and we have lost out on many manufacturing and high-value jobs. We must not let that happen in relation to Scotland's other opportunities. The marine energy sector comes near the top of that list of opportunities. Some of the leading academics in the field are based in Scotland and we must keep them here and ensure that they are not poached by other countries, particularly the United States or Spain, both of which offer more resources. We must also ensure that academic research is backed up and turned into commercial opportunities, which means that we must provide appropriate support. In answer to a parliamentary question, the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning was unable to tell me how much of that support we provide. We must address that and ensure that adequate research and development funds are available. A couple of weeks ago, I attended an oil company's presentation on the world's energy needs and learned that trillions of dollars will be spent on R and D in the energy sector in the next 20 years. That money will be  spent not in Scotland but elsewhere in the world. We must address that and ensure that R and D is funded and undertaken in Scotland. We heard about the biodiesel plant that Argent Energy Ltd will build in Motherwell, which represents a big step forward. If the project goes ahead it will be the first such plant in the United Kingdom. However, the technology for the plant is being imported from Austria. Aberdeenshire Council is considering heating all its public buildings by wood fuel but would have to import the technology to do that from other small countries in Europe. I mentioned the fact that we are importing wind technology from Denmark. To ensure that we capitalise on green jobs, we must address the gap in venture capital. I am told that entrepreneurs in the sector cannot secure the venture capital that they need to commercialise their projects and fund research. I want to know whether the minister has met the financial sector in Scotland to win its support, which is crucial if we want to get ahead of the game. Partly because we do not have the powers that we need in Scotland, we have been playing catch-up with other countries for far too long. It is time to stop playing catch-up and get ahead of the game.

If, for once, all parties represented in the chamber were to agree that  economic growth should be sustainable, why would that growth be a bad thing? Is the member suggesting that it is Green party policy that, every time new green jobs are created in Scotland, we should automatically close down another company, so that there is no growth in the economy overall?

I hope that many of those measures will lead to new green jobs in Scotland, but what is our starting point? How many green jobs are there in Scotland as of today? When I inquired of Scottish Enterprise Grampian, it could not tell me how many green jobs there were in Grampian.

The minister will be aware that the scientific advice on the white-fish stocks that are caught by the fleet, which was mentioned by Ted Brocklebank, states that the mortality of cod stocks has increased while the mortality of haddock stocks in the same waters has decreased. What conclusion has the minister reached on that advice? Do not the figures show that other factors and fleets other than the Scots fleet are influencing the state of cod stocks, and therefore that the Scots fleet should not bear any more of the pain?

Ask the audience!

This is the third bill on the water industry that has come before the Parliament since devolution six years ago. That speaks volumes about the huge task that faced the new Parliament in bringing Scotland's water infrastructure up to scratch and improving water quality after decades of neglect by Conservative and previous Labour Governments and local authorities. We welcome the debate. Because it is a debate on the water industry, it has provided an opportunity to see Des McNulty getting animated about the issue that is closest to his heart. We also welcome the committee's report. I have just joined the committee, so I missed out on the evidence-taking sessions, although I was there for the report stage. Many of the themes today are familiar and have figured in every water debate since 1999. The SNP supported the creation of Scottish Water because of the economies of scale, because we wanted to make the industry more efficient and because many customers in Scotland were carrying too much of a burden. The water industry has had a tough time. It has had to implement the new European Union directives and to modernise a crumbling water infrastructure. However, today's debate is about turning attention to how we can protect the industry from its latest challenge, which is the Competition Act 1998. Frances Curran, who spoke for the SSP, must have been speaking about a different bill. This bill is about protecting the industry from competition,  not about introducing competition to the supply of water to businesses and domestic customers. Frances Curran should read up on the background to debates before she participates. We have had debates about competition in the water industry before. When I was water spokesperson for my party a couple of years ago, I remember standing during many debates, taking on the minister on this subject, explaining that we could avoid having common carriage in the domestic and non-domestic sectors and avoid introducing competition to the domestic sector. Time and time again, the minister told me that I was talking rubbish and that I should sit down when we disagreed on those issues, so I was delighted when the Government dropped its proposals to introduce competition to the water industry; clearly ministers began to listen to the SNP's arguments.

The competition that the bill introduces is for the billing process; it is not for the supply of water, as the member said when she was speaking. She got that wrong. We welcome the fact that the bill is about protecting the Scottish industry. It is important that we support the bill so that we can have a statutory framework that will allow us to see off competition. We welcome the rejection of common carriage and the fact that competition will not be introduced to the domestic sector. There are dangers. We do not know to what extent competition will be introduced for the billing process. Mark Ruskell's point that we should tighten up regulation as much as possible so that we can chase off any competitors to Scottish Water on the retail side of the non-domestic sector was valid. That will depend on the retail element. The greater that element, the more attractive it might be to foreign interest to try to compete with Scottish Water for retail services.

If full competition were to be introduced throughout the water industry in Scotland, Scottish Water would be dwarfed by the multinationals that exist elsewhere in Europe and throughout the world, which would cherry pick aspects of the industry or take over the entire industry.  The bill will scrap the office of the water industry commissioner and I think that it is fair to say that no tears will be shed if that happens. The current situation lacks transparency, as many members said, and the WIC is far too remote. The current WIC constantly compares the Scottish industry with the industry south of the border, but the situations are not all that similar. It is unfair constantly to compare the performance of Scottish Water with that of water authorities south of the border. A message that has come through in the debate is that there must be clarity about the role of the customers' champion. Water customers need a strong champion. We welcome the beefing up of that role through water customer consultation panels, which will take responsibility for dealing with customers' complaints. However, we must ensure that the process is explained to customers, so that the panels can be true customers' champions. Perhaps the biggest issue that has been raised is the situation in relation to development constraints in Scotland. It is not good enough for the minister to continue to pass the buck for the fact that the matter was missed out in the consultation exercise on Q and S II to everyone else in Scotland. He was the Minister for Rural Affairs at the time and if anyone in Scotland was aware of the difficulties that development constraints would cause, in particular for rural communities, but also for urban communities, it is the minister. He should have put on his rural development hat and told himself to do something about the matter. Now, the minister takes the view that a way round the problem is to make developers responsible for paying for water and sewerage infrastructure to be installed. That might work in some situations in parts of the country, but it will by no means work throughout the country. We must consider social housing and the affordability of housing; we cannot afford to create a situation in which developers just pass on the cost of developing land through house prices, as that would do nothing to tackle the shortage of affordable housing in rural Scotland. Members, including Susan Deacon and Sarah Boyack, mentioned the proposals on odour nuisance, which are welcome. Like other members, the SNP supports the call for the code on odour control to be statutorily underpinned. Stage 2 will offer the Parliament the opportunity to make considerable improvements to the bill and we will seek to make such improvements. It is imperative that we ensure that customers get value for money from the water industry, that we ensure that we have the best water quality in Europe, and that we take the industry forward and keep it well within the public domain.

Will the member give way?

It is kind of the member to take us on a tour through the committee report. Will she address one of the biggest issues that has come to the fore during this debate and during previous debates on the water industry, which is the issue of development constraints? How do the Liberal Democrats intend to tackle that?

Will the minister give way?

I, too, congratulate Jeremy Purvis on securing the debate. It is important that our new Parliament should debate one of the few ethical issues that have been devolved to it and to Scotland. I view sympathetically the introduction of legislation to allow physician-assisted dying or voluntary euthanasia. This is a challenging issue for politicians, as we must put our party-political baggage to one side and address seriously the legal and moral complexities. As individuals, we must both keep to our strongly held views and do our best to reach a rational, considered view. Finally, we must pay heed to public opinion. Recent opinion polls indicate that there is growing support for a change in the law. In essence, this is a debate about the right to life. It is also a debate about the right to die, and the right to die with dignity. As Mike Rumbles said, it is a debate about supporting the principle of individuals' autonomy and freedom of choice. It boils down to whether someone who is terminally ill and whose physical and mental well-being is such that they have no quality of life, or prospect of that, may seek assistance to end their life because they are unable to do so themselves. As has been mentioned, it is legal in Scotland for someone to commit suicide but illegal for them to get help to end their life if they are unable to do so because of their illness. I remember reading the very powerful, moving article that BBC Radio Scotland's Derek Bateman wrote in July 2001, just two months after the death of his wife from cancer. In the headline, he said that he believed that he could perform no greater duty for his wife than to end her life. The article  outlined the heartache and difficulties that face the loved ones of people with terminal illnesses. Any legislation permitting physician-assisted suicide would have to be very tight. We would have to ensure that any request for assisted death was serious, rather than the result of a temporary emotional state, and that people were not making the request because they felt that they were a burden on their relations. We would also have to ensure that there was no let-up in the development of terminal care, to enable us to do our best to ease suffering for people with terminal illnesses. Legislation would offer protection to general practitioners and physicians, who sometimes have a conflict of duties. They see their role as being to prolong life, but sometimes that means prolonging suffering. They would have to be at the heart of developing any policy change. I have noticed that the police, increasingly, support a change in the law because they sometimes find themselves in the difficult position of having to consider the prosecution of doctors or the loved ones of the deceased. The issue has been addressed and legislated on in many countries throughout the world and we must learn lessons from what has happened in those countries. Yesterday we debated a smoking ban in Scotland. That debate was about saving lives, but today's debate reminds us that there may well be a case for introducing legislative change that, in very specific unfortunate circumstances, may mean helping people to end their life.

To ask the Scottish Executive what measures are being implemented to ensure the effective promotion of Scotland as a tourist destination in the Republic of Ireland. (S2O-3973)

I welcome the additional resources, but does the minister share my concern about the recent revelation that only a tiny fraction of the Irish people who visit the United Kingdom  visit Scotland? Is that not because, in the past, it was VisitBritain and not VisitScotland that took the lead for promoting Scotland in Ireland? Is that not a ridiculous situation, given our close historical and social ties with our closest neighbour and the results of a recent survey, which said that the most popular area of the UK for young Irish people is Scotland? Surely we should tap into that opportunity and ensure that VisitScotland, not VisitBritain, takes the lead.

To ask the First Minister what steps are being taken to ensure that communities neighbouring nuclear power plants are not adversely affected by contaminated land. (S2F-1169)

A growing number of Scots believe that the best way to protect their local communities is to say an unequivocal no to any more nuclear power plants in Scotland. Reference has been made to the situation at Hunterston A and the confusion over the level of contaminated land there. Does the First Minister share the alarm felt by the SNP when a British Nuclear Fuels plc spokesman said: "We don't know the extent of the contamination"? Given that confusion and the fact that the Parliament has its own health, communities and environment ministers, will the First Minister order his officials to carry out an urgent investigation into how the information on contamination is collected, measured and publicised? Will he order that investigation and make a report available as soon as possible?

One issue that many members have raised is the decline in new planting in recent years. Will the minister introduce any measures to reverse that decline?

I welcome the minister in his first debate as Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development. As I stand at my French sycamore desk in our spectacular new Parliament building, which features French and German oak throughout, the challenges that face the Scottish forestry industry are brought home to me. I am, however, glad that the spectacular chamber well is made from Scottish oak and that although not all the wood in the Parliament is Scottish, all the manufacturing was done in Musselburgh. This is the first debate in the new Parliament building on one of our key primary industries. Although the motion is entitled "Making the Most of Scotland's Forests" the Scottish National Party does not believe that Scotland is making the most of its forests—a point that I will allude to throughout my speech. The SNP hopes sincerely that we can bring forestry in from the cold and place it at the heart of our economic, environmental, health and energy policies. We all know that forestry can have economic, social and environmental benefits and we all accept nowadays that forests are multipurpose, but we must balance those objectives. We must ensure that the national forest for which the minister is responsible provides public benefits, which means economic as well as recreational and environmental benefits. The industry has a vibrant private sector, including farmers and crofters, that sustains 10,000 jobs directly and 40,000 jobs overall, but it faces short, medium and long-term challenges. As the minister said, timber production will double in the next 10 to 15 years. That will create opportunities and challenges. We must ensure that Scotland's processing capacity matches the increase in production and that markets are available so that the industry can stay profitable, because it must be profitable. That means finding new markets and developing new products. It is not right that, although Scotland is a largely rural country, the United Kingdom imports 80 per cent of its wood from the Baltic and Scandinavian states, which offer cheaper commodity wood products. A couple of weeks ago, the BBC's "Landward" programme featured forestry issues. The presenter highlighted the fact that, at present, every lorry load of timber that is produced in Scotland makes a loss. In the longer term, we must ensure that we have continuity of supply and quality wood products.  According to the Forestry Commission's figures on woodland grants, which I read this morning, new planting has decreased by 62 per cent in the past five years. If we are looking ahead to the next 30 or 40 years, we must address that issue now. We need a beyond-2020 strategy right away, not later. The Government has a target of ensuring that forestry cover in Scotland amounts to 20 per cent of our land mass by 2050, but I understand from the industry that that has become an aspiration rather than a firm commitment. We must ensure that it is a firm commitment and that the figure is a minimum—after all, 17 per cent of our landmass is already covered by forestry. Given that the European Union average is 36 per cent, we are once again playing catch-up with many other small countries in Europe. One big issue on which the minister can help is transport. I know that he has been working on that in the past few months. We must improve the transport infrastructure if timber, at the new production levels, is to get to the markets and be accessible. At present, 150,000 forestry lorry journeys are made every year on fragile rural roads. That situation is unacceptable and we must address it by establishing more railheads and piers. It is imperative that the Government gives maximum support to achieve that. To cut down further on transport, we must also ensure that more local processing facilities exist, which means creating local markets to allow those facilities to feed into them. The SNP supports the increase in community forests, particularly native woodlands, which have benefits for biodiversity and local wildlife as well as recreational benefits, particularly when they are located next to urban communities. Such woodlands bring the countryside to urban communities. They provide an example of how we can get other benefits, such as health benefits, from woodlands and forests. People can escape their stressful everyday lives and improve their physical and mental well-being. Our forests are increasingly used for sports such as mountain biking. The mountain bike world championships at Fort William have direct economic benefits for the local population, as does the development of Glentress forest near Peebles. Another demand that we can make on forests relates to environmental policy. I am glad that Ross Finnie is here. To play our part in tackling CO 2 emissions and given that trees store and recycle carbon, we should expand forest cover in Scotland. It is imperative that we put forestry at the heart of our environmental policy.

Very briefly.

I was so hoping for a brief intervention. I appreciate that there are many complex issues, but there is general agreement that expanding our forestry cover can help to tackle the problem of carbon dioxide emissions in Scotland and worldwide. Another demand we could make on our forestry resources that would make them more profitable is through energy policy. On biomass, we again find ourselves playing catch-up with other small countries. We should be ensuring that biomass is a new market for our forestry. The Government has to play its full role. There are no companies in Scotland that make wood pellets, although some are setting up to make woodchips so that local communities can use them for wood fuels. The Government put 23 action points into its 2000 strategy, but there was no mention of renewable energy contributing anything to forestry. That attitude has to change—there have been some more hopeful signs during the past few weeks that that will happen. Again we are playing catch-up with other countries throughout Europe. Timber-framed housing in Scotland is another way in which we can raise demand for wood and make more of a call on our forestry resources. It is sustainable. If we could set up communities where the new housing is timber framed and heated by biomass, those communities would be sustainable and that could lead to sustainability throughout Scotland. The Government should set an example by ensuring that public spending on buildings involves indigenous wood resources and biomass heating. That is the future for sustainability in Scotland. It would help to create new markets for our forestry sector and it would help it to thrive. We want to make Scotland's forests work for Scotland. For far too long we have been playing catch-up with other countries on renewable energy and in the forestry sector, which are interlinked. It is about time we went ahead of other countries and they were catching up with us. I move amendment S2M-1899.1, to insert at end  "; further believes that increased emphasis should be  placed on the principal economic concerns of the industry; calls on the Scottish Executive to introduce a specific target to promote the use of forestry for biomass; believes in the objective of a greater mix of public, community and private ownership of forestry, and urges ministers to take further steps to promote the use of timber in the construction industry."

The minister referred to the forecast increase in production over the next 15 years. What measures will the Government take in relation to its own buildings and the heating of those buildings to increase demand for that timber?

Many people in Scotland who believe that we need increased energy efficiency are calling for green heating targets and energy consumption figures for Scotland so that we know where we are starting from. The absence of such figures and targets seems to be a huge gulf in the Government's strategy. Does the Executive have any plans to produce them?

To ask the Scottish Executive when a further round of measures to improve the availability of national health service dental services will be announced. (S2O-3714)

I welcome the minister to her new portfolio. Her predecessor spent a lot of time engaging with the problems in NHS Grampian with NHS dental services. I draw to her attention the front page of The Press and Journal from 12 October, which carries the headline "Revealed: Scandal of our Dental Care Crisis", which refers to a dangerous new dimension to the problem. Because fewer parents register with local NHS dentists than used to be the case, they are not taking their children to the dentist and as a result the level of child dental decay is rising rapidly. A community dentist has said that one in three children who visit him have to have an extensive number of teeth removed. Will the minister investigate this worrying trend, which has arisen from the lack of NHS dentists, and bring forward urgent measures to address it?

I am pleased that, after having a Parliament for the past five years, we are debating this issue in some detail. It has taken a long time to get here, but the issue of drugs misuse is one of the biggest for the communities that we represent. When the Parliament met in Aberdeen a couple of years ago, I had a members' business debate on the subject, which many members attended to discuss the issues. I lodged the motion for that members' business debate because drugs misuse is such a huge problem in Grampian, the area that I represent in Parliament. There are 1,400 registered addicts in the city of Aberdeen alone. The local agency workers reckon that around three times as many people are also addicted to drugs but are not registered with local agencies. That represents approximately 3 per cent of the population aged 15 to 54 in the city of  Aberdeen. The issue is huge in Aberdeen and it is crawling into rural areas throughout Grampian. There has been a major problem with drug-related crime in Aberdeen in recent years—for example, the number of housebreakings is double the national average. The local police reckon that 80 per cent of the crime that is committed in the city and region is related to drugs. We also have the highest rate in Scotland of babies who are born addicted to drugs and one of the highest rates of drug-related deaths. A couple of years ago I had a private meeting—organised by a local charity—with 10 drug addicts. Many people from different backgrounds have become addicts in recent years in Grampian. The area has been targeted by dealers from south of the border because of its perceived wealth although, of course, it is not just wealthy people who become involved in drugs. I remember speaking to one woman who had lived in a leafy suburb of Aberdeen in a house that she owned with a car in the drive. The last time I saw that woman, she was begging on Union Street in the middle of Aberdeen. That brought home to me not only how huge the issue is, but the fact that the Parliament has to address it. The people whom I met told me that they were desperate to get off drugs and to get back to some kind of stability. However, when they applied to local agencies to get treatment—I accept that this was a couple of years ago and that things have improved since then—they were told that, in some cases, they would have to wait for one and a half to two years. I ask members to imagine someone who voluntarily wants to get off drugs going to his local drug agency and health board only to be told that while they will help, he has to come back in a year.

I welcome that, and I will be examining all the minister's announcements in the coming days to make sure that enough resources make their way to Grampian. Grampian—and elsewhere—needs a mix of treatment programmes. Residential places will suit some people and community service will suit  others. Parliament has to accept that there must be a mix of rehabilitation services. The voluntary sector has been mentioned and is crucial. Some rural areas of Grampian have access to organisations such as Grampian Addictions Problems Service, which is run by volunteers and which scrimps and scrapes from year to year. Local people give the organisation hand-outs such as free computers to try to keep it going. That organisation is working at the coalface with addicts and their families. Everyone who has spoken in this debate has acknowledged that families go through sheer hell as a result of having an addict in the family. I appeal to the minister to work with her colleagues and other ministers to ensure that the voluntary sector is given adequate and consistent funding. I have only one minute left and I will use it to talk about cocaine use. Much of the debate about rehabilitation services has centred on heroin, which has also been the target in Grampian. During the past four years, cocaine use in Aberdeen has increased by 600 per cent and the area is now being targeted by cocaine dealers. Cocaine users are a different type of client. They are often middle-class people with too much disposable income, but they now also have huge social problems. That situation requires a different response to that given to heroin users. Not enough research has been done into how we are to deliver rehabilitation services for cocaine users as well as heroin users and others. That is the next challenge on the horizon and I hope that the minister will turn her attention to it. On tackling drugs in prisons, there is a lack of sniffer dogs in the Scottish Prison Service. Craiginches inmates know that the sniffer dogs hardly ever visit. We need more sniffer dogs in the SPS and in HM Customs and Excise to help to keep drugs out of our prisons and to stop them coming into Scotland. The drug-dog unit has not yet been reinstated in Scotland. The unit is run from the north of England and hardly ever visits our ports in Scotland. That situation has to be addressed, as the Scottish Affairs Committee in Westminster requested about three years ago, but we are still waiting for the unit to be reinstated.

The Deputy First Minister's own party passed a motion at its conference calling for exclusive competence for fisheries to be removed from the constitution. Should he not also be voting against the constitution?

Parliamentary debates on international issues are usually very good. We have had a good debate today, with the exception of the contributions from the Conservatives and the Labour Party. I think that all members agree that the advent of the Scottish Parliament raised the nation's profile internationally, which is a good thing, and that the situation has improved during the past five years. However, the purpose of the debate is not to talk about what a great place Scotland is, as most Labour and Tory members have done, but to hold the Government to account for its record of promoting Scotland overseas during the past five years and to consider what more we can do with the Parliament's existing powers and what we could do if the Parliament had more powers.

I am just getting started. We have to use devolution to become a much more outward-looking country. The SNP certainly believes that it is not possible to be a Scottish nationalist without being a Scottish internationalist. The First Minister's opening comments about Scotland and the proposed European constitution demonstrate that he and his colleagues live in cloud-cuckoo-land. I have paid great attention to the debate on the constitution during the past few years. I remember the Executive saying that it would fight to ensure that the European Commission directly consults Scotland, but it failed to do so. I remember Henry McLeish, the former First Minister, saying that he would fight for Scotland to have access to the European Court of Justice, so that we could enforce subsidiarity through the courts, but that was not achieved either. Of course, the proposed EU constitution does not recognise Holyrood as a national Parliament, so we also missed out on measures to give the Parliaments of Europe a say in blocking unpopular proposals from Europe. When I was convener of the European and External Relations Committee, I met dozens of dignitaries from overseas, either when such people visited Scotland or when the committee made overseas visits. I met politicians, civil  servants, business people and others and I was struck by their enormous good will towards Scotland. Those people think that Scotland has an enormously positive image and would give their right arms for such an image for their countries. Our national icons, Scots emigrants over the years and our trade links with foreign countries have forged a positive image of Scotland throughout the world. However, the people whom I met are equally perplexed about why we do nothing to capitalise on Scotland's good image and the enormous good will that exists towards the country. Time and again, people told me that they never see or hear anything from Scotland. That is why we must question the Government's strategy. During the past five years, a range of low-key, low-level trade agreements with other countries have been signed—of course, such agreements are non-binding. Events have been held, such as Scotland in Sweden, Scotland in the Netherlands, and Scotland with Catalonia. They were worthy events, but when I lodged a parliamentary question to ask the former Minister for Finance and Public Services, Andy Kerr, what efforts are made to follow up such events, he replied: "no specific report, covering the areas where follow-up activity has taken place, is available."— [ Official Report , Written Answers ; 21 September 2004; S2W-10303.]

If no changes are made to the constitution, the SNP will vote against it. That is a long-standing policy. I want to return to the Government's international strategy. In May, EU enlargement took place, but the Government completely failed to respond to that. The Irish have set up direct air links with every one of the 10 accession states, but Scotland has no new links to any of the states. Flanders—a country of 6 million people—signed an official treaty with every one of the 10 accession states in the run-up to EU enlargement, but Scotland has signed no real agreements with any of those countries.

I heard the evidence to which the member refers, but I heard a different story, which is that the Flemish are deriving great benefits from those links and from their offices in the accession countries. Scotland has only 21  Scottish Development International offices, which have a narrow focus, but Flanders has 77 offices in 54 countries throughout the world. Those offices do not just have an economic role but promote Flanders in a range of areas. Scotland does not have such representation. We do, of course, have a first secretary in Washington. Again, that step forward was made under Henry McLeish—there have been no others until the First Minister's welcome announcement today. Even in Washington, with a first secretary and a secretary, we have a budget of only £250,000. We have to be part of the British embassy in Washington and yet the Northern Ireland bureau in Washington—which represents 1.5 million people compared with our 5 million—has its own premises, several members of staff and a budget that is many times the size of ours. I welcome the First Minister's announcement that we are to have a full-time official in China. Although that is a good step forward, he or she has a lot of work ahead of them. As the First Minister is going to China next week, I checked the website of the British embassy in Beijing this morning. One of the pages that acts as a gateway to the UK has a big picture of David Beckham in his England top, which gives an insight into the mindset at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office. It cannot be trusted to represent Scotland overseas, as it simply will not do that with the same enthusiasm as Scotland would do. As I have visited many British embassies, I can give the chamber a slight insight into the embassy mindset. When someone walks into the embassy, they see London broadsheets all over the reception area but no indication of a Scottish presence—we are simply not on the embassy radar screen. When I sit down with British embassy officials, they say, "Oh, you have a Scottish Parliament. What is it responsible for? We don't know anything about it; we never get briefings from Scotland." [ Interruption. ]

Either British embassy staff are very lazy or they are not being briefed by the Scottish Government. Whatever the reason, British embassies cannot be trusted to represent Scotland overseas. Even the British Council, which has thousands of employees throughout the world and which is supposed to promote Scotland, does not do so. That is despite the fact that it has an enormous budget and that education and culture are devolved matters. We have ministers who are responsible for those two areas and yet the British Council is accountable to Westminster and not to the Scottish Parliament. The situation is ludicrous.

Of course we have to gain more powers eventually, but we also have to use the powers that we have at the moment much more efficiently and ambitiously. Come back, Henry McLeish, all is forgiven. The First Minister has been appalling and the best message that we can send out internationally is to require the powers of a normal independent country.

If the member's theory is that anyone who wants constitutional change for Scotland has a chip on his shoulder, does that mean that he himself had a chip on his shoulder prior to 1999, before we had the Scottish Parliament?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Can the First Minister give the Parliament and Scotland evidence that he has secured actual decision-making powers for Scotland within the European policy-making network since he became First Minister? The regional advisory councils that he is boasting about do not have any decision-making powers as far as fisheries are concerned. No decision-making powers have been secured for negotiations over the constitution either.

In this important debate on renewable energy, it is good to see that political portfolios are also renewable. Since the Enterprise and Culture  Committee's report was published, we have had a new Deputy Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning, whom I welcome to his new role, and a new committee convener, Alex Neil, whom I also wish all the best. I pay tribute to the outgoing convener, Alasdair Morgan, who steered a hard-hitting report through the committee. Scotland has a massive opportunity for renewables. With our abundance of wind, we could provide 25 per cent of Europe's potential wind energy. We also have 10 per cent of Europe's potential wave energy and 25 per cent of Europe's potential tidal energy. Our massive forests could be used in delivering biomass energy and our agriculture industry could supply energy crops. Lo and behold, Scotland even has potential for producing solar energy. In 2004, however, we still find ourselves in the position such that our production of renewable electricity is below the European Union average. That is a great pity, given the huge potential of Scotland's environment. For CO 2 emissions, only five of the 26 European countries and only 22 of the 203 countries that were measured by the United Nations have a worse record than Scotland. There are huge job opportunities for Scotland. Tidal and wave energy present opportunities that should be grasped. We have lost out on many jobs in the wind energy sector, but there is still potential in the tidal and wave energy sectors. There is also enormous potential for Scotland in securing energy supplies, not just nationally but in communities throughout Scotland. We need to secure energy independence, as well as political independence.

Mr Gallie should read the report for himself—it is the subject of the debate—instead of asking me what its contents are. Of course we need to secure the figures to which he refers if we want to have a strategic policy in this area.

That is a fair point. However, in the context of the debate it is important to make clear that by tackling only electricity we will not reduce CO 2 emissions substantially. The report is excellent, but it concentrates on the production of electricity from renewables. If we are to make a real difference, Parliament must tackle the other huge areas, especially heat. It would be useful if the minister would today give a commitment to set targets for heat production, as well as electricity production, from renewables. We must also consider transport. The Executive's response to the committee's report was interesting because it highlighted three current schemes for transferring vehicles from current fuel use to clean technologies. Over the past couple of years, those three schemes have between them converted only 1,049 vehicles in Scotland to clean technologies and fuel efficiency. Given that there are 2.3 million vehicles in Scotland, at that rate it will take us about 2,500 years to tackle the transport issue here. A great deal more work needs to be done on that. Energy efficiency is a huge area. At question time, the minister said that £10 million has been allocated to it, but that is nowhere near enough if we are to take the issue seriously. Given that 80 per cent of the energy that is used in homes is for heat, we must invest much more cash in that. Perhaps the biggest indictment of the Government after five years in office is that despite rising energy prices in Scotland, despite our impending dependency on imports of energy, despite the freak weather conditions that remind us of the challenges of climate change—I notice that in today's news there are flood warnings throughout Scotland—despite the fact that we know that nuclear power stations in Scotland are coming to the end of their lives and despite the unstable international situation, which will have an impact on oil prices and so on, the exasperated Enterprise and Culture Committee has had to make a plea to ministers to produce "a comprehensive Scottish energy policy". That is an indictment of the Executive's track record over the first five years of devolution. The report contains a number of criticisms. In his opening speech, Mike Watson alluded to some of them, especially the emphasis in recent years on producing wind energy. All members agree that we must diversify and address issues such as the renewables obligation, which has tended to make wind the sole form of renewable generating  capacity. All members accept that onshore wind is important, especially when we hear that from Executive ministers, as was the case earlier. However, we must examine other sources, especially offshore wind production, which has huge potential for Scotland. We all welcome the recent announcement by Talisman Energy concerning the Beatrice field, which will allow us to transfer many skills from the onshore sector, especially in oil and gas, to the offshore sector. We must have public support throughout Scotland for onshore wind power production. The report points the way forward. We are almost begging ministers to introduce national guidance and a national framework. Today we heard that the minister is willing to steal an SNP policy that was proposed a couple of years ago and to set up an advisory forum. It is a great pity that he did not do so two years ago. However, it seems that there will be no action on that front for the next couple of years. We have to secure public support and address those issues. We also have to ensure that communities can see direct benefit from having wind turbines in their areas through access to the energy and to some of the revenues. Tidal and wave power has been mentioned, which has perhaps the greatest potential. The world expertise in that is based in Scotland, but I put it to the minister that we must ensure that the academic expertise that exists stays in Scotland. He must introduce measures to ensure that will be the case. This week the US announced another $28 million project to open a renewables laboratory in the States.

There is a real danger that our academics will be poached; we cannot allow that to happen. We must also ensure that assistance is provided to get projects out of the experimental stage. It is very difficult for projects to attract venture capital because of the risks that are imposed. I want to mention two final issues.

Finally, the minister must produce better regulations and ensure that our energy projects are not undermined. We have the potential in Scotland, but we need the policies to make that potential a reality.

The minister talks about Scotland's potential to become a "renewables powerhouse", but does he accept that the current proposals of the National Grid Company plc—which are being considered by Ofgem and which discriminate against Scottish renewable projects because of transmission charges—would pull the rug from under all our efforts to create a renewables industry in Scotland?

Does the minister acknowledge that the proposal to make fisheries an exclusive competence is one change that will be foisted on Scotland if the constitution goes ahead against the  will of the people of Scotland, particularly the minister's constituents in Shetland? Will the minister explain how he can reconcile support for that exclusive competence with the Executive's stated objective of giving more powers to the regional advisory councils that are going to be set up? Does he accept that that objective will be impossible to fulfil if the constitution goes through as it stands?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps have been taken to improve the level of drug rehabilitation services in prisons. (S2O-3440)

I am sure that the minister is aware that in many prisons, such as Craiginches prison in Aberdeen, the overwhelming majority of inmates test positive for drug misuse at reception. Often, they have been convicted of committing crimes to feed their drug habit. Therefore, if we want to cut crime in Scotland by up to 80 per cent, particularly in places such as Grampian, the best way to do so would be to break people's drug habits. However, the current level of services in our prisons—particularly in Craiginches—is woefully low. Will the minister give a commitment to pay close attention to the issue and to ensure that we get more resources out of the spending review to apply to the issue so that, for once, we can slash crime rates in Scotland?

Another source of energy is, of course, renewables. Renewables represent a massive green and economic opportunity for Scotland, which is very important to the minister's constituency of Shetland. Why is there no commitment on renewables in the minister's statement, given that investment in renewables is required?

I have to add my voice to Alasdair Morgan's complaint about the format of today's proceedings. This debate was preceded by a statement, after which we were allowed five minutes for clarification, during which time the minister was unable to answer one question. We have had barely a few minutes to digest the statement. I hope that we can come back to the topic in the very near future to have a proper debate on it. The constituencies of some of us are about 100 miles away from the Parliament and from the minister, Andy Kerr, but listening to the rosy picture of Scotland that he painted today I have to say that those constituencies might as well be light years away from him. The reality on the ground in the communities that we represent is that people complain every day about the impact on their communities of cuts in local government spending. We hear of local hospitals in which a quarter of the medical equipment is beyond its standard life and there is a desperate need for it to be replaced. That has been the situation over the past seven years of the new Labour Government. The voluntary sector is also scraping around for every penny that it can get. The picture in our communities is a far cry from the picture outlined by the minister in his statement. The key with the huge budget—compared to what we have had in past years—is to ensure that every pound makes a difference on the ground in our communities. After the first five years of devolution, the signs are not encouraging, because the Executive's record is appalling.  Since devolution, the Executive's budget has increased by about 50 per cent, yet the poverty figures that the Department for Work and Pensions put on its website a few days ago show that relative poverty among pensioners in Scotland has decreased only from 41 per cent to 39 per cent. When the Scottish Parliament was established, the figure for relative poverty among children in Scotland was 40 per cent, but last year—the most recent year for which figures are available—the figure was still 40 per cent. Again, during that period, the Scottish budget has increased by 50 per cent. That is an enormous increase and it does not take into account the increase that is expected over the next two to three years. It is clear that the Scottish Government is getting something seriously wrong. It has to be said that, over the same period, the Scottish economy has grown by only 8 per cent, whereas the United Kingdom economy has grown by 13 per cent. I would have thought that economic growth in Scotland would have been one of the Government's main objectives with its multibillion pound budget. Unlike Jeremy Purvis, I did not stay up all evening to craft the perfect speech to outline my party's political philosophy.

I see that Jeremy Purvis wants to intervene. Perhaps he just got up very early this morning. I have tried to respond to some of the issues that the minister raised in his statement, because many sectors in our communities are crying out for attention. The minister said that £1 billion would be invested in housing during the next three years and all members hope that that will make a real difference on the ground, particularly in rural communities. It has taken five years—seven years if we consider new Labour in the United Kingdom context—for ministers to wake up to the housing crisis in Scotland. At last they have done so. I appeal to the minister to ensure that the money is not simply transferred into the pockets of landowners, who charge a fortune for land. We must ensure that the minister's objective is to use that £1 billion to build lots of houses. We must help first-time buyers in cities as well as in rural areas. I would have expected the minister's statement to mention water infrastructure, which is a huge, pressing issue throughout Scotland, given the development constraints, but the issue was not mentioned. In fact, the minister had the cheek to say that the Executive has achieved record levels of investment in the water industry to meet European standards. As far as we are concerned, consumers, not the Government, are paying  through the nose to raise those standards. Capital assistance must be given to help to improve the water infrastructure throughout Scotland. I am not just talking about domestic customers; I refer to small businesses, too. Ministers must announce proposals on the rural economy during the next few days. I mention the fishing industry because last year—believe it or not—there was an underspend in the budget of £12 million in relation to the aid packages that had been announced for the industry. Apparently that money has disappeared into thin air. Since the Liberal Democrat-Labour coalition Government came to power in 1999, fishing employment at sea has been reduced by 27 per cent and fishing employment on shore has been reduced by 54 per cent, yet last year the minister managed to achieve an underspend of £12 million. [ Interruption .] I hope that ministers are listening, because I am trying to raise important issues. Ministers must bring back that investment in saving coastal communities. The minister's statement made no mention of the renewable energy industry, which perhaps offers the biggest potential for growing the economy in Scotland and tackling climate change. The industry has the potential to be a key driver in the Scottish economy in the years ahead. That appalling omission must be rectified, because millions of pounds will be have to be invested in the industry if we are to make the most of it. We must get ahead in the coming years and not be left behind, as we were in the development of the oil industry and other industries in Scotland. The minister said that £4 million would be invested in overseas promotion every year, which perhaps represents a small step forward. A few months ago, however, I visited a local council in Paris that has a budget of £2 million or £3 million for international aid alone. The Scottish Executive's ambitions are limited to £4 million per year for the promotion of Scotland overseas. We should be more ambitious about establishing a network overseas. For a few million pounds, the Flemish have 77 offices overseas to promote the Flemish economy. No such ambition is outlined in the minister's statement. Perhaps we will be able to bring real change to Scotland when we have a minister who can stand up and deliver a proper budget because he has all of Scotland's resources at his disposal and all the powers at his disposal that ministers of every normal country in the world enjoy.

I begin by congratulating Michael Matheson, our new front-bench spokesperson on sport and culture, on his classic opening speech. It is not just that Michael has been elevated to the SNP shadow Cabinet; sport and culture is now a Cabinet portfolio in its own right, which illustrates the importance that the SNP attaches to these issues. It is a pleasure to follow Sylvia Jackson's speech. I attended the University of Stirling. Back in those days, I played squash and five-a-side football several times a week at the sports facilities there.

Linda Fabiani says otherwise but, in those days, I had a slightly better physique than I have today, I must admit. Playing sport at Stirling was somewhat offset by the alcohol that I consumed at the Gannochy, which is, of course, the pub at the sports complex. That perfect combination at the university was absolute heaven. The debate covers many issues, including health and fitness. A few months ago, when I was travelling back up to Aberdeen by train, I found  myself sitting next to two public health professors from the universities in Aberdeen. We got on to the subject of obesity. They were frustrated by the fact that the whole political debate in Scotland at the time was about diet. That is still true to a certain degree today—rightly so—but they felt that the most important factor affecting people's health was a lack of physical exercise, and not simply diet. Lifestyle is responsible for Scotland's appalling health record, as well as what people eat. That is reflected in many ways. For example, when I took my family to the Centreparcs complex in Cumbria a few months ago, I was amazed to find a walk-in dryer in the swimming pool changing rooms. It is a rather pathetic illustration of the convenience society in which we now live that people do not even have to burn off a few calories drying themselves with a towel. We live in a remote-control society, which means that we do not have to get out of our seats to change television channels. Moreover, we have a different working environment in which people carry out less manual work and are not as physically active. I want to highlight some broader aspects where we might be able to change people's lifestyles, give them more access to sporting facilities and so on. On planning, when new housing estates are built nowadays, no attention is paid to giving people in those communities the ability to participate in sports or physical activity. For example, there is no obligation to provide sports facilities in new estates. We really must address that problem. I know of many housing estates in north-east Scotland that have neither postboxes nor leisure amenities for local people. Surely we must consider providing sports facilities in new estates so that people have access to the necessary infrastructure that will allow them to participate in physical activity. Moreover, with the advent of out-of-town shopping, people simply get in their cars to go to the shops. There is no incentive for them to do any physical activity because they do not have to walk anywhere. The other aspect of planning that I want to touch on is access to land, by which I mean not just the debate on walking in the countryside that was mentioned earlier, but the ability to purchase land. I am aware of many rural communities that cannot access land in order to build a village hall that the community can use for sporting activities such as badminton. We need some joined-up thinking in Government circles to ensure that those communities are able to get their hands on land and build communal facilities for sporting and other activities. Health service land, particularly in our cities, is being sold off for private housing developments that completely lack sports facilities. For example, the five-a-side pitches in Aberdeen are extremely popular and are always oversubscribed. However,  for some reason, it is difficult to get such pitches built, even though people in Aberdeen and other cities are desperate to use them. At the same time, publicly owned organisations are selling off land for private housing or other developments that do not take the public interest into account. Ministers must address some of these questions. When public land is sold off, is it possible to give priority to developments such as sports facilities that have a continuing public interest? Sylvia Jackson touched on some of the wider benefits of sporting activity for the Scottish population, such as health. I was interested to read in today's press that University of Glasgow researchers have discovered that people can recover from breast cancer operations a lot more quickly if they lead more active lives and participate in sport. Of course, we all know that Scotland has the worst health record in Europe and that we have to get people more active if we are to ensure that they become healthy. Finally, on infrastructure, although the system of cycle routes has expanded in many communities, that expansion has been a little bit bitty in some council areas where the cash to build new routes is not available. Ministers should attend to that issue. Furthermore, we should at least agree to the principle of making a solo bid for the European championships in 2012. That will allow us to sketch out the infrastructure that we will need in a few years' time if we are to be successful. Such an infrastructure would have enormous wider benefits for communities throughout Scotland and I urge the minister to say that he supports the principle of a solo bid. After all, making sport a bigger priority and giving it a lot more resources will mean a win-win situation for Scotland, and I encourage the minister to take the same attitude.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to make a solo bid to host the European championships in 2012. (S2O-3220)

I know that 2012 seems a long way away—Scotland will be independent by then and the minister may well be back on civvy street—but I am sure that Mr McAveety will agree that we have to start the ball rolling sooner rather than later. Is he willing to go on record saying that Scotland is perfectly capable of making a solo bid and that that should be the preferred option next time around? Will he reconsider his decision to keep confidential the report that was commissioned into the lessons learned from the failed 2008 bid? We should start the ball rolling so that we can try to win the huge economic and sporting benefits that could be secured for Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will review planning regulations to increase the ability of local communities to develop vacant properties or land. (S2O-3221)

Does the minister agree that more should be done to give urban and rural communities the ability and powers to access vacant land and properties that can be used to benefit the community? We all have examples in our constituencies of local communities that have spent years jumping through hoops to access such sites. Is that not now an important issue that the minister must address urgently? Will the minister use this opportunity to put my mind at ease, given that a local government source has told me that, as part of the current planning review, a change in compulsory purchase powers has been ruled out from behind the scenes?

Will the member take an intervention?

Given that this is my first opportunity to participate in a debate in our spectacular new building, I pay tribute to the many people who contributed to the building as well as to the staff who made sure that it was ready in time for us to convene a few days ago. It is a truly outstanding building. It feels like a Parliament and it looks like a Parliament, so the challenge that faces us all is to act like parliamentarians and to earn the trust and respect of the people who put us here. We have moved in and it is now time to move on. We have to change Scotland because that is what the people out there want. To do that, we will have to abandon the mediocrity that we have produced in great quantities over the past few years and replace it with a culture of ambition and radicalism. Huge challenges face this Parliament, many of which are key to today's debate. They include the deep-seated social problems in Scotland, the declining population—which has already been mentioned—the widening gap between the rich and the less well-off in our society and our record of low economic growth in comparison with the rest of the UK and many other countries. We have finally built a Parliament and we have finally got here, but the task that now faces us all is to build a nation; it is the biggest task that we face in the coming years. To do that, we need more powers; all parties must accept that. There is a huge gulf between the expectations of the people who elected us and what we can deliver with our lack of powers. The sooner we recognise that, the sooner we can move on as a nation. The well-worn phrase, "raising our game", must apply to all politicians in Parliament and not to one particular party. The First Minister was quick to send out that message when he launched his legislative programme, but it has to be a two-way process. As opposition parties, we have a duty to take on good ideas from the Executive and to support it. Likewise, ministers, the Government and the Government parties have to accept good ideas from the Opposition and to accept that they might have got it wrong sometimes. We have to adopt new strategies and attitudes to move on. I paid close attention to the debates that have been spurred by Wendy Alexander and others about fiscal federalism this week, although that is a bit of a red herring because one cannot have fiscal federalism alone—one has to have federalism in energy, trade, competition and many  other policies and not just in relation to taxation and the fiscal system. I will try to clear up the confusion that Wendy Alexander caused when she talked down to Parliament. We hear talk about talking down Scotland, but Wendy Alexander always seems to talk down to Parliament—she does not engage in debate or take interventions. We must bear it in mind that the only way we can have true financial independence is to be an independent nation state. The problem with federalism is that the rest of the UK does not want it, so we will not go down that route anyway. We could wait 20 years to try to persuade the rest of the UK to go for federalism, but Scotland cannot afford to wait that long. When one considers many of the small nations that are competitive and which have fiscal autonomy in their independent states, we see that they are much higher up the competitive index than is Scotland. According to the 2004 world competitive index, Denmark, Finland, Ireland and Sweden—which have true financial independence—are in the top 11 countries while Scotland, which does not, is down at number 36.

I will lead by example and show Wendy Alexander how to conduct a debate by accepting her intervention.

Under devolution, we will continue to fight for Scotland's best interests. If that means gaining more powers short of full independence, we will—of course—support such a move. The SNP is a progressive party and we want Parliament to have more powers so that we can change Scotland's economic and social fabric. We cannot do that with our existing powers. Because we do not have any genuine powers, we will continue to dance on the head of a pin and tinker around the edges of issues. We can publish as many glossy documents as we like; indeed, ministers—enterprise ministers in particular—are very efficient at bringing out such documents. However, they contain only the same words time and again. We need more powers to deliver some of the objectives that are outlined in those documents. It is important that Parliament punch its weight—and above its weight—on the international stage if we are to boost the Scottish economy. After all, many things that are happening overseas will impact on it. For example, proposed changes to regional funding could cost us hundreds of millions of pounds if we do not fight our corner. Moreover,  we must grasp the economic opportunities that have been presented by European Union enlargement. A couple of weeks ago, I spoke to some Irish people who told me that they have completed air links to all 10 accession states that joined the EU on 1 May. Scotland has only one such direct air link. Although tens of millions of people and huge economic opportunities are involved, we have done absolutely nothing to exploit the situation. Ireland of course has been proactive and is miles ahead of Scotland. Among the other federal or devolved Governments, the Flemish have started up 77 offices around the world to exploit economic opportunities for their country. Scotland, which has virtually the same economic powers as the Flemish Government, has only 21 overseas offices.

As I said, we must not only punch our weight, but punch above our weight. We all agree that we in Parliament have to change our attitudes. However, we also have to change Parliament's powers if we want to bring genuine change to Scotland.

Just like a schoolteacher.

Is the minister concerned by the front-page lead in today's edition of The Press and Journal , in which a local Labour member of Parliament says that the United Kingdom Government is about to centralise Government departments, which will lead to a loss of civil service jobs in Aberdeen? Will the minister acknowledge that that would be bad for Aberdeen and that it would run counter to the Scottish Government's policy? Has he made, or will he make, representations to the UK Government to save those jobs?

In the light of the Scottish Government's commitment to reducing obesity in Scotland and tackling our appalling health record, does the member agree that the establishment of facilities such as are outlined in the proposals will help to achieve those objectives in the city of Aberdeen and in the north-east generally?

To ask the First Minister whether he intends to introduce any new measures to promote Scotland overseas. (S2F-982)

I flag up to the First Minister that I warmly welcome his support for the saltire, which I know he will want to ensure flies as the flag at the new Holyrood building when we move in very soon. I ask the First Minister to acknowledge that, although it is important that we investigate how Scotland is perceived overseas, the key to  success is how we actively promote that image. Is he aware not only that we are missing out on the opportunities enjoyed by independent countries, but that many people feel that we are not punching our weight even as a devolved country? We must bear in mind the fact that the Flemish, for example, have 77 distinct offices overseas to promote themselves. Does the First Minister envision a greater presence for Scotland overseas, so that we can capitalise on the enormous good will that exists for Scotland internationally, as is identified in the Executive's research that was published this morning?

When the First Minister discusses the EU constitution with the Prime Minister, if he gets the opportunity to do so, will he ask the Prime Minister why it does not give Scotland the power to access the European Court of Justice to enforce subsidiarity and why there is no commitment by the European Commission to consult the Scottish Parliament?

I remember spending—as a member of the Rural Development Committee in the first session of Parliament—a lot of time trying to make sense of the Executive's budget figures. Five years on, we are slightly further forward. I welcome the Finance Committee's report and have attempted to read it—all 290 pages of it. Our committee reports are not always the most accessible and easy-to-understand publications that we produce for the people of Scotland. I am sure that many members in the chamber spent a great deal of time going through all 290 pages. Of course, simplification is the key not only to how the budget is distributed but to the determination of who gets what size of slice of the cake. In the past, Parliament has spent too much time debating how the cake is to be divvied up. We can change Scotland through legislation, but because Parliament does not have that much legislative power over the issues that relate to the budget, we spend a lot of time just talking about how the cake could be divvied up. The people of Scotland want to see a cut in waste. Although people see the Parliament's massive budget of £20 billion, they do not see a huge amount of change in their communities. People wonder why on earth the huge increases, about which they see and read announcements on television and in the newspapers, do not seem to make much difference on the ground. I agree with the theme that says that we must consider cutting waste and that we should not simply spend more and more money.

If we were in charge of the Scottish Executive, we would try to spend our budget and avoid a massive underspend. One of the report's recommendations is for more capital expenditure on housing. Although I support that recommendation, because I accept that we do not spend enough money on housing, we must treat the issue carefully. Affordable housing is a big issue in Parliament, but I mention it only briefly because other members want to speak on the subject. If we keep throwing more money at affordable housing, particularly in rural Scotland, all that will happen is that landowners will be made richer. In rural Scotland, affordable housing is all about the supply of land, so the value of land would increase and the people who own the land would become a bit richer. We have to examine other ways in which to address affordable housing; we must not think that all we have to do is to throw more money at it.

I visited Andrew Bradford back in 2000, which I am sure was long before David Davidson visited him. Landowners want to retain ownership of housing, so the way in which to address the issue of affordable housing is quite often to allow people to buy affordable housing and not simply to make available rented accommodation. I want to raise another issue that will impact on the Scottish budget, which is the future of regional funding. Just for a second, I will wear the hat of convener of the European and External Relations Committee. Last week, we published a devastating and fantastic report on the subject. At the moment, the UK Government in London is proposing to take back control of regional funding from Brussels. I do not believe that there is a great deal of support for that elsewhere in Europe; it is unlikely that it will happen in any case. Under the UK Government's proposals, Whitehall would take the cash back and would give a financial guarantee to Scotland to match any cash that Brussels would have given out. There is a lot of opposition in Scotland to the proposal because no UK Government can give that financial guarantee. It was unfortunate and regrettable that my committee was unable to get more information out of the Government in London, which refused to speak to us.

I totally agree, which is why it is so important that the money must continue to flow to Scotland. We are talking about funding that is worth £1 billion to Scotland between 2000 and 2006. Over the next year or two, hundreds of millions of pounds will be at risk unless we get our act together as a Parliament and ensure that we have control over those budgets. How the money is spent in Scotland is as important as how much is spent. At present, the Government uses many indicators for the public funding formulae, but those indicators do not always take account of need, which is important. Over the past five years, we have seen on-going reviews of the indicators that are used to distribute funding in our rural communities and that are used to distribute money in the health service under the Arbuthnott formula and so on. The funding formulae do not take account of need and so discriminate against many areas of Scotland. There is also the continuing issue of identifying need in our rural areas. At the moment, the funding formulae that are used throughout Scotland consider massive averages across large areas, which means that pockets of deprivation in our cities and rural areas tend to get missed. The Executive has to address that issue; I hope that the minister will address the point later in the debate. The final point that I want to make is that the biggest challenge that faces the Scottish Parliament is population decline in Scotland. It is the issue that will have the biggest impact on future budgets. If we do not address the issue, we will have a higher age profile in our rural areas and our local government will go bankrupt. We must address that: we have to get more people to move to Scotland and we have to ensure that the people who were born in Scotland stay in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive when it will announce the results of the review of police funding. (S2O-2646)

For the past few years, Grampian police and the local community have pinned their hopes on the review, which it was hoped might tackle the force's chronic underfunding. The area has some of the highest crime rates in Scotland, but it has the lowest level of police officers per head of population. The force also has extra responsibilities that other police forces do not have. Having been told to expect the results of the review last year, we were then told to expect them this spring, but the minister is still unable to give us a date. Will she take the situation seriously by telling the Parliament and the people of Grampian what extra evidence she  requires before she appreciates that the force is chronically underfunded?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it will take to encourage increased voter participation in elections. (S2O-2647)

Although all politicians in Scotland—and, indeed, throughout Europe—will want to reflect on the low turnout in last week's European elections, does the minister share my surprise that Alistair Darling, the Secretary of State for Transport and Scotland, raised the prospect of an all-postal ballot at the next Holyrood election? Was Mr Kerr consulted before the secretary of state made that announcement? Does he agree with the many members in all parties in this chamber that any such decision should be taken by the Scottish Parliament and not by London?

While holiday and second homes are important, does the minister accept that the underlying problem is the lack of homes? We should not be targeting holiday and second homes as the number 1 priority, however important they may be, because the main issue is that we have to make more land available so that more housing is built to address the shortage.

My only connection with St Andrews is that, as a teenager, I used to go to the caravan park on holiday. I therefore come to this debate as an outsider—I represent North East Scotland—but I very much welcome the fact that Iain Smith's motion gives us all an opportunity to talk about the rural housing crisis. There is a crisis in the lack of affordable housing. One of the biggest disappointments in the Executive's track record over the past five years is that we had a rural housing crisis back in 1999 and here we are in 2004 and the rural housing crisis has not improved, but has got much worse. We have not had any political leadership on this issue. It is about time that the Government got the bit between its teeth and came up with some radical proposals. The Parliament must also do more. My understanding is that no in-depth committee inquiry has been carried out into rural housing or affordable housing. Our committees should look into that. Far too many communities in rural Scotland spend years and years trying to get round the convoluted obstacles that prevent the building of more housing in those communities. We must get round these obstacles or demolish them—that is what political leadership is all about, but it has not been delivered during the past five years. I was a member of the Rural Development Committee for the four years of the first session of the Parliament. We undertook many inquiries into the obstacles to rural development and we visited communities and spoke to young people in Lochaber, in Galloway and upper Nithsdale and in Huntly in Aberdeenshire, which I represent. The young people would say, "The difficulty in this community is that local people like me cannot get a house. We have nowhere to live, so we will have to leave and find a job elsewhere, unless we want to sleep on a relative's floor or settee." That scandalous situation continues and we must do something about it. I am so frustrated when I speak to young people in our communities who cannot afford to live and work in their own communities, where they want to live and work. The age profile in Aberdeenshire, for example, is zooming upwards because people retire to Aberdeenshire and young people cannot afford to live there. Deeside has many problems that are  similar to those of north-east Fife. People are simply priced out of the local market and that is reflected throughout the country. Land reform legislation did not go nearly far enough in relation to access to land. We have to consider how people can get land. The situation could be resolved if more homes were built—it is as simple as that—but we need land on which to build them. Why is it that local authorities hardly ever use compulsory purchase orders? We should investigate that and make it easier to secure such orders. We should give communities the power to buy land on which to build housing for rent or ownership. We must remember that the debate is about owning accommodation as well as renting it; people should have the right to buy a house in their local communities and not just an opportunity to rent affordable housing, however important that is. Infrastructure has not been mentioned to any great extent, but it is crucially important. There is a chronic lack of infrastructure, which relates to the underfunding of Scottish Water, not just over the past few years but over decades, if not the past century or so. That must also be addressed. I received a letter from Scottish Water in March in response to a letter in which I asked the company why it is not doing more to put in place the infrastructure for affordable rural housing. Scottish Water told me that changes that the Executive made to the funding mechanism in the year 2001-02 took away the company's ability to put aside money for infrastructure for building houses in rural communities. Once again, the buck stops with the Executive, which made the situation worse in relation to the expansion of infrastructure for rural housing. Apparently that situation will not be addressed until after 2006. There is to be a review of planning, which is crucially important, but we must not forget design. Currently, strapped authorities such as Aberdeenshire Council are planning to bulk buy houses. If they get their hands on land, they will build as many houses as they can as close to each other as possible and as cheaply and quickly as possible. That makes the planning situation worse, because people object to the building of more ugly houses in the countryside. It is a chicken-and-egg situation; if we do not build nice quality housing people will object to plans to build more houses. We need political leadership from the Executive. We have waited five years for that.

Does the minister share my concern that, over the past two years, Albyn House—a designated place for people with alcohol problems in Aberdeen—has seen a 25 per cent increase in  first-time admissions? I found that out last week. What role does she see in future for such designated places? Will she give extra support to them so that binge drinkers are dealt with safely and given appropriate information to try to deal with the problem in the future?

Will the minister give way?

Allan Wilson made his customary attack on the SNP when he opened proceedings, but I will surprise him by saying that I very much welcome today's debate, which has been quite well attended by members from across the parties. It may be dark and Gothic here in the Hub, but the sun is shining outside and I am in a good mood, so I will not rise to the bait that he dangled in front of me. One thing that I will say is that we have waited five years for this debate. The fact that over half of our MSPs represent areas that have a coastline is a valuable asset because it means that many members take an interest in our marine environment. Today's debate is a much better use of our time than the two debates on beaches that we have had in the past few months. We have finally been given the opportunity to debate an important subject.  It is fair that many members referred to their constituencies, given the number of people in Scotland who, down the centuries and today, have been and are dependent on our marine environment. As a member for North East Scotland, I represent a constituency that includes Aberdeen, which is Europe's oil and gas capital. We have working harbours in Aberdeen, Dundee, Montrose and elsewhere. Up until recently—I doubt that this is still the case—the Buchan fishing ports were the biggest white-fish ports in the whole of Europe. We also have many other fishing communities and former fishing communities on our coastline. As several members mentioned, the marine environment is also being put to new uses, such as renewable energy and marine wildlife tourism, which is growing. That is why the marine environment will continue to be an important topic of debate. Other members highlighted the social value of the marine environment. As Scotland's national Parliament, we must remember that the marine environment has shaped Scotland's national identity to a great degree and has inspired much of our culture. Finally, we need to remember the marine environment's wider environmental importance, which is perhaps the crux of today's debate. As several members reminded us, Scotland's seas contain over 8,000 species of wildlife. That represents 50 per cent of our country's biodiversity. We should welcome the European legislation that has flowed from Brussels over the past 30 years. To a great degree, Europe has made successive Governments and the Scottish Parliament get their act together by providing leadership. As Alasdair Morgan pointed out, one of the impetuses behind that legislation has been to try to force society and the human race to change how we treat our seas and rivers. We must not use them as bins. In what was an eloquent speech, Alasdair Morgan highlighted the MOD's appalling track record on that. Key to any successful strategy for managing the marine environment is the level at which decisions are taken. That was a strong theme throughout many of the speeches that we heard today. We must take the right decisions at local, national, European and global level. The local level is very important, because—as many members have said—we must resolve local conflicts. That can be achieved by bringing stakeholders together. The SNP welcomes some of the initiatives that have been taken in the first five years of the Parliament's existence, particularly those relating to fisheries and areas such as aquaculture. We also welcome the current consultation on inshore fisheries.  The Parliament has a very important national role to play. First, we must address the complexity of the 85 acts and 13 bodies that regulate our marine environment. The current set-up is far too complex and confusing, and it is not efficient. As a national Parliament, we must address that. A marine act may be one way of doing so. Secondly, we must ensure that the Parliament has the powers that it needs to influence the marine environment. We must take appropriate powers from elsewhere in Europe and bring them to Scotland, so that we can take the appropriate decisions at this level. If those powers come to the Scottish Parliament, we can further devolve them to our local communities. Many members would support that. The theme of the common fisheries policy has cropped up, of course. I believe that all members think that it is ludicrous that in a large Europe of 25 states decisions about the future of our fishing communities—

I will take a brief intervention.

I inform the member that, all being well, the debate on fisheries will take place in the House of Commons on 16 July. Perhaps Conservative members in the House of Commons could sign the SNP motion to ensure that that happens—we would welcome the Tories' support. The common fisheries policy is an important issue. Subsidiarity—ensuring that the right decisions are taken at the right level—is another theme that has been raised. A few months ago, the Scottish Executive ministers and Labour and Liberal members of the Parliament said that the previous reform of the common fisheries policy was satisfactory, but even they have changed their position. They are now talking about having powerful regional management and regional bodies that have teeth. That is a change in policy. No doubt, it has something to do with the elections to the European Parliament, which are only a couple of weeks away.

I would love to take an intervention, but I cannot as I have only two minutes left. Members from all parties recognise that the common fisheries policy is not working—that is why it must be scrapped. I turn to the leaflet advertising the Government's consultation, which is entitled "Scotland's Seas: your chance to have your say" and indicates that the consultation process will run until July. Much of this debate has revolved around the themes that are outlined in the leaflet. The leaflet contains seven bullet points that indicate why the seas are so important to Scotland. The first relates to biodiversity, the second to "fishing-related jobs" and the third to the fact that we land so much fish in Scotland. We do not have enough power over the last two areas, because decisions about European fishing policy are taken in London. The fourth point states that our seas support "£21 billion of UK offshore oil and gas production". As we are all aware, decisions about that are also taken in London. The fifth point refers to the fact that there are "5.5 million passenger and 90 million tonnes of freight movements through Scottish ports". Ports legislation is also reserved to London, as are matters relating to the shipping that passes through Scottish waters. The sixth point refers to the fact that 90 per cent of UK-farmed fish, with a value of £700 million, comes from Scotland, but the Crown Estate Commission is also reserved to London. The final point deals with tourism, for which this Parliament has responsibility. Of the seven reasons that the seas are so important to Scotland, five relate to issues that are decided in the London Parliament, rather than in Scotland's Parliament. That is why the SNP takes trying to acquire powers for the Parliament so seriously—so that we can implement a proper strategy for protecting Scotland's marine environment. All that we require is leadership from the minister—for which we will continue to press—and for the Executive to join the SNP in seeking to acquire the necessary powers for the Parliament, so that we can make a real difference to protecting our marine environment.

I welcome Ted Brocklebank's comments on the Faroese, from whom Scotland has a lot to learn. Can he explain to the chamber and to the country why his party has suddenly taken an interest in the future of our fishing communities after 20-odd years? For 18 of those years, his party was in Government. Why does Michael Howard make fleeting visits to Scotland to say that fishing is his number 1 priority, when not once out of 130 questions to the Prime Minister at question time in the Commons has he mentioned fishing?

No one can question Allan Wilson's commitment to the environment, given that—no doubt in a bid to conserve mental energy and resources—he recycled much of his speech from the previous debate on Scotland's beaches, which took place a mere five months ago. It is unfortunate—I share concerns that were expressed by Rob Gibson and Mark Ruskell—that within five months we are debating the same subject again. The debate would have been 45 minutes longer had not there been a ministerial statement. Furthermore, we will debate Scotland's marine environment at the next plenary meeting of the Scottish Parliament, when we are up at the Hub, when many of the issues that we have discussed today will be touched on again.

I will explain my position to the minister. Every member of the Parliament should take a few moments to remember that this is the fifth anniversary of Scotland's going to the polls to elect Scotland's Parliament. When I was a candidate five years ago—this might also apply to other MSPs—I did not expect to come to Parliament to ignore some of the real pressing issues in Scotland, and instead debate Scotland's beaches. Of course Scotland's beaches are worthy and important: they are very special places, as Nora Radcliffe told us twice in her speech. However, we have debated them twice in five months; many other pressing issues—that we were elected five years ago and again last year to debate—are not being chosen for debate by the Executive, which controls 80 per cent of debating time in the chamber. Mark Ruskell mentioned climate change. That is a huge issue and the Executive should, of course, initiate debates on it. Climate change would have been a better subject for debate than Scotland's beaches. It took the European and External Relations Committee to initiate a debate on European enlargement, which is one of the biggest issues that currently faces Scotland. The SNP had to initiate a debate on the EU constitution—another huge issue.

The SNP picks subjects that are relevant to the people of Scotland and which the people of Scotland see as being priorities. I remind members that at the last Scottish Parliament elections less than 50 per cent of the people turned out to vote. If we want to engage the people of Scotland, perhaps we should pick subjects that are much more relevant to their priorities. Of course, the subject that we are debating is important. I am not arguing with that; rather, I am arguing with the fact that we are discussing the issue for the second time in five months. The Executive has been slammed the length and breadth of Scotland for debating subjects that do not necessarily reflect the priorities of the people of Scotland. One comment that the minister made with which I agree was about Montrose, which is in my region of North East Scotland. I welcome the progress that has been made on Montrose. I also welcome the fact that a new bathing water directive will come from Europe, because Europe is a main driver in trying to improve our environment, our beaches and our water quality, through the urban waste water directive, the bathing water directive and measures to reduce packaging and so on. Those are important pieces of legislation. We agree that we must change people's behaviour and members made valuable points about how we must do that. Many members have mentioned marine litter. The fishing industry is tackling the issue; it is trying to reduce the litter that it causes on our beaches. We know that much litter comes from shipping, but I remind Parliament that much of the litter that comes to our beaches is not necessarily from Scottish fishing vessels or Scottish ships, so there must be international co-operation. Perhaps when the minister is concluding the debate he could address that point interestingly and tell us what international co-operation exists in that regard. Adam Ingram made an important point—which one of the local councils in my area brought to my attention—on the impact that local government funding has on councils' ability to tackle the amount of rubbish on their beaches. Aberdeenshire Council in my region—apparently I am not allowed to call it my constituency, given the Presiding Officer's earlier comments—has just reinstated its programme for cleaning up beaches in the north-east of Scotland, after having had to abandon it in recent years because of local government funding cuts that were imposed by the Lib-Lab coalition that runs Scotland. The Executive has to take such matters into account when it is cutting councils' funding.  Finally, two or three members have mentioned the fact that many of the powers that would help us to improve the quality of our beaches and Scotland's seas are reserved. We do not have control over nuclear power and the non-biological particles that arrive on our beaches as a result of it; that matter is reserved. If we had control over it, we could perhaps do more to improve the quality of our beaches. Of course many shipping regulations are decided at Westminster, not by the Scottish Parliament. Robin Harper mentioned the prospect of oil pollution—a fear that the SNP shares—but we do not have control over shipping routes, which are also reserved to Westminster. If we are to have a single marine act—which we should have, given that 77 acts currently govern the marine environment—some of the reserved powers must be passed from London to Edinburgh so that we can have a comprehensive act that governs and improves the marine environment. I hope that it will be a few years before we have to debate the quality of Scotland's beaches again. We look forward to the debate in the next week or two on the marine environment, which will allow us to address some of the issues in a wider context.

The member makes an interesting point about the fishing industry and fishing litter on our beaches. She might welcome the many initiatives  that have been undertaken by the fishing industry in Scotland to reduce the problem. Does she accept that much of the fishing litter on our beaches comes from other fleets that fish the same parts of the North sea as our fleet?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it plans to assist first-time buyers looking to access the property market in their local area. (S2O-2258)

Does the minister accept that people are entitled to buy their own home, as well as to rent affordable houses, if that is what they want to do? Is she aware, from a survey carried out by the Council for the Single Homeless in Scotland, that there is a chronic shortfall in the Government's plans? Turning to first-time buyers, is the minister aware that, a couple of weeks ago, the Clydesdale Bank said that one in four first-time buyers has given up looking for properties because they simply cannot compete in the market, and that, at places such as Banchory in north-east Scotland, people recently camped out for several days to try to bid for fixed-price properties? Will the minister give us some new measures for urgently addressing the situation? Is there anything that she can do to stop people—usually millionaires—from bulk buying flats in new housing developments in city and town centres, which  freezes out local first-time buyers? Is there any way in which we can give those first-time buyers first option on the purchase of fixed-price new builds?

Will the member give way?

rose—

It is a bit rich of the minister to say that parties other than the SNP stand up for Scotland, given that the First Minister of Scotland telephoned the Foreign Secretary and told him not to give concessions to Scotland during negotiations over the draft treaty. George Lyon, who is a member of the minister's party, said that the minister would argue for powerful regional management. Will Mr Finnie, as the minister with responsibility for fishing in  Scotland, make the case between now and when the treaty is finalised and negotiate more powers for Scotland's fishing communities—albeit that he might describe that as "powerful regional management"?

Will the minister clarify whether he will negotiate powerful regional management for Scotland's fisheries during the months in the run-up to the referendum? He knows fine well—he has accepted this in the past—that that policy is not currently on the table. We may argue for the repatriation of fishing, but will he argue for powerful regional management?

Will the member give way?

Mike Watson is clutching at straws by saying that Europe cannot operate without a constitution. I remind him that Europe enlarges on Saturday—in a couple of days' time. No matter what happens with the constitution, we will have to survive for several years without one, yet the EU is not expected to collapse. I ask Mike Watson to say, on behalf of the Labour Party, what changes he is looking for between now and when the final treaty is published. We are talking about only a draft treaty—surely, no matter what it says, the Labour Party now accepts that. What changes does he want to see?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

Among the accession states, Poland is generally regarded as by far the most pro-Europe country in the whole of Europe, but the Poles stopped the EU constitution going through to secure concessions. Does that make them anti-Europe?

The member's comment about trying to persuade the people of East Lothian to support the constitution gets to the crux of the debate, which is the gulf between politicians such as John Home Robertson and the people of Scotland and Europe. Does that not show the importance of making the necessary changes to the proposed constitution so that people in Scotland will want to go out and vote yes?

Will the member give way?

Will Irene Oldfather give way?

Will Irene Oldfather give way?

I was not sure whether Phil Gallie was referring to scare stories or to scary Tories, but there are certainly many scary Tories in the chamber. Of course, there is also much scaremongering. The minister's opening speech was all about Scotland becoming isolationist if we did not have the new constitution and the disaster that that would be for Scotland's economy and for Scotland full stop. Members will remember that, when the constitution talks in Brussels stalled, Tony Blair said that it would not be the end of the world if we did not have a constitution—it would be no big deal. However, all the minister can do is scaremonger. It is a great pity that the Executive has resorted to that kind of strategy. We must destroy one myth by pointing out that the debate over the constitution is not a debate about being in or out of Europe. It is a debate about the draft constitution, which will be put to a UK referendum and over which Scotland will have a say.

That is why it is so important to ensure that the constitution is right before it is the subject of the referendum. That is why we must secure the appropriate changes. When that has happened, the new constitution will have the support of the people in Scotland and people elsewhere in Europe. The reason why we have a Scottish Parliament is that the priorities in Scotland are different from those in the rest of the UK. That means that our priorities for the EU constitution might be different from the priorities of the rest of the UK. We now have some influence to ensure that our priorities are reflected in the final version of the constitution. We must use that influence. Tony Blair now has more influence, because Europe knows that he must win and must get the British people behind his vote. We should exploit that situation and ensure that that influence is devolved down to Scotland and that we have a voice when the draft constitution is negotiated.

I will take a final intervention.

I wish Scotland was negotiating the constitution from a position of independence, because we would be able to secure concessions. Unfortunately, that is not the case, which is why we must plead with and put pressure on the UK to have Scottish priorities reflected in the draft constitution. That is what is before us in the next 18 months and that is what we should all concentrate our energy on. For Jack McConnell, Scotland's First Minister, to call the Foreign Secretary and plead with him not to give Scotland concessions is appalling. Can anyone imagine the presidents of Catalonia, the Basque Country or Flanders in Belgium calling their foreign ministers and saying, "Look, we are negotiating the constitution over the next few months, so for goodness' sake, whatever you do, make sure there are no concessions for us"? That would not happen, because the presidents of those countries defend their national interests in such situations. It is dreadful that Jack McConnell is putting narrow political interests before the interests of Scotland in those negotiations. Jack McConnell refuses even to talk about the issue and raise the debate. Two weeks ago, the Aberdeen Evening Express , which is a very good paper, invited all the political leaders in Scotland to give their views on the constitution and the referendum. Articles were submitted by John Swinney of the SNP, by David McLetchie of the Conservative party and by the Deputy First Minister and leader of the Liberal Democrats, Jim Wallace. However, as the Evening Express article stated: "First Minister Jack McConnell declined to comment as the issue concerns a power reserved to Westminster." Jack McConnell is a man who absolutely refuses to stand up for Scotland and even to talk about what will perhaps be the biggest political issue in this country in the next 18 months. That is a dreadful position for Scotland to be in. Scotland has its own red-line issues. Of course fishing is the red-line issue for the SNP, because the industry is so important to Scotland's national interest. George Foulkes of the Labour Party told The Herald on Monday: "I think there is an argument for repatriation of control over fisheries and that the SNP has a valid point". We welcome that change in UK Labour Party policy. Perhaps it will be reflected in Labour policy for Scotland, where fishing is a national interest and is 20 times more important than it is in the UK as a whole.

I am sorry, but I have to move on.  I tell the Minister for Finance and Public Services, Andy Kerr, that the constitution was created to meet three objectives. I know that members on the coalition benches have a short attention span, but I ask him to take a few moments to have a read of the constitution. The first objective is to bring stability to Europe; the second objective is to ensure that the European Union is workable after enlargement; and the third and most important objective is to make Europe closer to the people. If Andy Kerr looks at the constitution, he will find that it does not meet many of the Executive's objectives. I want to know what Scottish ministers will do between now and the publication of the final version of the constitution to secure those objectives. I shall give some examples. First, the Executive makes great play of the new commitment to subsidiarity in Europe. Subsidiarity is fantastic, we are told. It will give the Scottish Parliament a say, a role and a new influence that we did not have before. Nonsense! The constitution does not give the Parliament the power, which the former First Minister, Henry McLeish, requested, to have direct access to the European Court of Justice to enforce subsidiarity. So far, ministers have lost that battle. Secondly, ministers have called for the Parliament to be directly consulted by the European Commission. So far, that battle has been lost and we are no further forward. Thirdly, there is talk of new powers for national Parliaments. National Parliaments have not even been given a red card. They get six weeks' notice of legislation and, if a third of them say to Brussels that they do not want something, Europe just has to give a reason why it will proceed anyway—and by the way, Scotland's Parliament is not recognised as a national Parliament. We need a Scottish Executive and a First Minister who will not squeak like a mouse but roar like a lion for Scotland and secure our national interests between now and the publication of the final version of the constitution.

I have two questions to ask. First, does Robin Harper acknowledge that not £1 has been given to Scottish skippers, through the common fisheries policy, to build new vessels? The money has gone to other states; that  is the problem with the common fisheries policy. Secondly, two months ago, Scotland's most eminent scientists—the Royal Society of Edinburgh—called for the EU's exclusive competence in marine conservation to be deleted from the draft constitution. Does Robin Harper agree with those eminent fisheries scientists that that exclusive competency should be deleted?

Will the member give way?]

Can the Conservatives clarify whether, should Scotland be able as part of the negotiations over the draft constitution, to negotiate the scrapping of the CFP, the Conservative party will change its position and vote for the draft constitution?

The debate is about the draft constitution; we do not have the final document. Will the minister tell us and Scotland what changes his  Executive will be arguing for between now and when the final constitution is tabled? Tony Blair's hand has been strengthened, as he can get concessions from Europe and will have a referendum, which in turn strengthens Scotland's Parliament's influence, so how is the Executive using that new influence to benefit Scotland?

Will the First Minister outline what he believes are the red-line issues for Scotland, given the on-going negotiations over the draft constitution, especially as there are major concerns in Scotland about the references to fishing and energy? Does he agree with many in the chamber that the referendum strengthens Scotland's hand because Tony Blair will require the support of Scotland to get a yes vote?

On tapping into the good will towards Scotland in the accession states, is the minister considering increasing the presence of any Scottish agencies or Government departments in those countries?

It gives me great pleasure to open this debate on behalf of the European and External Relations Committee in my role as convener. On 1 May, the European Union will fundamentally change when its membership increases from 15 to 25 states and its population increases to 450 million citizens. The centre of Europe will move east and, for the first time, parts of the former Soviet Union will be within the European Union's borders. I know that the Parliament and Scotland as a whole look forward to welcoming Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Slovenia, Hungary, Malta and Cyprus into the European fold. Of course, that is not the end of the story, because Bulgaria and Romania are online to join the EU, which it is hoped will happen by 2007. A decision will be taken in December on whether Turkey's application to join should proceed, if its human rights record has improved. Croatia has also applied to join the EU. The European and External Relations Committee is keen to debate the issue because we are just a few days away from EU enlargement, which is an historic event, and because we want the Parliament to discuss the opportunities and challenges that EU enlargement presents for Scotland. The wave of entrants to the EU on 1 May is different from previous waves. It is momentous for two reasons. First, we will welcome former communist states from eastern and central Europe into the EU. They will be able finally to put the dark years of dictatorship behind them. Of course, they are still struggling to make the transition from communism to capitalism and to meet the conditions of EU accession. The states that are joining the EU are also different because they are poorer than those of previous waves of enlargement. Although 100 million extra citizens will join the EU, enlargement will add only 4.5 per cent to the EU's gross domestic product. After experiencing war and turmoil in much of the 20 th century, those countries look for stability and prosperity as part of the EU in the 21 st century. The EU was formed in 1957 to rebuild  continental Europe after the second world war and it is incredible to think that, in fewer than 10 days from today, some of the countries that were most affected by that war will join the EU nearly 50 years after its formation. Scotland has many historical, social and economic links with the countries that are joining the EU. The biggest new member will be Poland, whose population of 38 million is virtually the same as the total of the other accession states' populations. We have a long historical link with Poland. Few Scots are aware that in the early 17 th century Poland was the biggest recipient of Scots emigrants, when many pedlars and merchants emigrated to Gdańsk, as well as to Kraków and Warsaw. Scotland's influence lives on today, because many Polish place names relate to Scotland and many Scots names that have been polonised can be seen in Polish phone books. Those links continue, as Scotland has a Polish community. In the second world war, the Polish army was stationed here and the Scots were protected by 70,000 Polish soldiers. After the war, 100,000 Poles decided to stay on. Scotland also has links with other states, in particular the Baltic states, with which we know that the tartan army has built many connections. Many fans have gone to those states to watch the football and not returned. That was not just because of the drink; those people have built families in those states. The accession states are on the brink of modernisation, which raises two issues for Scotland. First, Scotland will have more economic competition from the accession states and, secondly, that modernisation will offer business opportunities for Scottish businesses. The accession states will spend billions of euros in the coming years on modernising their transport and information technology infrastructure. They are spending hundreds of millions of euros on adapting to EU legislation such as environmental legislation. Last week, I was lucky enough to join colleagues from other parties—Mike Pringle and Des McNulty—on a three-day visit to Poland, at the Polish Government's invitation, which perhaps shows the links between Poland and Scotland. We visited many ministers, members of Parliament and organisations that are based in that country to discuss the impact of EU enlargement on Poland. We visited the British-Polish Chamber of Commerce, which told us that, unfortunately, only one of its members is a Scottish company and that only one Scottish company will attend a conference that it has organised to take place in the next few weeks to discuss potential business  opportunities for the United Kingdom. Clearly, that is not good enough. Some of the English-language publications in Warsaw say that Spanish, United States, Danish and German companies are lining up to invest in Poland, but no mention is made of any Scottish companies. Of course, Scottish companies are investing in Poland, but they are few and far between and the emphasis seems to be on other countries. It is clear that there is a challenge in raising awareness among Scottish businesses about the opportunities that are available in Poland and the other accession countries. There are some general challenges for Scotland. First, there is the threat of the outsourcing of jobs. In Poland, the average wage is £315 a month, which is 13 per cent of the German average, and the minimum wage in Poland is £1.25 an hour, compared with £4.50 an hour in this country. We must be aware of the danger that, as has been discussed in business circles, jobs will be outsourced from Scotland to the accession countries. The accession states will enjoy a geographical advantage over us, as they are more accessible for European markets. The centre of Europe is shifting east and Scotland is on the north-west periphery. That might have implications for direct investment into Europe, which, in past years, might otherwise have come to Scotland. The report by Bradley Dunbar Associates Ltd that was commissioned by Scottish Enterprise indicated that one of the Baltic states—Latvia—has one of the best credit ratings in Europe. Estonia is one of the most business-friendly countries in Europe and is more business friendly than many of the current EU members. It is also clear that the accession states will receive the lion's share of regional funding to help to build up their infrastructures. Scotland will have to compete against those countries, which are modernising their infrastructures and have rapidly growing economies and low inflation in many cases.

There are many lessons for Scotland to learn from the accession states and I hope that the ministers will tell us during the debate what we are doing to learn such lessons. There are many opportunities for Scottish companies. R B Farquhar Ltd, which has one factory in Scotland—in Huntly in my constituency of North East Scotland—has just opened its second factory. It chose the Czech Republic as a  location for its new factory in order to access European markets. The Poles told us that €70 billion are ready in private accounts in Poland for investment. People are waiting for confidence to invest that cash in new businesses and contracts. The Poles will receive €11.6 billion from the EU over the next three years. Again, contracts will be up for grabs. Another advantage for Scotland is that English is increasingly the business language for the EU. Scotland is well poised to take advantage of that situation. Moreover, as we discovered during our visit to Poland, there is enormous good will towards Scotland. That good will exists not just in Poland. Last summer, I was lucky enough to visit the Czech Republic and Hungary, where the good will towards Scotland is palpable. We must take advantage of that good will to build links, particularly economic and cultural links. Some people think that the fresh talent initiative may benefit from accession countries entering the EU. Of course, we want to explore that, but the message that we received in Poland was that the level of migration from those countries that is being predicted in the current EU member states is exaggerated. That is a cause for concern and a matter that the Executive and others will have to take on board. The issue is not only about Scotland getting advantages from the accession countries; we must also offer something back to them. What can Scotland offer them? First, many partnerships exist. We have a lot of experience of using regional funding in this country and we must share that experience with the accession countries. I know that partnerships between the Czech Republic and Scotland exist to achieve that. Secondly, Scotland is well placed to help to build civic society in the accession states. Those states have suffered from decades of communism and are just beginning to build their civic societies. Scotland's voluntary sector should be recruited by the Executive and the Parliament to play a role in achieving that. Finally, the Parliament can make a specific contribution to the accession countries. Those countries are still trying to adopt and develop a democratic culture. The Parliament is new—it is only five years old—and we have learned from tough experiences over the past few years. I hope that we can share those experiences with the accession countries in future years. What action is needed from the Scottish Executive? It would be helpful if the Executive could produce a strategy that outlines how we are making the most of opportunities in the accession states and recognising the challenges. The  committee welcomes the reports that it has received so far. Direct air links are crucial for building economic links with the accession states. Currently, there is no direct air link from Scotland to Poland, which is the biggest accession state by far. The link between the Czech Republic and Scotland has been a phenomenal success. I hope that we can learn from that and build on those links. We must investigate new air links with the accession countries. In addition, we should encourage our towns and cities to twin with their counterparts in the accession countries and build more links in that way as well. Enlargement will produce political challenges for Scotland. It will raise the issue of how an EU of 25 or 27 members will work efficiently. Given that the EU constitution is back in the news, that will be a big question in the coming months, because every member of this Parliament will need to address how Scotland's voice can be heard. The centre of Europe will shift further east and will be further away from Scotland than ever before, so the question facing this Parliament is how we can continue to play a role at the heart of Europe. On 1 May, enlargement day will be celebrated throughout Europe. I congratulate the City of Edinburgh Council on organising several months of celebrations. The Parliament should celebrate enlargement, too. Scotland is an old European country, so let us welcome with open arms the other European countries that will join the EU and let us prepare for enlargement as well. I move, That the Parliament welcomes the enlargement of the European Union that will see 10 new member states join on 1 May 2004; recognises that this provides both challenges and opportunities to Scotland, and encourages the Scottish Executive to promote actively the benefits of enlargement across Scotland.

I thank the minister for his helpful statement. I also welcome at long last the first breakthrough since the disastrous fishing deal that was signed more than three months ago. I particularly welcome the spectacular climbdown by ministers who were persuaded by the fishing communities to go and renegotiate a deal that ministers originally labelled a triumph for Scotland. Today, our fishing communities have taken a step forward, but I hope that the minister accepts that there is a long way to go. I have three specific questions for him. First, what will happen between now and when the proposals make their way onto the statute book, which I understand might not be until mid to late April? Will the fleet that is currently at sea be able to land its hauls of white fish and the prawn fleet's bycatches at the end of this week and onwards, given that they have been informed that changes are to be made? They should not have to dump those stocks overboard. Secondly, will the minister reassure members and our fishing communities that he is pushing for more time at sea for the fleet? The fleet needs time and space. Today's announcement is about more space at sea, but the fleet needs time to catch the quotas, otherwise it is no further forward. Thirdly, will the minister give an insight into the nature of the other changes to the deal that he is negotiating? He says that the EC's statement today does not fully reflect the negotiations that he is pursuing. Will he shed some light on the other areas that are up for negotiation?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether the indicators that underpin the funding formula for local government are being reviewed. (S2O-1861)

Does the minister accept that the current funding formula hits north-east councils hard—especially Aberdeenshire Council and Aberdeen City Council—and leaves local citizens with overstretched local services? Since reorganisation, £63 million has been cut from Aberdeenshire Council's budget. Aberdeen City Council receives the lowest funding per head of any local authority on mainland Scotland. Does the minister accept that grant-aided expenditure does not adequately take need into account given that, although the formula uses some 100 indicators, 75 per cent of the funding is distributed on the basis of 12 indicators, of which 10 are concerned with population and school rolls? That discriminates against north-east councils. Will the minister take into account the councils' campaign for a fair share of local government funding and give a guarantee that he will review the funding formula, which is clearly not working for the north-east of Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive what changes to the December fisheries agreement, which are being announced by the European Commission today, will be implemented.

I, too, welcome the minister's statement. As a representative of North East Scotland, where many of the local and structural plans of recent years have been viewed as either shambolic or inaccurate, I hope that we can move forward. I appreciate the fact that a consultation is being undertaken, but the Executive must have some views, and I would like the minister to confirm two objectives. First, will our communities' views be not simply registered, but acted on and genuinely taken into account? Secondly, in the minister's view, must the planning system be changed to make it easier to make land available for building affordable housing? Does the minister appreciate that we could throw as many millions of pounds as we like at rural housing, but it will not make the slightest difference? Rather, it will simply make landowners richer unless we use the planning system to make more land available, thus allowing the value of land to be reduced. We could then talk about a genuine increase in affordable housing. Is it the minister's objective to use the planning system to make more land available, not just in rural communities but in urban communities, so that we can increase the availability of affordable housing?

Will the minister give way?

I oppose the business motion because it makes no provision for the Executive to make a statement on the continuing negotiations with the European Commission on changes to December's fishing deal. The Parliament rises for the Easter recess tomorrow, and we have been promised time and again by ministers that those changes were about to be announced. The First Minister wrote to me on 29 January, stating that he remained "confident that these discussions with the Commission can be concluded successfully and, importantly, without undue delay in order that Scottish fishermen can effectively plan ahead." Two months on, we are no further forward. The Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development told the Environment and Rural Development Committee on 3 March that he expected "proposals ... to be produced shortly."—[ Official Report, Environment and Rural Development Committee , 3 March 2004; c 827.] That was almost a month ago, and we have heard nothing since. Only last week, Allan Wilson met fishing industry representatives in Edinburgh and told them that he expected to make the announcement on the changes by the end of last week or, at the latest, by the beginning of this week. However, we have not heard a single thing from the ministers. The SNP welcomes the fact that the Government has moved from saying that we should be congratulating ministers on the deal that they signed in December to admitting that the deal has to be renegotiated to give our fishing communities a future. The restrictions on where the fleet can catch its quotas have affected the white-fish fleet in particular. If the fleet wants to fish for cod, it has to dump haddock stocks, which are at a record level in the North sea and for which we have quota. If it wants to catch its haddock quota, it has to dump cod stocks—which the regime that was foisted on Scotland in December  was supposed to protect. The white-fish fleet still has only 15 days a month at sea, which is not viable. That number has to be increased in the negotiations; however, the minister says that he is not going to make a decision on giving aid to the fleet until he has announced the changes. Time is dragging on. We have to scrap the draconian permit system that remains in place. I remind Parliament that the issue does not affect only the white-fish fleet; it also affects the prawn fleet from Fife and other parts of Scotland, the onshore sector and the fish processors, and the scores of harbour businesses in all the ports around Scotland. As we speak, the white-fish fleet is fishing in the North sea. If the changes are not announced during the next 48 hours, those boats will face two choices: they will either have to dump at sea fish from stocks that are at record levels in some cases and for which we are supposed to have a quota; or they will have to bring the fish back and land them illegally. Surely the minister does not want that. The fact that the delay has been so long appears to show that the minister is not fighting hard enough to save the white-fish fleet in Scotland. There are thousands of jobs at stake—the white-fish fleet is currently hanging by a thread. The fishermen are desperate for announcements to be made and I understand that, if the announcements are made, the Executive might have to go formally to the April fisheries council, which is another month away. It is therefore imperative that, before close of play tomorrow and before Parliament rises for Easter recess, the Executive find an opportunity to explain to Parliament what will happen in the meantime, before the formal proposals go to Brussels in April. The Executive must explain what changes it expects will be made and what it is doing to ensure that the changes will save the future of our fishing communities and the fishing fleet. I urge Parliament, all political parties and ministers to support amending the business motion so that we can discuss this vital matter tomorrow before it is too late and Parliament goes into recess.

Is the minister aware that SEPA has introduced a charge for companies that want to recycle waste for paper mills and spread it on fields? Might that prove to be a disincentive for companies to recycle paper-mill waste, which I am sure we all agree should not go to landfill?

Does Nora Radcliffe share my concern that, according to Scottish Enterprise Grampian, although the enterprise companies play a key role in the partnerships that are trying to get industry to introduce waste minimisation  strategies, which were conceived in November 2001, they are only now, nearly three years later, beginning to develop action plans? Why has there been such a delay?

I do not need to repeat the statistics that underline Scotland's rather regrettable environmental record, particularly on recycling and waste. However, the fact that this is the second debate in as many months on reducing Scotland's waste says a lot about the value of the Scottish Parliament. After all, Westminster never debated the issue in a Scottish context. That we can now begin to tackle issues that have been neglected for so long shows that this Parliament is worth while. As the Scottish National Party has a long-standing commitment to achieving a sustainable Scotland, we are sympathetic to the vision that the Green party has set out in its motion, which we will support. I appreciate that we are talking about a vision; however, we should start to realise that vision now rather than try to do so further down the line when our record in Scotland will be even worse. The people of Scotland will certainly support such a long-term objective. Although  targets are important, we have to underpin them with a vision. As the Greens and other members have previously pointed out, we must move the focus from managing to reducing waste. Managing waste centres on the role of landfill sites and incinerators, which, as we know, is a very contentious issue in communities throughout Scotland. I know that other members will highlight local constituency issues in that respect, because such facilities raise concerns about public health and their detrimental impact on the environment. Of course, sending our waste to landfill sites or incinerating it also represent a completely inefficient use of resources. If we are serious about reducing waste in Scotland, we must recruit the support of consumers and end our throwaway culture. We have to ensure that consumers use their power to make retailers and others reduce the amount of packaging and other waste. However, consumers must also be able to access facilities to ensure that they play a direct role in waste minimisation and recycling. For example, when, after January's debate, I ordered a compost bin from Aberdeenshire Council, I was told that I had to drive 12 miles to an industrial estate in the city of Aberdeen to get it. Not only do I have to get in a car and drive to pick up this bin, but I have to travel 12 miles to get it. Moreover, not everyone has a car. How on earth can we ensure that people can play a direct role in waste minimisation and recycling when we cannot even provide the facilities for them? I should tell the chamber that I have not yet had the time to drive over to the industrial estate to pick up the bin. However, I hope to do so soon. We also have to recruit the public sector. I wish that ministers would say more about the role that Government and the public sector play in waste minimisation. Where are their strategies? What have they done in the first five years of the Scottish Parliament to provide an example for the rest of Scotland of how to reduce waste? We must persuade industry that reducing waste makes businesses competitive and reduces costs. We like to think that Lewis Macdonald is representing the Executive today because he has responsibility for enterprise and that there is a link between the enterprise and environment portfolios. The real reason is that Allan Wilson is elsewhere launching a document on fishing, after which he has to come to the chamber and speak for the Executive in the debate on genetically modified crops. However, it is appropriate that Lewis Macdonald is speaking in the debate with his environmental hat on, because so many green jobs could be  created in Scotland through waste minimisation. He must do more to ensure that the enterprise companies are playing their role. They are clearly dragging their heels on this matter and, after four years, they are only now putting together their action plans. As I am running out of time, I want to turn to the crux of the SNP's amendment, which highlights the fact that we have to conduct today's debate in the context of the Scotland Act 1998 and that the Parliament has only limited powers to address Scotland's environmental record. After all, although the carrot-and-stick approach is perhaps the most effective way of addressing the issue with industry, retailers and so on, all those powers lie with the Westminster Parliament. If we want to make a real difference and tackle the problem much more quickly, the relevant powers must be transferred from Westminster to the Scottish Parliament. For example, the Scottish Parliament has no power to tackle junk mail or to introduce research and development incentives.

No, I am in my final two seconds. We have no power over tax breaks and other carrot-and-stick approaches that we could take to make industry change its behaviour or to try to encourage consumers to do the same. Instead, we have to find convoluted ways of introducing even such simple measures as the carrier bag tax, which is the subject of a Westminster private member's bill. Any other independent Parliament can simply pass a piece of primary legislation and immediately introduce such a levy. If the Parliament had more powers, we could be much more efficient and make a real difference to Scotland's environmental, recycling and waste minimisation record as a result. I am delighted that the Deputy First Minister has seen the light and is arguing that the Scottish Parliament should have more powers. Indeed, I hope that he will argue that the Parliament should have more environmental powers. The SNP will not withdraw its amendment, as the Greens have asked us to do. We feel that it is very important to put the debate into context and make the people of Scotland aware of the fact that we need more power to change things. As a result, we urge the Green party to support our amendment in the same way as we will support its motion. I move amendment S2M-1089.3, to insert at end: "and further notes that many of the powers required to reduce waste and achieve a sustainable Scotland reside with Her Majesty's Government and that such powers  should be transferred to the Scottish Parliament."

If the council rebate on second homes were scrapped, more revenue might be raised but very little would be done to address the shortage of affordable housing in rural areas. If people can afford to buy a second home, they can afford to pay a second council tax. Does the minister agree that the Chancellor's budget will in a number of ways make life even more difficult for first-time buyers in Scotland?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

George Lyon mentioned the relationship of the public debate to his party's decision on whether to support GM crops in Scotland. What bearing does the public debate have on his support for GM crops in Scotland? Does he have any indication that the public support the commercial growing of GM crops in Scotland?

I am astonished at how vocal the Lib Dems have been in supporting ministerial decisions, given that their counterparts elsewhere in the UK have been equally vocal in opposing them. The only thing that is consistent about the Lib Dems in the UK is their inconsistency.

Presiding Officer, I shall continue on the issue of GM crops being introduced into Scotland. This is not just a debate about the economy and the environment; it is a debate about democratic deficit in Scotland. People voted for this Parliament because they felt that decisions were taken outwith Scotland over which they had no control and which they did not want to be taken. We now have a Parliament and we put authority in ministers to go and negotiate on behalf of Scotland, but they are not doing that. When those ministers go south of Gretna, they seem to have difficulty in speaking to their counterparts in London. They forget their responsibilities. I do not know whether they are overawed by the seniority that they seem to think their counterparts in London have, or whether they want to avoid falling out with their bosom buddies in case they do not buy them a pint at the next Labour conference in Brighton or Blackpool, but they are not negotiating on behalf of Scotland. They should be fighting tooth and nail to protect our interests on the issue, but the fact is that there is not enough information to allow this GM crop to be introduced to Scotland. As Roseanna Cunningham and other members have pointed out, there have been no tests on  feeding this crop to cattle. There have been no tests, and the minister must accept that. When he made his ministerial statement to the chamber a few days ago, he said that there was no problem, that it was just about fodder and that only a few farmers would grow the crop in Scotland. There have been no tests on that.

There was no reference to that in the minister's statement. The view of the other authorities that I am just about to quote, and which have been quoted elsewhere in the debate, is similar to the view of the SNP and the other parties that are opposed to the proposal—that there have been no such tests. The House of Commons Environmental Audit Committee's report states: "Pollen spread and the calculation of separation distances so as to prevent contamination is a subject still heavily debated by scientific experts." The other gaps in knowledge are referred to in the Agriculture and Environment Biotechnology Commission's report of October 2003, which cites "other instances of organic and non-GM farmers facing significant problems and economic loss from adventitious presence in Canada and the US from the growing of GM oilseed rape and maize." The report goes on to say: "The Spanish Association of Corn Growers reports that some 5% of batches of maize destined for one of Spain's largest food processors were rejected due to adventitious presence of GM." There is a lot of uncertainty, not just in this country but around the world. The voluntary zones are a sop. There will be a whole lot of disputes over the boundaries, contamination issues and so forth. The only people who will make a profit out of the issue are the lawyers in Scotland. The organic sector will have the rug pulled from beneath its feet as well. The Soil Association will have to withdraw organic status from many farms in Scotland if the 0.1 per cent threshold that it has set is broken, which is likely if the proposal goes ahead. If the minister is sceptical, as he said he was in his statement, and the First Minister is also sceptical, have they requested that the UK Government change EU law so that we have more powers here in Scotland to do something about such issues? Or will they just shrug their shoulders and allow another decision that we do not want to be foisted on Scotland? It is not the World Trade Organisation, the US, the EU or the UK that should take decisions on growing GM crops in Scotland. It is this Parliament, representing the people of Scotland, that should take those  decisions. As I have said, there are authorities elsewhere in the UK that think that there are powers in Europe that would allow Scotland to be declared GM free. The case for not allowing the specific crop that we are discussing today to come to Scotland is overwhelming.

Will the member give way?

On Scotland applying to become a GM-free zone, has the minister had a chance to consider the note issued by the parliamentary office of science and technology, which states: "Although the first application by an EU region, Upper Austria, to set up such a zone was not allowed, future attempts may have more success if they apply under a different part of EU law." Has the minister gone to the trouble of investigating what that EU law might be?

I, too, welcome the debate and congratulate Sylvia Jackson on securing it. The Scottish Parliament is only five years old and is a relatively new Parliament in world terms. As a result, we can learn much from other countries. I hope that, because we are a new Parliament, there are also things that we can share with other countries. We live in world of many circles, of which the Commonwealth is one. It is important that the Parliament plays a full role in circles such as the Commonwealth in order to make a contribution to the wider world. Of course, I wish that Scotland was an independent member of the Commonwealth. We are not at the moment—that is a few years down the line—but powers have been devolved, so we have the opportunity to make a contribution. I remember when I represented the Parliament at the Commonwealth conference, at which there were 500 parliamentarians from 50-odd countries. We met in Australia in 2001. I was there as part of the Scottish delegation with Cathy Jamieson, the Labour MSP who has since gone on to higher things. We sat at the conference as the duo from Scotland; we had a saltire in front of us, which was the first time that that had happened. For a week or so, we were able to pretend that Scotland was there as independent country. We were able to make a contribution. There was a huge, warm welcome from the other countries for Scotland's presence.

I am happy to agree with the member. She makes an important point. However, it is also important to say that Scotland's contribution to many Commonwealth countries down the centuries has sometimes not been positive. We in Scotland, and people throughout the UK, should remind ourselves that we have a  debt to repay to many of those countries. We should keep that at the forefront of our minds. The Commonwealth can play a key role in two specific areas. First, it can play a role in partnership and co-operation with Parliaments in order to improve their accessibility to their electorates. It can also use information technology to improve democracy and, of course, ensure that all the Parliaments learn from one another in scrutinising their respective Governments. The second area that is extremely important is that of discussions around issues of international development. At the conference in 2001, the biggest and most important issue, which all the delegates wanted to talk about, was international development and the impact on their countries of globalisation. Commonwealth day was 8 March. Just two weeks before that, the World Commission on the Social Dimension of Globalisation presented to the International Labour Organisation an important report entitled, "A Fair Globalization: Creating Opportunities for All". The report states: "There are deep-seated and persistent imbalances in the current workings of the global economy, which are ethically unacceptable and politically unsustainable." The report goes on to draw conclusions from its analysis, two or three of which are devastating. It found that the income gap between the richest and poorest countries was widening significantly. In 1960-62, the average annual income was $212 for the poorest countries in the world and $11,417 for the richest. By 2000-2002, the figures had risen to $267 for the poorest countries and $32,339 for the richest. The report goes on to talk about "a world in which 22 industrialized countries representing only 14 per cent of the world's population dominate about half the world's trade and more than half of its foreign direct investment." It also states: "Net overseas development assistance (ODA) flows have been decreasing and are far below the long-standing target of 0.7 per cent of GDP". The report is important, because it calls for a reform of world governance, which is what Commonwealth countries are looking for. I hope that, despite the fact that Scotland is a small country, we can contribute to the call for the reform of international bodies such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. I hope that when members of Commonwealth Parliaments get together, we can reach conclusions on those issues so that members can go back to their respective Parliaments and try to get their Governments to sign up to the changes. We have to get results from the Commonwealth, especially given that the Scottish Parliament is  sending its representatives overseas. I hope that the Scottish Executive representative who is about to speak will indicate the Executive's support for reforming governance globally so that we can improve the quality of life not only here in Scotland but particularly for the rest of the members of the Commonwealth who desperately need to improve their standard of living.

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress has been made in seeking to address "unintended consequences" of the December European Union fisheries negotiations. (S2O-1414)

There has been no timescale for some time now, so will the minister say exactly when the decisions will be made? Does he appreciate that this is a difficult time for  Scotland's fishing communities, whose livelihoods depend on substantial changes being made to the discriminatory and draconian deal that was signed in Brussels? Is he seeking to scrap the haddock permit system and to take the traditional haddock grounds out of the cod protection area? Is he seeking to take more days-at-sea per month for the fleet and, if not, given that the fleet will be in a worse position than it was last year, will he introduce an aid package?

The minister mentioned patient safety. In 2000, a profound and world-renowned report, "An Organisation with a Memory", was published south of the border to learn from past mistakes and the National Patient Safety Agency was subsequently established. Will the minister outline what will be done in Scotland to emulate that report so that we can learn from past mistakes in the Scottish NHS, increase patient safety and help our staff with appropriate skills and resources?

As I have only two or three minutes to speak, I want to introduce one or two fresh angles to the debate. We all support attempts to build and support the NHS work force, because if the system is better for staff and the NHS it will be better for patients. However, we must give NHS staff the right tools to use in our hospitals, the right skills and the right working conditions. I reiterate a point that I have made in the chamber on numerous occasions since 2000. We must bring the medical equipment in our hospitals up to standard. I was not at all surprised when today Audit Scotland released a report, which was publicised yesterday, indicating that 25 per cent of equipment in our hospitals is beyond its standard life and 37 per cent has no value in hospitals' accounts because it is so old and out of date. I have lodged written questions and asked oral questions on the matter and I have raised the issue in several debates about health. More than three and a half years ago, I lodged a motion, which received support from many of the parties in the chamber. At that time, ministers told me that they had not considered the issue, that they did not have any information on it and, specifically, that they had not investigated the impact on patient care of using old and outmoded medical  equipment in our hospitals. I ask the minister to address that extremely important issue today. We have to make sure that our NHS staff are properly trained in the use of that—preferably more up-to-date and modern—medical equipment. One of the difficulties facing our staff, particularly nurses, is that, although there are more demands on their skills, their skills are not necessarily being upgraded so that they can do their jobs properly. The new GP contracts that allow GPs to opt out of out-of-hours cover mean that nurses in the hospitals will have to pick up more of the work. We have to make sure that they get the training that they need to do that work, which will put new demands on them. An example of that was brought to my attention this morning by people working in the NHS. Syringe drivers, or infusion devices, are syringes that inject drugs into a patient over a period of time. They are not standardised between hospitals; indeed, sometimes they are not standardised between wards in the same hospital. Nurses and other staff get no training in how to use the different bits of equipment. A nurse could change ward and suddenly find different dials, or whatever, on medical equipment that they have not been trained to use properly. If we do not give the staff the right training or the right equipment, mistakes will be made in the health service. In 2000, the Department of Health in England published a profound document—"An organisation with a memory". Unfortunately, there is no Scottish equivalent. The document states: "the best research-based estimates we have reveal enough to suggest that in NHS hospitals alone adverse events in which harm is caused to patients ... occur in around 10% of admissions". That is a phenomenal figure. The situation is not the fault of the staff, who do an excellent job under difficult circumstances. It arises because the Government is not ensuring that equipment is up to date and that staff are trained in how to use it. The consequences are devastating for the patients who are the victims of such mistakes and for the staff, who have to deal with those situations and the blame culture that exists in Scotland and elsewhere. We have to tackle that blame culture so that staff can come forward and tell us transparently where improvements can be made in the NHS. According to the document published in England, that could save up to £2 billion for the NHS. We could save lives and money and we could ensure that our staff worked in much better conditions, because they would be better trained and could use better equipment. I ask the minister to address that issue. We are five years into the Scottish Parliament and it has not yet been addressed, despite the fact that it is being addressed in England. We do not have an  equivalent of "An organisation with a memory", which is now deemed to be a world-class report. Scotland has to have an equivalent look at how we can help our staff and patients.

Will the member taken an intervention?

To ask the First Minister whether any new measures are planned to help rural communities to access land for affordable housing. (S2F-666)

Is the First Minister aware that the lifeblood of many of our rural communities is being lost as local people—particularly young people—are unable to afford to live in their own homes and communities where they were born and bred? Many communities are spending years trying to get round the obstacles to access land  and build affordable housing. It is the duty of the Government and the Parliament to demolish those obstacles. Given that access to cheap land is the crux of the problem, will the First Minister bring forward specific radical measures to ensure that communities and people can access cheap land, which is a huge element of the cost of building a new house in rural Scotland? Will he give powers to our rural communities to compulsorily purchase local land?

I have two brief questions. First, the minister talked about seeking a review of the single farm payments. How soon after they come into force would he like a review? Is he talking about one, two or three years? For what timescale will he be pressing? Secondly, on the national beef envelope, given all the uncertainty surrounding the reforms, does he have full authority to make adjustments at any time that he sees fit or are there obstacles that prevent him from intervening?

To ask the Scottish Executive what the average reduction in waiting times for drug treatment services has been in the last year. (S2O-1323)

I hope that, once the minister gets that information, he will appreciate the scale of the problem in Scotland, particularly in areas such as Grampian, where many drug addicts are told that they will have to wait a minimum of three months—and perhaps up to eight months—for an appointment with the local drug problem service. Will the minister tell us what he thinks is an appropriate time for drug addicts to wait for drug treatment services? Does he agree that a period of eight months is utterly unacceptable if we want families and communities to escape the impact of drug misuse on their lives?

This is supposed to be a debate.

There is a growing consensus in Scotland. The sooner the Executive takes its head out of the sand and gets behind that growing consensus, which has not gone far enough but is increasing, the sooner Scotland can move on. Consensus is growing behind the fact that the Scottish economy cannot continue to lag behind that of the rest of the UK and behind the fact that the decline in Scotland's population is becoming a national crisis.

I agree that that is one factor. I was told this morning that Aberdeen city, which includes the minister's constituency of Aberdeen Central, expects a decline of 40 per cent between 2000 and 2016 in the number of residents aged 30 to 44. That will cause enormous problems for the minister's city and constituency. The consensus is growing on that issue and on the fact that Scotland needs more powers to address such issues.

I am thankful that some dreams come true and independence for Scotland is one dream that will come true soon. As an independent country, Scotland will be much wealthier. In the world wealth leagues, the best standards of living all belong to small independent countries in northern Europe, such as Sweden, Denmark and Norway. Surely it is ambitious of the SNP—other parties should share that ambition—to try to emulate that success. If the Scottish Executive were not weak, it could boost the Scottish economy. We know that our fishing communities are suffering because the Executive allows the UK to lead in negotiations on fishing issues, when the Executive has full powers to take charge on those issues. Our fishing communities cannot exploit healthy fishing stocks in their traditional fishing grounds, 30 miles off their own shores.  The minister apparently takes a keen interest in the offshore industry, which is huge. It is the most valuable value-added industry in Scotland and is worth 130,000 jobs. It has capital expenditure of £3 billion a year, not to mention the multiplier effect of the 130,000 people who are employed in it. Despite that, the minister and the Executive never discuss the offshore industry in the chamber, although it faces massive challenges. The minister is vice-chair of PILOT, which is a joint industry-Government initiative, but we never have feedback on that. The subject is important.

I will give way in a second. The minister can help the offshore industry on the huge issue of the downturn in drilling activity, which has led to considerable job losses in recent months and may store problems for the future. Of the 39 semisubmersible drilling rigs in the North sea, 19 are stacked—that means that they are not working. Of those 19, 11 are cold stacked, which means that they are blocked up for the foreseeable future and are not expected to be used. The minister is doing nothing about that huge issue and the UK Government will never do anything about it. The minister must put pressure on the London Government to introduce measures to stimulate drilling activity if we are to protect those 130,000 jobs. The minister and his colleagues are fond of producing many glossy documents. We have never had one on the offshore industry, yet it is one of Scotland's most important industries. When will he intervene to address that? When will Jim Wallace or the First Minister, Jack McConnell, end the platitudes, demand action from the UK Government and produce a Scottish Executive strategy? After all, the Scottish Executive is responsible for economic development, education and training, all of which are big issues that can help the industry. In a previous debate on the economy, Wendy Alexander said that the only factor that influences the offshore sector is the price of oil. I sent the Official Report of that debate around the industry, with which her comments went down like a lead balloon. She does not know what she is talking about.

The Executive must start taking an interest in the offshore sector and do something for it, because it involves 130,000 jobs.

The Executive must do that to boost the Scottish economy.

Does the minister accept that it is essential to Scotland's economic growth and to achieving his aims that young people live and work in Scotland? What is the main reason that many young people leave Scotland to get their first job?

If it is not a rhetorical question, the minister should let Chris Ballance answer it.

As you have given me only two minutes, Presiding Officer, I shall follow Susan Deacon's example and depart from the substance of today's debate. I will talk about energy policy in general and the subject of Sewel motions. If Susan looks at a recent issue of Holyrood , she will see that Professor Thomas W Wälde, who is a professor of international economic, energy and natural resources law at the University of Dundee, is calling for the Scottish Parliament to have more responsibility over energy matters. In the article, he says that it is imperative that the Parliament should get more power over offshore resources such as oil and gas. The trend is therefore going against what Susan Deacon is saying. More and more people are arguing for more powers to come to the Parliament. On issues such as renewable energy and the offshore industry, it is ridiculous that so much power is still reserved to London. Renewable energy is a huge topic in Scotland. We are in the vanguard of the renewables revolution. We should have full responsibilities over all those matters. When it comes to the continental shelf, we should be getting powers not just over offshore wind farms but over the offshore industry in general. Just about every federal state in the developed world devolves responsibility for energy to its constituent parts. This is the only Parliament with primary responsibilities that are similar to the powers of federal Parliaments elsewhere in the world that finds that most energy policy is reserved to the central authority—in our case, Westminster. Only in underdeveloped countries is energy not devolved to federal Parliaments. We have to address those points. Susan Deacon has to face reality. Energy is a huge issue and we in this country are in the vanguard of  energy technology—whether in oil and gas or renewables. That is why the SNP and others in the chamber think that it is important to oppose the use of Sewel motions. We should be taking the decisions here. When people voted for a Scottish Parliament in the referendum of 1997, they expected us to have decision-making powers over the biggest issues that were relevant to their jobs. The oil and gas sector, for instance, has more than 100,000 jobs in Scotland. It has its own crisis at the moment, but Lewis Macdonald, the minister responsible for energy, who is vice-chair of PILOT, never reports back to the chamber on what he is doing to help the oil and gas sector. We get not one squeak from him about what he is up to.

In response to parliamentary questions, all we get back are answers that say that there are on-going discussions between the Scottish Executive and the UK Government. We cannot even scrutinise the Executive on what little power it has over energy policy and perhaps we should address that.

rose—

Given the fact that the member is closing the debate for the Labour party, I ask her please to address the substance of the debate, which is the new restrictions that apply only to Scotland and which mean that the Scottish fleet will not be able to catch the quota that has been given to us. Will the member please address the substance of the debate?

Will the member give way?

Is the member aware that there are numerous conditions in the deal that mean that cod and haddock stocks, especially juvenile haddock stocks, will be damaged, because boats will be forced to fish where the juvenile stocks rather than the mature haddock are?

The minister talks about a credit for decommissioning. Will he explain how the outcome of 15 days for the Scottish fleet was calculated, because the fishermen have not yet been told? Will he also explain to the chamber and to our fishing communities why, when there are more fish in the sea and fewer Scottish boats to catch them, we get less time at sea?

I begin by welcoming Allan Wilson to his new role, which he will carry out for the next few months. We are delighted to hear that Ross Finnie is recovering from his operation. Given the brighter outlook before December's talks, we all expected to be here early in 2004 finally sailing into calmer waters, yet ministers once again find themselves in the middle of a storm. Only a few weeks ago, things were looking up and our fishing communities were poised to turn the corner after so many disappointing fishing deals. The troubled cod stocks were recovering, haddock stocks were at record levels, other stocks were robust and we had a much smaller fleet. Despite that, ministers managed to clutch defeat from the jaws of victory in Brussels. At some ungodly hour, the United Kingdom signed an agreement that blatantly discriminated against its fishing industry and left the white-fish sector fighting for survival. Industry representatives from every sector have united in their appeals to the courts for justice. Fishing communities in Buchan, the Western Isles, Shetland and around Scotland's coast have denounced the deal. Many have called it worse than the notorious 2002 deal. The SNP calls on ministers to stop defending the indefensible, to reopen the negotiations in Brussels and to demand that the UK Government gets behind Scotland or gets out of the way. The deal that is set to come into force in less than 10 days' time is not only unjust, it is unworkable. It is the most complex deal ever, which is saying something when we are talking about the common fisheries policy. The producer organisations that manage the quota for the fleet are tearing their hair out, because they do not know how they will be able to implement the new regime that has been foisted on them. Ministers still claim that the deal is good for Scotland, perhaps believing that, if they repeat it often enough, people will begin to believe them. That view insults the intelligence of the fishing industry and shows nothing but contempt for our fishing communities. Ministers point to increased quotas in the North sea, particularly for haddock, but they ignore the fact that the industry has been denied the time and  space at sea to catch that quota. The opposite is the case on the west coast of Scotland, where the fishermen have enough time at sea but have been denied the quota to catch. The deal also imposes new restrictions on Scottish vessels in Scotland's traditional fishing grounds that other fleets fishing the same waters for the same stocks have escaped. At least the minister and the European Commission have moved from a position of outright denial to accepting that there are "unintended consequences" that require "technical adjustment". Parts of the deal require urgent renegotiation. Does the minister accept that the industry cannot live on 15 days a month at sea? Ross Finnie told Parliament that at the council in Brussels last month he argued for more days for the Scottish fleet. He understood the importance of getting more days, but he did not get them because, apparently, he lost the arguments. Perhaps when Allan Wilson is on his feet he will confirm that the fleet cannot survive on 15 days a month.

My next paragraph will answer exactly that question. The two pillars that allowed the fleet to survive throughout 2003 have been removed. The first pillar was the areas of the sea in which the fishing fleet faced no restrictions—the fleet could go to those areas and fish over and above their 15 days in the restricted areas. The second pillar was the aid package delivered by the Scottish Executive. There is no new aid package. Those two pillars have been removed, which is why, if nothing is changed, the fishing fleet faces bankruptcy.

I am happy to agree with that point. The size of the cod protection zone must be renegotiated. It includes Scotland's key haddock grounds and represents about 40 per cent of the northern North sea. It is obscene to prevent the Scots from catching more than 20 per cent of their haddock quota in their key fishery while allowing other fleets to catch their whole quota in that fishery. The result negotiated by ministers means that other fleets can catch up to three times the amount of haddock that Scotland's fleet can catch in Scotland's traditional fishery. Many members may think that fishermen in the prawn sector have got off scot free, but I ask them  to bear in mind the fact that those fishermen also catch haddock and that, no matter where they catch it in the North sea, it will count as if it was caught in the restricted area, which means that the haddock quota in the cod recovery zone will be exhausted in a matter of months. At that point, the prawn boats will have to dump any haddock that they catch—good-quality, mature haddock will be dumped overboard. That is the first reason why the deal is bad for fisheries conservation. Another reason is that, because vessels are being forced to catch 80 per cent of their haddock quota outside their main fishery, they will have no choice but to target the valuable cod quota. The whole regime was designed to protect cod but, as vessels will not be allowed to catch haddock, they will be forced to catch cod. The deal delivers a hammer blow to fisheries conservation, but it gets worse. The permit system has to be scrapped. When we heard that a permit system had been created, we all assumed that it would be for the cod stocks, which were apparently in trouble. However, the permit system is not for cod; it is for haddock, which is at record levels. The permit has many conditions attached to it—17 at the last count—and is unworkable. To call it draconian would be an understatement. According to fishermen in Shetland, the permit system will kill their fishery. If fishermen take a permit, they will have to throw away cod, even though they have a cod quota, because they are allowed only a 5 per cent bycatch. If they do not take a permit, they will end up throwing haddock overboard, because they are not allowed to catch it. That is a catch-22 situation, which will kill the Shetland fleet. The minister must agree to pursue the following objectives. He must remove the haddock fishery from the cod zone, allow the fleet access to the full haddock quota, give our much-reduced fleet more days at sea outside the cod zones and scrap the unworkable permit system. He must also ensure that, as long as we are signed up to the disastrous common fisheries policy, there is a level playing field for all the fleets in the North sea and that any new restrictions apply across the board. The minister must deliver an aid package for all the communities and all the sectors concerned. There is a cast-iron case for that. The deal this year is worse than last year's deal and there was an aid package last year. This year, so far, there has been no aid package. The minister must reward the fishing fleet, which has been decommissioned to only half the size that it was two years ago. It was promised better times if it decommissioned. There are only 120 white-fish boats left. There are no better times ahead; there is perhaps bankruptcy ahead, which is why the minister must wake up to the situation.  If the minister wants to save the fishing industry and keep it afloat this year and beyond, he must start fighting for Scotland's fishing communities. If he does not deliver, we will have plenty of fish in the North sea, but we will not have a fishing industry in Scotland. I move, That the Parliament recognises that the fisheries agreement signed in December 2003 discriminates against Scotland and as a result is unworkable and unjust and therefore calls upon the Scottish and UK governments to seek an urgent renegotiation of the agreement to ensure the survival of our fishing communities.

rose—

I am sure that it brings a smile to many members of the public and to the sketch writers who haunt this place that the Parliament is debating the production of rubbish. Nonetheless, today's debate is important. I welcome the Environment and Rural Development Committee's report, which flags up many questions that need to be asked. It keeps the pressure on the Scottish Executive to deliver on the issue in the years ahead. We are making  progress. Over the past two or three years, we have at least started to discuss waste issues in the Scottish Parliament, which is a huge step forward from what happened in the years prior to the establishment of the Parliament. It is shameful that, whereas Austria regularly recycles 75 per cent of its municipal waste, Scotland puts 91 per cent of its waste into landfill and recycles only 4 per cent. I have no doubt that the committee and the Executive are considering how Scotland can learn from other countries that take a pride in their environment and want to protect their resources. We need to learn how they achieve those targets and we need to adopt some of their practices here in Scotland. As Sarah Boyack mentioned, Europe has had much to do with the fact that waste recycling has come on to our agenda. She was quite clever in saying that the European Union reinforced the imperative to recycle; the reality is that the Scottish Parliament discusses such matters because the Scottish Executive is required to respond to EU regulations, such as the packaging regulations and the waste electrical and electronic equipment regulations that are coming on stream, or the landfill regulations that we have had in the past. The Scottish Executive and, indeed, Scotland are playing catch-up. Today's debate has two themes. First, it is about managing waste. Secondly, it is about waste minimisation. Clearly, dealing with the latter makes dealing with the former much easier. We should put much more emphasis on reducing Scotland's waste in the first place. I would be interested to know the breakdown of the Government's expenditure so far on achieving those two objectives. To reduce waste, we will clearly need to change the behaviour of householders and of businesses. One of the biggest challenges is to raise awareness about what individuals and businesses can do. There has been much talk about educating the public and businesses, but I am not sure how that will be done. There is a real danger that Scotland will have lots of initiatives but that no one will know about them. Will leaflets—on recycled paper, of course—be put through people's doors, or will television adverts be used to put the message across that people need to reduce waste and manage their waste more effectively?

I will deal with the need for a carrot-and-stick approach in a moment. We need to make people aware of what is available to them. Until a few months ago, I lived in Aberdeen city centre and had to travel quite far by car to recycle anything. Off the top of my head, the only places that I could think of that had recycling facilities were the supermarkets at the retail parks. That is fair enough for people who have a car and who have the time to get there. However, I now live in a village just outside Aberdeen, where the recycling facility is just two minutes down the road. It is a lot easier for me to recycle now. Those are two contrasting situations. People throughout Scotland face such choices; what they can do often depends on where they live. On the composting initiatives, I think that composting is the way to go, but how do people get hold of a compost bin? I do not know how to do that. At home, we have talked about composting in the past week or so and I want to pursue the issue, but I do not know how to go about it—I will need to find out. I welcome initiatives that are under way in Aberdeenshire to work with community councils, such as the one in Braemar, in order to establish community facilities for composting. I wish those initiatives all the best. Incineration plants have been a controversial issue for the past few years in Aberdeen and constantly dominate the newspaper columns in the region. In mid-February, the local planning committee will make a decision on the proposed £40 million plant. Hundreds of letters have been sent to the planning committee and there has been a petition with several thousand names on it. One of the reasons why so many people oppose the plant is that it would be only two thirds of a mile from the nearest homes. In its briefing for today's debate, Friends of the Earth points out that, if Aberdeen City Council reaches its recycling and waste targets over the next few years, the capacity of the proposed facility will, by 2020, be three to four times over what is needed. That overcapacity might cause local authorities and other agencies to take their feet off the pedals in relation to waste reduction. We could end up with a situation in which they think that they can simply send their waste to Aberdeen. The carrot-and-stick approach is the only way forward. It is important to consider how we can offer incentives to companies to develop recycling technology and new technologies to ensure that what they produce can be recycled. The difficulty in that is that the Scottish Parliament is limited in what it can do. We are unable to give research and development incentives through the tax system, for example. As we cannot use tax breaks as an incentive, we will have to find innovative  ways of providing incentives while putting pressure on the United Kingdom Government in the meantime. I agree with the report when it says that local enterprise companies should be producing plans to ensure that companies across Scotland take advantage of the new objective of reducing waste and try to create jobs through doing that. That is an important point. I urge the committee to keep its eye on this important issue and to continue to scrutinise the Scottish Executive's performance.

The member, who represents North East Scotland, will be familiar with the proposal for an incinerator at Altens in Aberdeen, which is causing huge controversy in the city. Does he agree with Friends of the Earth, which says that if the city reaches its targets by 2020 that facility will be three to four times over capacity?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to seek a renegotiation of the fisheries agreement concluded in Brussels in December 2003. (S2O-1054) I take the opportunity to wish Ross Finnie all the best for the coming weeks and months as I understand that this is his last time in the chamber before he goes off on his leave of absence. [ Applause. ]

I thank the minister for that answer—I just wanted to check. Given that time is ticking away before the most complex and draconian fishing deal ever signed by a government kicks into force, it is interesting the European Commission has indicated that some parts of the deal are set in stone and other parts are not. Will the minister explain to the chamber which parts of the deal he understands are set in stone and which parts he understands are not? Will he indicate whether the Government still has an open mind on delivering a further aid package to the white-fish sector?

May I turn the minister's attention to the relationship between the Scottish Executive and the European Commission? Is it still the Executive's position that the Commission should consult the Scottish Parliament directly as opposed to doing so via the Committee of the Regions or the House of Commons? If that is still the Executive's position, what steps does he intend to take to ensure that consultation becomes a reality?

Will the member give way?

Does the member acknowledge that the Commission's work programme and Scotland's response to it in the next 12 months could influence tens of thousands of jobs in Scotland?

Enlargement of the EU has been a big issue in the debate and will continue to be so. Will the minister give examples of any analyses by his department of the impact of enlargement on Scotland?

As convener of the Scottish Parliament's European and External Relations Committee, it is a pleasure for me to open the debate on the European Commission's work programme for 2004. The debate is the first one in the new parliamentary session in which the committee has been involved and it presents my first opportunity to open a debate for the committee. Given that it is so early in the year, the committee felt that it was appropriate that we debate the European Union and, specifically, the European Commission's work programme for 2004 and its relevance to Scotland. I appreciate that the debate's title is not the most glamorous, but I assure members that the debate is important. We are debating the issue because we must highlight to Parliament, the Scottish Executive and the nation generally many of the key issues that will be on the Commission's agenda in 2004. We hope to provide early warning of many of the issues that Europe will be taking forward, so that the parliamentary committees, MSPs and everyone else can investigate the impact of each proposal on Scotland and ensure that Scotland's interests are being taken into account and promoted. Of course, the committee is also keen to raise the profile of European issues in the Parliament. Unfortunately, it is difficult nowadays to get the media interested in European issues. I understand that there is now only one correspondent based in Brussels to represent the Scottish media corps. It is important that our committee and other committees hold the respective ministers to  account on European matters. Earlier this week I met Jimmy Hood MP, the chairman of the European Scrutiny Committee in the House of Commons, and the chairs of other European committees throughout the United Kingdom to discuss the work of our committees. The House of Commons has a motto that states that good scrutiny leads to good government. I believe that all European committees throughout the UK, and specifically the Scottish Parliament's European and External Relations Committee, want to abide by that motto. I hope that the debate on the EC's work programme will become an annual event that the Scottish Executive will sponsor, so that we can help to ensure that Parliament remains focused on EU matters. After all, 80 per cent of the legislative work for which the Scottish Parliament has responsibility is influenced by Europe. The recent Queen's speech in the House of Commons barely mentioned any legislation that was relevant to Scotland, but much legislation comes from Europe directly to the Scottish Parliament. The most recent time that the European and External Relations Committee counted, we found that 1,200 items in a year had come from Brussels to the Scottish Parliament. All committees will notice an increasing number of items on their agendas that relate to Europe. I hope that each committee will move towards regularly placing Europe on their agendas. Some committees, such as the Environment and Rural Development Committee, have made progress on that. It is in the Parliament's interests to ensure that the EU adheres to the principle of subsidiarity and that the Commission directly consults Parliament. The Scottish Executive jointly submitted, with the UK Government, a paper on Europe to the convention on the future of Europe that argued that the Commission should directly consult the Scottish Parliament. Unfortunately, I understand that the Commission is not adopting that stance; it wants simply to consult the Committee of the Regions. I ask the minister, if he has the opportunity, to respond on that issue during the debate. Our committee—and, I am sure, all parties in the Parliament—wishes the Scottish Parliament to be consulted directly by the European Commission, which is what we all called for previously. The EC will produce extended impact assessments in 2004, which will analyse not only the economic, social, environmental and regulatory impact of European legislation, but subsidiarity and proportionality in European legislation. I believe that everyone in the Scottish Parliament would welcome that and would want to pay close attention to it to ensure that EU legislation is produced at the most appropriate level.  I turn to what will happen in 2004, which will be an historic year for Europe and the EU. There will be enlargement of the EU on 1 May, when we will welcome 10 new member states—I will return to that issue. The European elections are in June and I am sure that we all want to encourage the people of Scotland to turn out in that election. A new Commission will be appointed later this year when the Prodi Commission retires, and new commissioners will be appointed. Perhaps the minister will say whether there are moves to propose names from Scotland for the new UK commissioners. We may also have the continuation of the intergovernmental conference and the adoption of a new EU constitution, should that come back on to the agenda. If it does not, Europe will have to revert to the Treaty of Nice. The EC's programme for 2004 will attempt to achieve three key priorities: a stable European Union, stable growth within the EU and the accession of new states to the EU. To help to achieve those objectives, nearly 80 items of legislation or initiatives with huge relevance to Scotland will be produced in 2004. One example is a new financial framework for 2007-13, which will decide where all the money will go. Billions of euros will be at stake for rural communities, regional development, research and so on, so the framework will be critically important for Scotland. The European and External Relations Committee is investigating the impact on regional funding, given the UK Government's recent consultation on repatriating that funding to the UK. A new external border management agency, which will help to manage immigration to the EU, will be created in 2004. That has a resonance for the First Minister's fresh talent initiative, which is designed to attract new people to Scotland—provided, of course, that the UK Government believes that we in Scotland will understand the immigrants' accents. A green paper on public-private partnerships will be produced in 2004. Again, that issue is to the fore of political debate in Scotland—indeed, it is front-page news today. There will also be a consultation on the working time directive. Specifically, there will be a review of the opt-out that the UK Government secured for workers in the UK, who work longer hours than anyone else in Europe. If the review led to the removal of the opt-out, it would have implications for the Scottish health service and other sectors in Scotland. Europe will also continue to develop the reform of the common agricultural policy and the cod recovery plans, which are vital to our farmers and fishermen respectively. I note that Alasdair Morgan, the convener of the Enterprise and Culture Committee, is in the chamber. He will be interested to know that the  Commission hopes to achieve in 2004 its aim of developing the knowledge economy in Europe, which means that it wants to reach a spending target of 3 per cent of Europe's gross domestic product on research and development, which has ramifications for the Scottish economy. Members of the Health Committee will know that the launch of a health card is on the agenda, which will give people easier access to health benefits in EU countries. There is also an aim to ensure greater uptake of environmental technologies, which is relevant to next week's debate in the chamber on the national waste plan. EU enlargement will dominate the European agenda in 2004. On 1 May, eight new members from central and eastern Europe will join the EU: Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovenia, Slovakia, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Two countries from the Mediterranean will also join: Malta and Cyprus. It seems only a few years ago that the prospect of such countries joining the EU appeared to be a pipe dream. However, we are now only a few months away from that dream's becoming reality. I am sure that we all welcome the appointment last week of an Estonian honorary consul to Scotland and hope that other states follow suit. The Commission is committed in 2004 to pursuing negotiations with Bulgaria and Romania, which are likely to join the EU in 2007. It is also committed to producing a recommendation later in 2004 on the possibility of Turkey's joining the EU, as well as preparing an opinion on Croatia's application to join the EU. It is hoped that the 10 new members of the EU in 2004 will benefit soon from the EU's prosperity and stability. There will be a huge increase of up to 453 million citizens in the EU's population and a huge increase in the EU's land area. Enlargement will enrich Europe's history and culture, and it is anticipated that Europe's influence in the wider world will increase. It is important that Scotland joins the enlargement celebrations, which the European and External Relations Committee has discussed. The Irish are hosting a day of welcome on which all European heads of state and people from other organisations will be invited to Dublin. Perhaps the minister could indicate in his speech whether Scotland will be represented at that celebration. Our committee is certainly working on a number of initiatives to ensure that Scotland has celebrations at home to welcome the new member states into the EU. The previous European Committee published a report in 2002 in which five challenges and opportunities arising from EU enlargement were identified. They were: the impact on trade; the impact on Scotland's share of European funds and subsidies; the impact on labour markets and social  policy; the impact on freedom, security and justice; and the impact on cultural, educational and other issues. It is clear that enlargement offers Scotland opportunities. For example, there will be a bigger market for our businesses. In my constituency a company that makes pods in the form of bathroom units for hotel developments throughout Europe is opening its second factory in the Czech Republic, because it wants access to the new markets. There will also be challenges, as there will be more economic competition. It will be cheaper for companies from non-EU countries to locate elsewhere in Europe and there will be competition for jobs and investments. An excellent booklet produced by the Scottish Council for Development and Industry details all the benefits, challenges and opportunities of enlargement for Scotland and provides background on all the new member states. The European and External Relations Committee urged Scottish ministers to lead parallel trade missions to the new countries when they visit them on other, political business. It is unfortunate that after making a bright start in relation to the Czech Republic, the Executive does not seem to have planned any more visits.

Yes. I am delighted to agree with a fellow member of the committee. The review of the 2004 work plan for Scottish Development International shows that it has plans for public-sector support trade missions to, among others, the Dominican Republic, Hong Kong and Portugal, but not to any of the 10 new member states such as Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary or Estonia. Perhaps plans are in the pipeline, but we need to hear more about them. If the European and External Relations Committee does not know what is being planned, how can small firms in any of our constituencies know what is happening? How can they benefit from the trade missions, tailored market intelligence and so on? It is a shame that we do not have that information, because, according to figures published by the SCDI, the markets of central and eastern Europe are worth nearly £0.5 billion to Scotland, including £63 million in exports of office machinery to the Czech Republic, £21 million in whisky exports to Turkey and £17 million in exports from the  chemicals industry to Hungary. I welcome the start of the Executive's efforts to encourage trade, inward investment and new immigration, but much more needs to be done and ministers need to be seen to lead. The Executive should rest assured that the committee will be the first to congratulate ministers on their efforts and will support them in any way that it can. I ask the minister to say something about the location of European agencies. I know that we will all be disappointed that Glasgow lost out in relation to the location of the European Maritime Safety Agency. The European Agency for Network and Information Security went to Greece and the European Chemicals Agency went to Helsinki. New agencies might be in the pipeline, such as agencies for defence and for minority languages. I urge the minister to tell us what is happening to secure the other agencies and perhaps to review why we were unsuccessful in securing the agencies that I mentioned, particularly the European Maritime Safety Agency. I turn to the Irish presidency of the EU. I know that we all want to wish our friends and neighbours the Irish the best of luck over the next months of their tenure of the presidency. Naturally, there is much cross-over between their priorities and the Commission's priorities. We will all want to welcome today a number of initiatives. The Irish will host a conference in the spring in Dublin on conflict resolution, which will involve discussions on the role of civic society and non-governmental organisations. I am sure that we all welcome that, particularly the Presiding Officer, who I know has a particular interest in it. In April, there will be an EU-Africa troika meeting in Dublin to discuss strategies to tackle AIDS and poverty. The Irish will also host a major conference on HIV and AIDS in Europe and central Asia and a meeting with ministers from the Mediterranean countries. I am sure that we all welcome the international slant that the Irish are putting on their six-month tenure of the EU presidency and wish them luck for all those agendas. Perhaps the minister will tell us whether Scotland will be involved in any of the initiatives or events to ensure that we make a contribution. I return to the Commission's work programme. I urge members and committees to investigate all forthcoming legislation from Brussels to ensure that Scotland's interests are taken into account and that Parliament acts early so that we can influence the legislation that affects Scotland. I hope that ministers will agree to publish an analysis of this year's work programme and its implications for Scotland as that would help the Parliament and its committees. The committees could then turn to the good offices of the European Commission and European Parliament offices in  Edinburgh and make contact with the EU to find out more and to ensure that Scotland's voice is heard and that the Executive is scrutinised properly. The Scottish Parliament is establishing an office in Brussels on a pilot basis, which I hope will become a permanent feature. It will provide assistance to MSPs and committees to ensure that we have good intelligence and information from Brussels. I move, That the Parliament notes the publication of the European Commission's work programme for 2004, which is dominated by the enlargement of the European Union, and agrees that it contains a number of legislative and non-legislative plans of importance to Scotland.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Have you had notification from the First Minister to correct an inaccurate statement that he made in response to my question during First Minister's question time on the matter of the December meeting of the fisheries council? As you will be aware, Presiding Officer, paragraph 1.1(c) of the Scottish ministerial code states: "It is of paramount importance that Ministers give accurate and truthful information to the Parliament, correcting any inadvertent error at the earliest opportunity." Although I have received a written apology from the First Minister in the past 30 minutes, do you agree that it would be in order for him to deliver a statement to Parliament, given that his statement was inaccurate? Indeed, his letter of apology further muddies the waters by stating that the reason why Scottish vessels have more restrictions than other nations that fish the same waters for the same stocks is that we were the only nation that asked for more haddock quota. That is plainly wrong.

To ask the First Minister what steps will be taken to ensure the prosperity of fishing communities following the outcome of the agriculture and fisheries council in Brussels in December 2003. (S2F-490)

Does the First Minister agree that it is unreasonable and unjust that, thanks to the deal that was signed in December, in Scotland's traditional fishing grounds fewer than 40 miles from our coastline, for every one box of haddock that Scots can catch, foreign boats can catch three boxes of haddock? Does he also agree that it is unjust that the new restrictions apply only to Scottish white-fish vessels in the North sea and not to the white-fish fleets from other states that fish the same waters for the same stocks? Does he accept that it is absurd to give the Scottish fleet a larger quota but not the time or space at sea to catch it?

Once the First Minister has—

Will he renegotiate the deal and give us an aid package that will ensure the industry's survival?

I begin by thanking the minister for giving me an advance copy of his statement. However, this was another rotten Christmas for Scotland's fishing communities, thanks to the latest deal that the Government brought back from Brussels. Our fishermen regard the deal as even worse than the notorious settlement that was agreed in the previous year. Once again, team UK went to Brussels and sold Scotland down the river. The UK minister Ben Bradshaw said that it was a good result as soon as he had signed the deal. The truth is that it is a dreadful result for Scotland, which is what Scotland's fishing communities are saying. Once again, our fishing communities are shellshocked and have suffered from a lack of political clout in Europe and a common fisheries policy that discriminates against Scotland. In his statement, the minister talks about life being made more difficult for the white-fish sector—the truth is that life will be impossible. The deal provides bigger quotas in the North sea, but not enough time and space to catch them. For the west coast vessels, the deal provides plenty of time at sea, but fewer fish to catch. A while back, Ross Finnie said that he did not intend to preside over the destruction of our fishing industry, but he has taken it further down the road to ruin rather than put it on the road to recovery, which is what he promised to do only a few weeks ago in the chamber. I have three specific questions for the minister. First, he talks about the strings that are attached to the haddock quota, but does he not realise that there is a noose around the industry's neck? Will he explain why he supported a deal that foists on his own white-fish fleet extra, unworkable restrictions that will not apply to fleets from other nations that fish the same waters for the same stocks? That is the first question that the minister must answer today. Secondly, given that the minister said that any new deal would reward the fact that Scotland has decommissioned half of its white-fish fleet, will he explain why our fleet has been limited to the same number of days at sea as it had last year, even though the fleet is much smaller and there are more fish in the sea? Can the minister answer that question, too? Finally, will the minister give a commitment to tear up that ludicrous and unworkable part of the deal, take the first plane back to Brussels and bring back a better deal for Scotland, which will allow our fishermen access to stocks off their own shores and which will deliver an aid package to  help the fleet and the onshore sectors until that is achieved? The minister said that he wanted to ensure that the new arrangements had no unintended consequences, but the unintended consequence might be the end of Scotland's fishing industry, unless he acts now.

On the autonomy of higher education institutions and the creation of new training places for therapists, if NHS Grampian approached the Executive for assistance to set up such courses in Grampian, would the minister look upon that sympathetically? After all, the Executive intervened to create new training opportunities in Grampian to address the shortage of dentists. I accept that the situations are not the same, but the sentiment is the same.

It gives me pleasure to open this debate on the motion that was lodged in my name, which concerns the pressures on children's therapy services in north-east Scotland, especially in Aberdeenshire. I thank the 24 members of the Parliament, from all parties, who signed the motion. The motion was lodged very much on a cross-party basis, and there is a cross-party campaign in north-east Scotland. I pay tribute to the parents and families who are conducting that campaign and who have ensured that this issue is being placed firmly on the radar screens of local politicians. In particular, I thank Julie Fawns and her husband and the other parents who are in the public gallery. Members will join me in welcoming them to the Parliament. The job of local MSPs is to ensure that the issue in Grampian is firmly planted on the radar screen of ministers, although we all welcome the fact that the issue of children's therapy services and the associated pressures is already on the Scottish Executive's agenda. Last year, the Executive published a review of children's therapy services, and its recommendations were published in August. Those recommendations were put out to consultation and the consultation period closed in October. That review was partly a response to the Riddell advisory committee's "Report into the  Education of Children with Severe Low Incidence Disabilities", which highlighted the problems associated with the shortage of therapists in Scotland and the resulting long waiting times. However, that report was published back in 1999 and we are debating the issue at the end of 2003. We must inject some urgency into the process, given the fact that time is going by and the situation does not appear to be improving. This debate primarily concerns children with special needs who require therapy to improve their quality of life. We are mainly talking about speech and language therapy, occupational therapy, physiotherapy and orthotics. The Executive's review confirmed that there is a shortage of therapists in Scotland and that waiting times are unacceptable. The review states: "it is clear that there are too few experienced therapists, recruitment difficulties in rural areas and growing numbers of referrals." That is certainly the situation in Grampian, which is largely a rural area. That region has the second-highest referral rate in Scotland for speech and language therapy per speech and language therapy post. Also, the number of children on speech and language therapy waiting lists in Grampian is four times the national average. Indeed, of the 15 health boards in Scotland, NHS Grampian has the third-highest level of vacancies for speech and language therapists—10 per cent as of March 2003, according to a parliamentary answer that I received from the ministers. As of today, and following inquiries this morning, I can tell members that in Aberdeen, one third of the speech and language therapy posts are vacant—that is, 10 of the 30 posts. Four of those vacancies are due to maternity leave, which happens to be a big problem in the service because so many of the therapists are female. If there is not enough cover for maternity leave, that can lead to greater problems. In Aberdeenshire, five out of the 19 positions are vacant. We must remember that this is not just about pressures on the families that are involved and the children themselves; it is also about the pressures on the staff in the service. In many cases, therapists work in small teams. If a small team of five therapists in one part of Grampian has one or two vacancies, that leads to enormous pressure on the remaining team members. I am sure that we all recognise that early intervention is essential in treating children. We must treat children at the right time in their development to ensure that treatments are of maximum benefit and are effective. For instance, physiotherapy is central to the rehabilitation of children with special needs. Speech and language therapy is vital for communication skills, among other matters, and orthotics is vital to improve  mobility for the children who require the service and to improve appearance, which is a sensitive issue for young children. I will refer the minister to two of the many case studies—there are dozens in Aberdeenshire—that highlight the problem. On speech and language therapy, I have an e-mail from a constituent of mine in Balmedie that says: "I have been fighting for speech and language therapy for my nine-year-old son for three years. He has pragmatic semantic disorder, diagnosed at two years. He needs a language group to help with social skills, and although he attended two to three groups four years ago, we have had nothing since, despite referrals from my GP, the school doctor, the school and the educational psychologist." Another constituent inquired about receiving the orthotics service. Her e-mail says: "I spoke to a receptionist who told me my daughter's appointment had been booked, but it was for four months later, as this was the first available appointment they had. I could not believe it, and I explained my daughter was only three years old and she had special needs and would not be able to communicate if the boots were hurting her or not." The e-mail continues: "Once my little girl's feet grew and I felt she needed new boots, I contacted the clinic once again. I was told I had to wait X amount of weeks. It is stressful enough having a child with special needs without having this carry-on each time her feet grew." Those are two quick case studies. There are case studies that refer to waiting times of up to four years. In Grampian, we hear of waiting times of easily up to a year for services such as physiotherapy, speech and language therapy and other therapies. We must recognise that for families, coping with everyday pressures as well as having a child with special needs can be extremely difficult. That often leads to relationships breaking down, marriages breaking up and other strains on families. Short, medium and long-term solutions are required. I welcome the fact that the Scottish Executive's review said that more resources were required, to be aimed at improving the recruitment and retention of therapists in Grampian and throughout Scotland. Additional student places are also required. Both those solutions are desperately needed in Grampian. Grampian has a general shortage of national health service staff. We must recognise that many of the challenges that face therapies also face other health professions in Grampian. However, we do not understand or have information on how many therapists are required in Grampian to deliver an adequate service. The minister has said that such information is not kept centrally. We do not know the ratio of therapists to children who are registered as requiring such services. Surely we  must find that out if we are to address the situation. We know that many people in Scotland are applying to be trained as therapists but that student places are not available. A parliamentary answer that I received a couple of weeks ago said that for every speech and language therapist student place in Scotland, seven applications are made. For orthotics courses alone, three applications per place are made. Plenty of people want to train as therapists. We must ensure that places are available soon. The Executive says that it wants to create 1,500 new posts in what are referred to as the allied health professions, which cover all the therapies. I ask the minister how many posts will be created in Grampian. Can we learn lessons from the recruitment campaigns for dentists in Grampian? We have decided that unless we recruit and train dentists locally, we will not be able to plug the gap. We are being told that the situation with speech and language therapists and other therapists is similar. If we do not create training places in Grampian, people will be less likely to live and work there, especially as many therapists are people who have retrained as mature students and have family commitments in Grampian. If they do not have the opportunity to train locally, they do not train, because they would have to leave behind their families and other commitments to travel to the central belt or elsewhere to do so. If we want to increase the number of therapists in Grampian, we must establish courses in Grampian. I welcome the fact that the Robert Gordon University is working with NHS Grampian to create an MSc course. I ask the minister to ensure that that happens and that the course is funded. I know from parliamentary answers that the minister is talking about making £1 million available nationally, but that is not enough. I would also like the minister to deal with the concern that any new resources to address the issue should be ring fenced. The fear is that any new resources to tackle the problem will be swallowed up by the NHS, so the money for therapy services must be ring fenced. Many of the recommendations in the report are welcome. We need the minister to give a commitment today to an action plan and a time scale for the implementation of such a plan. The recommendations were issued in August and the consultation period closed at the end of October. Although we are now almost at the end of 2003, we are still waiting for the Executive to respond to the consultation submissions and to tell us when action will start and what level of resources will be made available.  I appeal to the minister to give the chamber and parents in the gallery and elsewhere in Scotland—particularly in Grampian—some words of comfort and a commitment that action will be taken in the short, medium and long term.

Will the minister give way?

I thank the minister for giving way. Will he comment on the timetable for getting Laurencekirk station reopened? Mike Rumbles mentioned 2004. Is that estimate accurate?

I congratulate Mike Rumbles on securing a debate on an issue that is relevant not only to his constituency but to the North East Scotland region that David Davidson and I represent. The station closed in 1967, but I hope that we can get it reopened by 2007. After all, the campaign to do that has been going on for nearly 30 years. I acknowledge colleagues' comments  that we should pay tribute to the small group of people who have pursued the matter. I, too, know Norman Banski—we all seem to be discussing a mutual friend this evening—but many other people have been involved down the years. To some extent, the members in the chamber are Johnnys-come-lately to the campaign. I know that the minister, who was formerly MP for the area, will be familiar with the Laurencekirk station issue, although I take it that it played no part in his departure from his seat. Maybe that is why Mike Rumbles was so keen to secure the debate and to get the matter to the top of all of our agendas. The issue has been raised time and again in the four and a half years of Parliament's existence. Looking back at some parliamentary questions on the matter, I found that one of the first was lodged by my former SNP colleague Irene McGugan in October 1999. It is now December 2003, and we are discussing the same issue. Thankfully, things seem to have moved forward quite a bit and I hope that the matter will soon reach a positive conclusion. In May 2000, local authorities expressed concern at Railtrack's suggestion on cutting journey times between Edinburgh, Glasgow and Aberdeen, which would have meant fewer stops between those stations. I hope that the debate has now moved on. In any case, Railtrack itself is no longer with us. That said, we still face a general capacity issue in north-east Scotland: only one single line runs through Aberdeen and there are only seven stations in the area. In fact, only 12 per cent of the population in the whole area live within 1 km of a station. I hope that opening Laurencekirk and other stations in the area will address that problem. Moreover, a study that was carried out in 2001 calculated that opening the station would generate 25,000 journeys to and from the town. As Mike Rumbles and others have pointed out, those 25,000 journeys currently take place on local roads. Given that the Executive and Parliament are committed to sustainability and sustainable transport, shifting 25,000 trips off the roads onto local trains would do a great deal to help the environment and the local economy in Laurencekirk and the Mearns. At a council meeting in November, we heard that it would cost £3 million to open Laurencekirk station. That is not a huge amount of money, so I hope that the minister will look kindly upon that plea. A positive case was presented on transportation, economic and environmental grounds. The local council is addressing some more issues to progress the situation further.  I have two final comments to make, the first of which relates to freight. If Laurencekirk station reopens, we should consider opportunities for getting more freight on to rail in the area. Throughout Europe, the amount of freight that goes by rail has declined. We want to buck that trend in Scotland by getting more freight traffic on to rail and off the roads. Secondly, we need to ensure that trains will stop at Laurencekirk. It is all very well talking about having a station at Laurencekirk, but we will need to try to get some trains to stop there, because there ain't any point in having a station if trains do not stop at it; I hope that the minister will address that in his summing up. As members know, there are on-going issues to do with getting more local routes up and running in the Aberdeen area and between Dundee and Aberdeen. We want a station at Laurencekirk, but we also want trains to stop there and we want them to do that at appropriate times, when people want to use them. That will give them the incentive to get off the roads and on to the train. I invite the minister to address that issue.

Is the member accusing Alistair Carmichael, a member of his own party in Westminster, of being guilty of carping and posturing in his campaign against the common fisheries policy?

Will the member give way?

Can Des McNulty square his comment on the history of the North sea with the fact that the haddock stock today is at a 32-year high?

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree with RSPB Scotland and the WWF, which have argued in their briefings for this debate that there is a case for increasing the haddock quota for Scotland if it can be separated from cod? Does he agree with that? If he does, does he not also agree that the fleet will require more days at sea to catch that haddock quota?

Given that Michael Howard took the opportunity to apologise for foisting the poll tax on Scotland, will Mr Brocklebank tell us why he did not apologise for taking Scotland into the common fisheries policy?

Last year, the CFP reached a new low when, with the blessing of the UK Government, Franz Fischler imposed on Scotland a draconian and unjust deal that is still biting at the hearts of communities all along the country's coastline. The Labour-Liberal coalition also reached a new low by failing to defend our fishing communities or to offer appropriate support to cope with the aftermath. Indeed, in October 2002, Ross Finnie told the Parliament:  "neither I nor the Scottish Executive has any intention of presiding over the destruction of the Scottish fishing industry."—[ Official Report , 30 October; c 14707.] Given the minister's decision to scrap another 66 white-fish vessels on top of the 100 he has already scrapped, the people of Scotland could be forgiven for thinking that he has every "intention of presiding over the destruction of the Scottish fishing industry".

I have to say that the minister rejected a whole range of conservation measures that were put to him, apart from the option to decommission his own vessels. Ross Finnie has now secured his place in history as the fisheries minister who butchered his own fleet and left other European fleets laughing all the way to the North sea. Over the past two years, Shetland alone has lost 40 per cent of its white-fish vessels. Despite past sacrifices and the impact of other fleets on our waters, the Scots yet again face an uphill fight for every extra fish that they want to catch. I could not imagine a more immoral way of running Scotland's fishing industry. It is difficult to envisage that next week's talks will be any worse than last year's talks; however, we cannot put anything past Franz Fischler or the UK Government. Given the European Commission's constant outpourings of doom and gloom, a huge effort is now required to remind consumers that our fish stocks are actually much better than most people think. For example, pelagic stocks are healthy, although the minister will be aware of concerns about our share of North sea herring and of unresolved issues over blue whiting that I hope he will address. Our most valuable fishery—the nephrop fishery—is in good shape. That said, the minister must seek an increase in the North sea quota, given that the scientists themselves recommend an increase of 25 per cent. The Commission, with its usual inconsistency, has called for a much more modest increase.

We must ensure that there is diversification of catching opportunities in the fishing industry so that the market can benefit from that.  One of the Commission's most worrying proposals is to cut the monkfish quota in Scottish waters despite the fact that all that will happen will be that our fishermen will be forced to discard dead monkfish overboard, when monkfish is one of our most valuable catches. At the same time, in a neighbouring management area, however, the Commission proposes to increase the monkfish quota by 27 per cent. That is of genuine concern to Scotland's fishing industry and the minister must take it to Brussels. The biggest opportunity for the fleet is the super-abundant, massive haddock stock, which is estimated to be 457,000 tonnes. The North sea is chock-a-block with haddock and access to that massive stock will provide a lifeline for the white-fish fleet. Perversely, the EU proposes a TAC of only 37,000 tonnes—a fraction of what could sustainably be taken from the North sea. A huge increase in the haddock quota, backed by a well-resourced promotion campaign to boost consumer demand, will help to get the industry back on its feet. However, as in previous years, cod stocks drive the Commission's proposals even though spawning biomass has increased by 60 per cent over the past two years. The minister must persuade the Commission that its draconian policies to boost cod stocks are inappropriate for Scotland's mixed fishery.

If the minister listens to what I say, he will hear that I have not said at any point that we should ignore that scientific advice or avoid taking conservation measures for cod stocks. However, if we do not decouple cod from other stocks, a slow and painful death will continue to be inflicted on the Scottish industry. That is why the decoupling argument will make or break next week's talks. We all agree that we need to reduce fishing effort in cod spawning areas and where clean cod fisheries can be identified, but we must provide viable alternatives for the fleets. We know that the cod bycatch in the nephrop fishery is minimal. The results of trials by Seafish, released this week, now give us conclusive evidence that haddock can be caught selectively with a bycatch of less than 3 per cent. That breakthrough will be crucial to next week's talks in Brussels. The white-fish fleet has even offered to carry independent observers on board to monitor cod bycatches. Even the scientists accept that, if all cod fishing were ceased, stocks might never return to their previous levels because of factors outwith our control. That is one reason why we  need more fundamental scientific research. When I speak to Government scientists, they tell me that they no longer have the time or resources to carry out fundamental scientific research because they are so busy servicing the common fisheries policy. However, we know that climate change and industrial fishing are huge factors, so let us get to the bottom of those issues rather than always pointing the finger at the fishermen. Last year, the fleet managed to survive on only 15 days a month at sea by being able to fish outwith the restricted areas and with the limited transitional aid that was made available. Any revision of the now infamous annex XVII must mean more days at sea, not fewer, now that the fleet is smaller. That must happen against a backdrop of increased quota, particularly haddock quota. There cannot be any blanket rules that ignore Scotland's disproportionate sacrifice in recent years. We welcome the minister's commitment to take that issue to Brussels and to fight for it. Anything else will leave our industry teetering on the brink for another 12 months.

I am sorry; I am running out of time. Ministers must also be prepared to introduce a new aid package and not repeat this year's botched scheme. Ross Finnie and Jack McConnell promised aid to the fleets, the onshore and the processing sectors to get them through this year. Nine months on, however, less than a quarter of the £1.8 million promised for rates release has been given out and not a penny of that went to the fish processors, who employ 10,000 people in Scotland. I got a letter from Aberdeen City Council this morning to say that 20 companies in the city that had applied for the money had all been knocked back because of the tight criteria laid down by the minister. We also have an £8 million underspend in the £40 million decommissioning scheme. That money must stay in our fishing communities. It is also estimated that the bulk of the decommissioning cash has gone to the banks and has not helped to pay off the debts of the onshore businesses that have also been neglected by the minister. Last year, Jack McConnell and Ross Finnie promised that team UK would deliver for Scotland, but all that they delivered was disaster. Elliot Morley sold Scotland down the river and was promoted by Tony Blair for his efforts. Protecting fishing has never been a red line issue for London. Now we are stuck with Ben Bradshaw and, given his lack of experience and the fact that he has paid only one brief visit to Scottish fishing ports  since being appointed to his new post, we cannot afford the risk of allowing him to lead for Scotland next week in Brussels. Ross Finnie should demand the lead role in next week's negotiations to give him the authority to try to win a good deal for Scotland. We can only hope that, next week, Scotland secures the best deal under the current circumstances. If we want the best deal, we have to stop simply putting sticking plaster on every new wound and get to the root of the illness. The growing consensus in Scotland and in our fishing communities is that we can get back on the full road to recovery only outwith the common fisheries policy. Horse trading and backroom deals involving 25 states in Brussels will always mean that fisheries conservation and our coastal economy will play second fiddle. As Government ministers helpfully point out time and again, fish do not recognise national boundaries. Even outside the CFP, international agreements will be required, but they will be on Scotland's terms. Politicians have to take more of a back seat to allow the fishermen, the scientists and the others with a direct interest in each fishery to make the final decisions. Today, Parliament will have the opportunity to support the campaign to bring control over Scotland's fishing grounds back to this country, where it belongs. Previous generations have had to deal with much bigger challenges than replacing the CFP and they rose to those challenges, so surely we can rise to the challenge of scrapping the CFP. Today, we have the opportunity to boost the morale of Scotland's fishing communities and restore their faith in this Parliament. We can also send a powerful message that will concentrate minds in Brussels and let it know that Scotland has had enough of decisions, taken beyond our shores, that are killing one of our most valuable industries. I urge Parliament to back the SNP amendment. I move amendment S2M-715.4, to insert at end: "but believes that the Common Fisheries Policy has failed and that it is in the interests of our fishing communities and fisheries conservation that fishing policy is repatriated to Scotland."

Can I take it from the minister's comments that he is ruling out a blanket approach to the allocation of days at sea among the fleets—if the European Commission goes down that route—and that the number of days allocated to Scotland should reflect past sacrifices, such as decommissioning?

Many people fear that the regional councils will simply be talking shops. The minister himself refers to the need for further changes in the common fisheries policy. Given that the minister believes that we should stay in the CFP, will he indicate what changes he will pursue and when he will pursue them?

Does the member accept the fact that my so-called carping was simply pointing out that we had to widen the debate beyond bathing waters to address the whole of the marine environment, because this is one of only two Executive debates this week?

I am surprised that we are debating bathing water quality for a couple of hours, given the number of pressing issues that the Parliament faces. The Parliament needs to increase the relevance of its debates to match what people outside the Parliament are talking about. Some of the subjects that were discussed during SNP time this morning, such as financial powers and the threat to cut the number of MEPs in Scotland, are far more fundamental; they are the sort of issue that we should be spending our time discussing. Bathing water quality is a very important and worthy subject, but I do not think that it should be commanding two hours of our time, given the pressure we face in relation to several other issues. When starting his opening speech, even the minister looked rather disappointed and worried when the Presiding Officer told him that he had to speak for 11 minutes. The marine environment is crucial to Scotland because we are a marine nation and we are responsible for much of Europe's coastline. That means that we have an enormous responsibility to look after our marine environment. The issue is important not only because bathing water quality is important to human health.

I give way to Sarah Boyack.

When the Parliament is pressed for time, there is a difference between worthy and important issues and issues to which the public want the Parliament to devote two hours of debate in our national political forum. A distinction also exists between the overall marine environment and bathing waters, on which the debate focuses. We should be talking about many other matters. If members speak to the public, they will find that the public have a similar view to mine. The turnout at elections is plummeting because the Parliament is not seen to be talking about issues that matter to the people of Scotland. The marine environment as a whole is important for economic reasons, because it concerns the shellfish industry; the tourism industry, which other members have mentioned; and the growing organic aquaculture industry. All of those depend on good-quality and healthy sea water, and that is not to mention the human health implications to which other members referred. The minister should say why we designate only 60 beaches, unlike many other countries, which designate thousands. Another matter is the "Good Beach Guide", which receives a huge amount of publicity when it is issued. The public become confused by the messages in that coverage and the fact that the Government has designated 60 beaches. They are not sure whether the message is that our beaches are or are not of great quality. This year, the "Good Beach Guide" endorsed only 10 extra beaches in Scotland, and endorsed only 32 of the 126 beaches in Scotland that were sampled. I understand that beaches in the outer Hebrides are of great quality, but are not sampled, which distorts the image that the public receive from the guides that are publicised in the press. The pressure from the European Union on the Scottish Government to deliver environmental improvements is a positive aspect of the EU. The debate arises because of an EU directive, and other EU legislation such as the dangerous substances directive, the groundwater directive and the birds and habitats directives all have an impact on our marine environment. I am thankful that the Government cannot get away with dragging its feet because of EU pressure. The EU  does not always have a good press in Scotland, but it deserves a good press this time. My final point is about reserved matters. Ghost ships have been in the news a lot recently. Those ships could have had a huge impact on our beaches and on the quality of the marine environment. I am thankful that the ghost ships, which are in Hartlepool, will not come into Scottish waters, but they could have done so. When I wrote to the ministers about the subject, their reply was that they did not know about the issue. The Executive did not know about the matter until it saw all the publicity and it contacted the UK Government. We need a bit more co-ordination. Much of the legislation is reserved to London. The fact that 77 acts are relevant to the marine environment in Scotland creates huge confusion and complexity, so we must simplify the situation. I hope that the Executive has proposals in the pipeline to achieve that. We must find out how to streamline those 77 acts so that we know who is responsible for what and the public understand the situation. We must do much to ensure that the marine environment goes higher up the political agenda.

George Lyon's colleague Jeremy Purvis suggested that he did not support full financial powers for the Parliament, only some financial powers. Which financial powers would George Lyon like to be transferred to the Parliament?

Will the member give way?

Will the member explain why she once used a members' business debate in her name to debate a reserved matter?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

There are fears in the fishing industry that the common fisheries policy is about to encroach further into inshore fishing grounds. Such a move would frustrate the Parliament's ability to issue in a few years' time some of the regulations that the minister has suggested. Are those fears with or without foundation?

I welcome this debate. That the issue is local to Galloway was eloquently illustrated by the motion's sponsor, Alex Fergusson, and my colleague Alasdair Morgan, both of whom are, among others, members for the area. The issue highlights the importance of ensuring that the inshore fisheries issue moves further up the political agenda. A strategy from the Scottish Executive is long overdue. The inshore fishing community was excited by the prospect of the Scottish Parliament and thought that it was an opportunity to start to address some of the unique and distinctive issues that the community faces. However, we are now four and a half years into the Scottish Parliament and we are still waiting. There have been at least two rounds of consultation on the proposed strategy for inshore fishing. There was not a huge response from Executive ministers to the first consultation. The recent consultation closed in August and we now await the publication of the resulting draft strategy in early 2004. Producing that sooner rather than later is imperative. One difficulty is that the inshore fisheries sector has been overlooked to an extent, because ministers and other politicians have been distracted by the crisis that faces our distant-water  and deepwater fleets—particularly the white-fish fleet. As a result, we have taken our eyes off the ball. As has been said, the inshore fisheries sector involves 2,000 vessels in Scotland.

I never fail to be amazed that Alasdair Morrison can bring his divide-and-rule tactics even into a members' business debate, which is supposed to be consensual. All SNP members advocate sensible measures for all fleets—the inshore, distant-water and deepwater fleets. Of course we support sensible measures.

I am about to talk briefly about the importance of protecting communities, which is the crux of the debate. Inshore fisheries sustain many smaller coastal communities whose boats cannot go further afield to make a living, as has been said. Protecting the inshore fishery is imperative because, in many places, no alternative source of employment is available. The Parliament and the Government must learn from mistakes. I will not go into a long debate on the common fisheries policy, but it has been a disaster. We must ensure that local communities are at the heart of the decision-making process on the inshore fishery. We must depoliticise the matter as much as possible. The problem with the other fleets has been politicisation of the issue among politicians in Europe, which is destroying fishing opportunities for Scotland. We must depoliticise the inshore fishery and put local communities at the heart of decision making. If we achieve that in the foreseeable future, situations such as the one that has arisen in Galloway will not be created. That would be a huge step forward. I urge the minister to give us an idea of the time scale for producing the strategy for inshore fisheries; to explain the delay, because many people are scratching their heads and trying to work out why we have taken four and a half years to reach the current position; and to  describe his vision for inshore fisheries, so that we can help fishermen in Galloway and the rest of Scotland.

Would the minister be willing to investigate reports that the European Union is planning to cut funding for the HIV surveillance centres in Europe in 2004?

I see that Patrick Harvie got dressed up for the occasion.

I congratulate Des McNulty on securing this important debate. The Parliament always shines when we add an international dimension to our debates, so let me begin by addressing the international dimension to the AIDS debate before returning to the Scottish situation. Internationally, there is an inextricable link between poverty and the spread of HIV and AIDS. Only last week, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation published a report that contrasted different countries. It showed that countries with economic growth have been able to reduce hunger, which, in turn, has led to slower population growth and lower levels of HIV infection. We are in the 21 st century—in 2003—but 850 million people in the world will go to bed hungry tonight. The world is perfectly capable of feeding itself, yet the number of people who are undernourished is increasing by 5 million a year and has done since the mid-1990s. We must  tackle famine and world poverty if we are to tackle the spread of HIV. AIDS is causing havoc in many developing countries by depriving them of their work forces. Families are losing their strongest and most productive members. Last year alone, an extra 5 million people were infected with HIV worldwide. One in five people in sub-Saharan Africa are infected by HIV. That is 40 million people in total. In the next decade, Botswana, which is one of the most developing countries, is set to lose a fifth of its agricultural work force through AIDS. That is an indication of how serious the situation is likely to remain in the next few years. Some UN reports indicate that teachers in some developing countries are dying at a faster rate than they can be trained. That gives another indication of how serious the situation is. There is a vicious circle involving AIDS and poverty. Unless we tackle HIV infection, we cannot tackle poverty; unless we tackle poverty, we will not halt the spread of HIV. The west has a huge role to play in breaking that vicious circle. Recently, we have seen a welcome fall in the price of drugs for preventing the spread of HIV and for treating patients with HIV. Because of that, Britain's position is now that it will give cash towards treatment rather than just prevention. I believe that all of us in the chamber would share the view that the way in which the multinational pharmaceutical companies have held the developing world to ransom in recent years is absolutely despicable. Let us hope that we can put that behind us and allow affordable drugs to be supplied to the developing world. In the past year alone, UN spending on HIV/AIDS has increased by 50 per cent, to £4.7 billion. That might seem to be quite a lot of money on the face of it, but it is just a fraction of what should be spent. During Bush's recent visit, he said that tackling AIDS is always on the agenda whenever global leaders meet these days. The difficulty is that they always have military spending and war on the same agenda and those issues, unfortunately, are higher up the agenda than tackling AIDS is. I want before I sit down to make two points to the minister, which I hope he will address. First, there have been reports that the European Union is planning to cut the funding for the centres that monitor the progress of tuberculosis, AIDS and other sexually transmitted infections in 2004. That may be the plan, but at the same time, new states in which HIV rates are on the rise are entering the EU. I ask the minister to address that point. Perhaps he will investigate the matter and make representations to the EU if he thinks that that would be worthwhile. We have to find out more information about those worrying plans.  I also seek an update on plans to tackle HIV infection in Scotland. Lots of new initiatives have been adopted. One initiative is run by Grampian police who are now giving out clean needles to stop the spread of HIV among drug users in their custody. I look forward to the minister's responses on those issues.

Walking to Deacon Brodie's.

As a comparative youngster, I enjoyed Duncan McNeil's recalling of life in early 18 th century Greenock. It was very interesting. It is ironic that I intervened at question time to talk about Scotland's declining population and we are now having a debate on encouraging physical activity in Scotland. Something tells me that there might be a link there, and a win-win situation, but perhaps we should not delve too far into that particular debate. The health statistics in Scotland highlight just how important it is that we make people much more active. I know from personal experience that it is not easy for people to access sports, youth and leisure facilities in their area. I play indoor football in Aberdeen. To get there, I have to travel about 8 miles by car. I am quite lucky, both because I have a car and because there is such a facility within 8 miles of where I live. However, most people in north-east Scotland and, no doubt, elsewhere in Scotland, must travel a lot further. I have always found it ironic that such indoor football facilities are always packed out and that it is difficult to book pitches. It is clear that supply is not meeting demand as far as five-a-side or eight-a-side football is concerned. That sport is played mainly by men, but the same applies to all leisure facilities. I understand that the community of Tillydrone is the area of Aberdeen with the youngest population, but it has next to no sports facilities. That situation is replicated throughout the country. The exception is Shetland, where virtually every village, no matter how small, has leisure facilities,  because Shetland Islands Council has used some of the oil money to build them. No matter where someone lives in Shetland, they have access to such facilities. As a result, people there have a much better quality of life and are more likely to be physically active. Scotland is a relatively rich country, so why can we not achieve those standards on mainland Scotland too? I have always thought that some sort of formula should be applied to communities, whereby people should live within a minimum distance of sports facilities. One problem with changing people's lifestyles is to do with housing estates' being built with no facilities. Two garages might be put next to each house, but there are no amenities or facilities nearby. Unless some planning gain is built into the planning permission—which is worth while pursuing, although we cannot rely on that—there will be no facilities. When new settlements are being built, it is expected that people will get into their cars to go to the shops, given the fact that all the small shops have closed down and it is now necessary to go to out-of-town shopping centres, or to get to other facilities. There is also a problem with parents always getting into their four-by-fours, despite the fact that they live in built-up areas, to take their kids to school. Kids are therefore getting out of the habit of walking even to the local school, which might be less than a mile away, because of frequently over-hyped safety issues. That is a cultural aspect that we must address.

I agree with that sentiment. Building community, sports and leisure facilities should somehow be done automatically. It should not rely on planning gain built in by local planners, because that happens only in some cases. I do not see why that cannot be done automatically. Perhaps the minister should be addressing that. We must encourage national sports. That means encouraging the national football team and encouraging Rangers and Celtic to put some indigenous players on the pitch, so as to encourage youngsters to come through in Scotland. It is reported in the news that the England team winning the rugby world cup—although it inspires many of us to switch off our television sets—is inspiring many people south of the border to get involved in sport. We must  encourage national sporting role models and support our national teams. We can benefit not only people's health but Scotland's environment if we encourage people to be more active and to get out of their cars. That will save the national health service a fortune and it will make Scotland a much more fulfilled and healthy nation.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to measure the impact of the decline in Scotland's population. (S2O-843)

I am delighted to hear that the minister has read the explosive and worrying document that the Registrar General for Scotland issued earlier this year. The document states: "Scotland, unlike other countries in the European Union, is currently experiencing overall population decline." Does the minister agree with the Registrar General that population decline is "often regarded as being symptomatic of poor economic performance". Will the minister tell the chamber and Scotland why, in a devolved Scotland, young people and young families continue to emigrate overseas?

Does the First Minister recall that, after last December's disastrous talks in Brussels, he announced a so-called aid package that would amount to £50 million for Scotland's fishing communities? It transpired this week that the Government has held back £13 million of that package because it miscalculated the amount of cash that would be required for decommissioning. Will he give the fishing industry and the chamber a commitment that that £13 million will be given to our fishing communities, which, although he might disagree, are not thriving but fighting for survival and require that cash?

What are the minister's views on the consultation exercise that was undertaken by the Electoral Commission? Does he think that there was any point to that exercise, given that all the submissions were ignored? Did the Scottish Executive make a submission to the Electoral Commission?

During the past 300 years, many people south of the border complained that Scotland was over-represented in the Westminster Parliament. The whole of Scotland united in opposing that view and said that we are distinctive, that we have to protect our cultural identity, and that Scotland is not simply a region but an ancient nation. Likewise, that is why we should argue to retain 8 MEPs and why the UK Government should not adopt an across-the-board policy in determining the number of European Parliament seats that parts of the UK should have. As convener of the European and External Relations Committee, I have paid close attention to the issue, as indeed has the committee, which has considered the issue in detail and expressed its views. Nicola Sturgeon is right to point out that Scotland should retain eight MEPs, to take into account the distinctions that we have in this country. I wrote to the Electoral Commission on 7 October, "to reaffirm the view of the Scottish Parliament's European and External Relations Committee that the number of MEPs from Scotland selected for the next mandate of the European Parliament should remain at 8". The committee also wrote to the UK Government; as convener, I wrote to Lord Falconer, Secretary of State for Constitutional Affairs, on 5 November. I said that the committee considers that the situation "is neither balanced nor fair and does not take into account any contributing factors, such as peripherality or the rural nature of most of Scotland, which may have led to a different outcome" We received a response from the Electoral Commission. The committee was interested to know what formula had been used by the Electoral Commission to determine how many MEPs Scotland should have and one of the main difficulties that the committee identified is that the consultation process was, in effect, a sham. The Electoral Commission appears to have been in a situation in which none of the formulae that it considered could have arrived at any number other than seven. We challenged the commission about that, but it was clear that it could not do much about the situation because its criteria had, in turn, been set by the UK Government.  The committee also noted the fact that the vast majority of submissions to the Electoral Commission, including our own, argued for the retention of eight MEPs from Scotland. The UK Government has now responded to the committee. On 18 November, we received a response from the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State in the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister, Christopher Leslie MP, who says that arguments have taken place in the past, but adds: "However, Scotland is a constituent part of the UK in Europe and constitutes just one of twelve UK European electoral regions." I hope that the whole Parliament is united in agreeing that Scotland is not simply one of the UK's regions. It is a nation, which has been recognised in the past and should continue to be recognised in the future. That means retention of 8 MEPs. The letter goes on to say: "It would not be right to single out one electoral region of the UK for special treatment, beyond the minimum requirement of 3 MEPs each, particularly since a disproportionate increase for one region would necessarily be made at the expense of another region." The letter goes on to refer to the terms of the European Parliament (Representation) Act 2003, which was, of course, passed by the UK Government before the Electoral Commission embarked on its consultation. The bottom line is that the consultation exercise that was run by the Electoral Commission was a complete sham and was meaningless. The submissions to that consultation were not taken into account and were not worth the paper that they were written on, which is very disappointing. The only option that is left to us is for Parliament to come together to express a view to the UK Government and to hope that when the appropriate order is before Westminster, the UK Government will change its mind and amend the order, as it is perfectly entitled to do. I hope that the minister will take on board the views of the European and External Relations Committee and of members who have spoken in this debate, and that he will decide to fight for Scotland on the issue.

The shortage of affordable housing in rural communities has priced many young people out of their local communities, even if they want to continue to work and live where they have been brought up. For example, in Aberdeenshire—which is a small area—alone, there are 4,500 people on the housing list. The rural home ownership grant scheme has attracted only five successful applications in Aberdeenshire, and not that many more elsewhere in Scotland. Does the minister believe that that scheme has been a success in helping people to buy their home? If not, is she going to replace it or do something else to promote it?

I also welcome the minister's statement and thank him for responding to views expressed by MSPs from around the country. Will the minister tell us how many dentists will have to be recruited nationally before he can achieve his objectives? What discussions has he had with the Minister for Health and Community Care, Malcolm Chisholm, with regard to the shortage of specialist consultants and theatre staff, whose work is also related to this important topic?

Presiding Officer, can you confirm that, as soon as a minister sits down, the statement is available to all members anyway at the back of the chamber, as previously agreed, and that every member had access to that statement as soon as the minister sat down?

This debate is primarily about US foreign policy and the fact that the UK Prime Minister has given his blessing to it. The world faces a dilemma in that we cannot achieve world peace without the backing of the US but neither can we achieve it with the current US leadership in place. I remind the chamber that yesterday was the 13 th anniversary of the signing in Paris by the members of the Warsaw pact and the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation of the treaty that signalled the end of the cold war. However, in this new millennium, few people in Scotland or internationally would think that the world has become a safer place in the past 13 years. We all  know that, thanks to the USA's short-sighted foreign policy, the world is a much more dangerous place. As an indication of the changes that have taken place over the past 13 years, I draw the attention of the chamber to the fact that, last week, a survey revealed that 53 per cent of Europeans think that the USA is a danger to world security. That places the USA on a par with North Korea and Iran. Of course, George Bush has become unpopular throughout Europe not only because of Iraq, but because of his back-pedalling on the environment and his opposition to the International Criminal Court. Previously, the cold war united Europe and the USA, but now America is the only huge economic and military superpower on the planet. It has decided to use that might to become the archetypal playground bully, thinking that the only way in which it can do things is by using that economic and military might. What happened on 11 September should have been a wake-up call to the USA but, instead, it seemed to view it as some sort of call to arms. After 11 September, we were all united behind the USA in the fight against international terrorism. However, America moved the agenda away from that and towards weapons of mass destruction and, later, regime change. In the meantime, other issues that it could have tackled, such as world poverty, famine and the issues that feed terrorism throughout the world, have been completely neglected, particularly the crisis in the middle east, which seems to have fallen off the USA's radar screen. Surely our strategy must be to isolate the terrorists. However, the current USA policy, to which Blair gives his blessing, isolates America and the UK, not the terrorists. Further, it gives terrorism a worldwide recruiting sergeant and it undermines the UN. The challenge facing Scotland, the UK and the rest of the international community is somehow to persuade the USA that international interests are also America's interests. At the moment, the USA is trying to persuade the rest of the world that its interests are the same as international interests. Bush has to start learning how to make friends and not just create enemies. Yesterday, the UN put out an appeal for aid to help in the 21 crises throughout the world that have been neglected because of what has happened in Iraq and, previously, in Afghanistan. The UN wants $3 billion to that end, which is a tiny percentage of the $87 billion that Bush asked Congress for to deal with the situation in Iraq. What would the world be like today if Bush had thought that it was in the USA's interest to ask Congress for $87 billion to  tackle world poverty and famine? Think of the bridges that that would have built and the resentment towards the USA that would have been eliminated. Scotland should be confident of being able to make a contribution to the process that I have described. We should remember that, back in the early 1990s, Norway helped the middle east peace process and that, as Ireland takes over the European Union presidency, it has put on the EU's agenda a range of issues relating to international development and world peace. If a small nation such as Ireland can make that sort of contribution, Scotland should be able to do so as well. It is despicable that the Scottish Executive ministers have not appeared for this important debate. The message from this chamber today should be that the USA's leaders must change their foreign policy and that, if they will not do that, the people of the USA must change their political leaders.

Will the member give way?

I believe that yesterday, as part of the First Minister's new role to which David McLetchie referred, he signed the declaration of Salzburg, which calls for Parliaments such as the Scottish  Parliament to have direct access to the European Court of Justice and for a reaffirmation that regional and devolved Governments can lead EU delegations on behalf of member states. Does the First Minister intend to pursue those two issues with the UK Government to allow it to protect our fishing communities and give this Parliament some power to defend them?

Europe is a great thing, and it has done Scotland a lot of good. Over the past few years, however, many people in Scotland have had huge difficulties with its policies, which can usually be described with three-letter acronyms—the first letter is usually a C and the last a P—namely, CAP and the CFP.

I thank George Lyon for that intervention, but I do not recall saying that we  should pull out of the CAP. However, people have wanted to change policies, including the common agricultural policy, for a long time. Some farmers have been saying that the biggest change in land use in Scotland this century is possibly about to take place. Many farmers think that the common agricultural policy in its current form has been failing for a long time. If £0.5 billion of subsidy is being put into a particular sector, as has been the case in recent years in Scotland, and if, as they have been telling us in our surgeries, farmers are getting derisory incomes and are having to add non-farming activities to their businesses in order to survive, then we can all accept that something is clearly wrong with the situation. That is not the only thing that has been wrong with the CAP. There have also been the food mountains—although they have been dealt with to an extent. As Irene Oldfather mentioned, there is a ridiculous situation with tobacco subsidies. The EU is trying to get more involved in health issues, so it is hypocritical for it to be involved in those subsidies. The issues around CAP reform concern not just Scottish, UK or European farmers; they concern farmers throughout the developing world. Part of the CAP reform agenda relates to promoting development elsewhere in the world, which we should not forget. Although there was a failure to make progress at Cancun, we know that liberalisation is still on the agenda, so even more pressures and challenges will be facing our farmers in the near future. Some way down the line we may lose the right to subsidise any products that are exported. These reforms are the beginning of change that will continue for some years.

I accept what the member says. I am saying that there is more change ahead, because liberalisation will be on the agenda again in the foreseeable future. I turn to food security. All farmers believe that change to the CAP is inevitable and have thought so for some time. Most farmers to whom I have spoken can prepare for that change. However, food security is important to the debate, as it was the founding principle of the CAP. As a nation, we must ask what we mean by food security. Is it still an objective and is it still required? If so, how do we define it? I hope that that issue will feature in the debate that lies ahead in the next few months and that ministers will take it into account. Everyone agrees that farmers must farm for the market and for need. As Rhona Brankin said, when determining what will be in the marketplace  we must define what we mean by need. We all welcome the simplification that is on the horizon, because it will mean that farmers may not have to spend as much money on consultants—although the integrated administration and control system forms will still have to be completed and passports and movement records will still be needed. Some farmers have mentioned cross-compliance to MSPs. There is some confusion about whether new burdens will be imposed because of climate cross-compliance. I hope that the minister will refer to that, because many farmers want to know about it. I give a very warm welcome to the new emphasis on delivering new public goods for the people of Scotland and allowing our farmers to play a central role in doing that and in protecting the environment. It is important that we raise awareness among the people of Scotland of the new opportunities that will be afforded them as a result of these changes. On the ITV news last night, a reporter discussing the CAP reforms said that they might mean money for nothing for farmers. That is a myth that we want to destroy. We want to explain what the CAP reforms mean for the people of Scotland and how they, as well as farmers, will benefit from those reforms. A severe reduction in production may have a significant impact on downstream industries. As George Lyon pointed out, no one knows what impact the reforms will have on production. Production may not reduce at all, but there are concerns in the beef sector. If members have been reading the press over the past few days, they will know that predictions for the reduction in suckler beef cattle herds range from 5 to 30 per cent. The reforms may have an impact on downstream industries and the infrastructure of many of our rural communities, as reduced production would mean that less feed was required for animals and that abattoirs could be closed. The haulage industry and the marts would also be hit. We must take all those issues into account. Many farmers are diversifying and that process must be supported. An impressive number of farmers are becoming involved in the production of biofuels and other forms of renewable energy. That development must be supported and encouraged. We are rising to that challenge. There are challenges, because the outcome of the reforms is unpredictable and we will not be able to measure it. We know that our farmers are resilient and will adapt, but they will need the support of the Parliament to do so. There are many opportunities to protect our niche and premium markets and, above all, to ensure that we protect our traditional way of life in Scotland. It is incumbent on MSPs to try to attend the many  consultation meetings that will take place throughout Scotland over the next few days and to hear the concerns of farmers. We can then have another debate in the chamber and move forward.

Will the minister define what "unnecessary delay" in making that capital funding available means? In Grampian, there are some question marks over the £2 million that may be made available over three years. As I understand it, there is no written commitment, as yet. Will there be a commitment to releasing that £2 million? I also invite him to address the need for more dental school places. Will more places be made available in the dental schools and, if so, when will that happen?

To ask the Scottish Executive what alternative scientific research it plans to commission into the reasons for North sea and north Atlantic fish stock fluctuations. (S2O-680)

I thank the minister for his response, although it does not quite answer my question. Will he commission specific research into the causes of the decline in cod stocks in the North sea? Has he been in contact with any of the many marine scientists from throughout Europe who say that climate change is largely responsible for fluctuations in the location of cod stocks in the North sea? Surely that is the key to strengthening the case that we will be taking to Brussels in December.

Will the member give way?

A signal that there is an opportunity for the Scottish Parliament to make a huge difference in achieving sustainable development is that our standing orders state that any bill that comes before it must have attached to it an assessment of its impact on sustainable development. That is a far cry from what happened in this country a few years ago. Then, the whole of the United Kingdom was referred to as the dirty man of Europe. Like people in the rest of the UK, Europe and the world, the people of Scotland face key challenges. Nowadays, many folk live in better housing and there are more cars, videos and personal computers. We take more holidays and enjoy more leisure, but such changes have a massive impact on the environment. The challenge must be to reduce demands on the earth's resources, improve all environments and tackle poverty, which is a key objective of any sustainable development strategy. The SNP agrees that sustainable development must be a thread through absolutely everything that is done and must not be simply a fad for politicians who now and again turn their attention to the issue. We all remember Tony Blair soon after he was elected in 1997 going to Europe surrounded by Cabinet ministers and dictating what should happen to help the environment, then going to New York and speaking to the United Nations. I do not think that many of us remember him doing much to achieve sustainable  development since his warm words and such rhetoric. In September last year, after his visit to the South African summit, the First Minister made a statement to the Parliament on sustainable development. I cannot remember him talking much about sustainable development since then or making further statements to the chamber. The issue does not seem to be particularly high on the Executive's agenda.

The key for the Executive is to ensure that sustainable development is a priority. There have not been many ministerial statements or comments by the First Minister about sustainable development in the chamber. If the issue is a top priority, we must hear more from ministers so that the Parliament can hold the Executive to account. We must change the culture of individuals in Scotland, our communities, businesses and, of course, politicians. As other members have said, the key challenge is to marry economic development with sustainable development. I was interested in the World Wildlife Fund's saying that, because we do not have a proper green jobs strategy in Scotland, we are missing out on 50,000 jobs. I remind members that there are currently around 150,000 unemployed people in Scotland. Unemployment could be cut by one third in Scotland if we got our act together in implementing a green jobs strategy. We do not want to be churlish. The Parliament and the Executive have made steps forward. Strategic environmental assessment has been mentioned and I hope that it will change the culture of the public sector in Scotland. Much more must be done in respect of renewable energy and the national waste strategy, but at least we are making a start. However, we must bear in mind the fact that the impetus for many changes has come from the European Union rather than from Executive ministers; we are simply responding to directives that must be implemented. That said, it is important to continue to emphasise reducing the use of materials and reusing and recycling materials in Scotland. People must change. That means that education must be the key in chasing sustainable  development. I have a leaflet by the North of Scotland Sustainable Development Awareness Campaign. Most people in Scotland do not know what is in such leaflets. Even the New Internationalist magazine—which not many people read; only a few middle-class people in Scotland read it—has produced an excellent poster that shows a 20-step programme to kick habits and improve people's impact on the environment. We must ensure that the people of Scotland are aware of all the steps that they can take. The Executive's record is not perfect. Robin Harper referred to an issue that was in the press yesterday. A draft independent report by the Scottish centre for public policy commission said about sustainable development that the Executive is cheating on our children, cheating on our neighbours and cheating on ourselves.

I will wait and see what the report says, but I gave a direct quote. The key point that the SNP wants to make is that many key drivers in achieving sustainable development are reserved to Westminster. Many transport issues—which we must get right if we want to address sustainable development—are reserved to Westminster, as are energy and nuclear power issues. Fiscal policy and the carrot-and-stick approach to make people change their behaviour are also reserved to Westminster. Robin Harper said that if one good policy is undermined by bad policies elsewhere, we will lose its benefits. That is true. If we are to make a real difference, we need cross-cutting legislative powers. There is no point in adopting the best policies that we can in Scotland only to be undermined by what is happening in London. That is why this country needs full financial independence so that we can make a real difference. Scotland is a perfect size—we simply need the tools to make a difference. I move amendment S2M-559.1, to insert at end: "and recognises that, by gaining the powers enjoyed by other independent member states of the EU, the Parliament's efforts to achieve sustainable development will be greatly enhanced as this will provide legislative powers over matters currently reserved to Her Majesty's Government that influence sustainable development, the ability to use fiscal measures and direct representation on  international bodies dedicated to protecting the environment".

Most people welcome the simplification of the common agricultural policy, which will lead to simpler regulations for farming and other businesses in rural Scotland. However, it was reported in the press this week that the minister thinks that the reform of the common agricultural policy may lead to job losses in the civil service. Will the minister guarantee that any loss of civil service jobs will not occur in rural communities, which will need on-going support during the intense period of transition in the years ahead?

To ask the Scottish Executive what progress is being made in extending the availability of broadband throughout the country. (S2O-563)

Does the minister accept that we have to extend broadband throughout the country, particularly to places such as Aberdeenshire, where fewer than 10 per cent of British Telecommunications exchanges are currently connected to broadband? Will he explain to Parliament how Northern Ireland is able to tender for 100 per cent roll-out in the province while we are apparently unable to do so in Scotland? Will he also confirm whether he has inquired as to how much it would cost to achieve, say, 95 per cent or 100 per cent roll-out in Scotland? If he has, what figure was he given?

If the First Minister believes in the sustainable development of Scotland's marine resources, does he agree with the SNP that we should use the negotiations at the intergovernmental conference that begins in Rome this Saturday to prevent Brussels from gaining exclusive competence over Scotland's fishing grounds, as is unfortunately proposed under the draft European Union constitution? Will he tell us who will represent Scotland in those negotiations alongside United Kingdom ministers to ensure that Scotland's case is heard?

Answer the question.

Will the minister give way?

A letter that I received yesterday from Grampian Primary Care NHS Trust indicated that the waiting time for NHS drug treatment in Grampian fell from a massive 27 months in June 2002 to four months in June 2003—I am sure that the minister will welcome that. However, the cash for the pilot initiative runs out in September. Will the minister speak to NHS Grampian to ensure that adequate resources are available to allow that initiative to become permanent so that we can break the cycle of drug-related crime in Grampian?

Quite rightly, the minister states that the issue concerning the Crown Estate is reserved to Westminster. However, is he willing to approach the relevant authorities to try to get  the powers that they enjoy transferred to the Scottish Parliament?

The SNP welcomes this long-overdue debate on an industry that is vital to Scotland. Many members who serve, or have served, on the parliamentary committees that were and are concerned with rural development and with the environment over the past few years have been lucky enough to visit fish farms, shellfish farms or similar facilities the length and breadth of the Highlands and Islands. Like me, they realise how important a role the industry plays in providing local employment and supporting rural communities. I visited fish farms in Lochaber and the Shetland Islands. One of my recent visits was to a mussel farm in Yell in the Shetlands. Such visits bring home to us how important those aquaculture operations are. The minister mentioned fragile communities in which fish farming or shellfish farming can represent 30 per cent of local employment. That is the case not only in the Highlands and Islands, as most people think; the industry is also responsible for supplying many of the fish processors throughout Scotland, from the north-east to the south. Hundreds of jobs in Fraserburgh, Buckie, Moray, Annan and elsewhere are involved in processing farmed fish. I mention those examples to give people an impression of how important the industry is to the whole of the country. Today marks the first debate on aquaculture in the four and a half years of the Parliament and yet Scotland is responsible for 90 per cent of United Kingdom production, 30 per cent of European production and, according to the minister's foreword to the framework document, 50 per cent of Scottish food exports. The ministers are questioning those figures—I see them speaking to  each other—but I say to them that the Scottish Parliament information centre has checked them. We have to bear in mind the size and importance of the industry when we consider the fact that it is struggling as a result of cheap imports and other issues. In recent weeks and months, in the Western Isles and elsewhere in Scotland, there have been job losses not only on the farms, but in related industries such as packaging, which are also suffering. The product does not command the niche market that it once did; it is now a commodity product. Massive levels of production, both in and outwith Europe, are making an impact on the Scottish economy. The economic contribution that the industry makes has been overshadowed by the heated debate that is taking place about the industry's impact on Scotland's environment. The industry went unchecked for 30 years. It has developed over the past three decades and yet Westminster, when it was in charge, took virtually no interest in supporting the industry or looking after Scotland's environment. The lack of support to make the industry more competitive and to protect the environment means that, now that we have a Scottish Parliament, we need a strategy that will protect and develop the industry and protect our environment. We are beginning to address the issues, but I have to say that the Executive's record is extremely poor. Members will remember the call for an independent inquiry into the impact of fish farming on the environment, which was rejected despite the fact that two parliamentary committees called for such an inquiry. The call was rejected despite the fact that the debate on the impact of fish farming on the environment is one of the biggest that has taken place in the Scottish media and in our rural communities in recent years. The Government is only now beginning to address some of the issues and that is simply not good enough. I pay tribute to the parliamentary committees that took up the issue because the Government refused to do so. Four and a half years into devolution, we are speaking to the third minister with responsibility for fisheries. However, all we get in the framework document is a damp squib.

I will come to the issue of science. However, as a graduate of the University of Stirling, I know all about the fine work that is carried out at that fantastic institution. The minister's speech reminded me of Tony Blair's speech to the unions yesterday. However, in this case, although the minister talks tough, nothing in his paperwork lives up to expectations. The document ducks just about all the important issues on which people seek action. There has been some progress. For example, the area management agreements are welcomed all round the chamber. However, the heated debate to which I have referred continues. The tens of thousands of anglers in Scotland, environmentalists and many other people are expressing genuine concern about the lack of attention to the impact that might be—

If the member will be patient, she will hear some of the SNP's criticisms. Escapes from fish farms are giving Scotland's communities much cause for concern. It is fair to say that such escapes are not good for the environment. Interbreeding and many other issues that we all know about pose dangers, which is why the minister should rule out the introduction of genetically modified fish. However, he does not do so in the document. He should protect our environment and the industry's good name by not allowing such a development in Scotland at any stage. The importance of science is highlighted by our need to get to the bottom of issues such as the impact on our river systems of the introduction of diseases and sea lice and nutrient pollutions from salmon waste and chemicals to control disease and pests. The SNP and I totally agree with the Scottish Executive's priorities on scientific work as laid out in the document. There is an immense amount of confusion in the public arena. In fact, it is no wonder that people who consume salmon and other products are confused. That is why we need a Government that will commit resources to ensure that objective scientific research is carried out. Such research is lacking.

No—I have given way too many times. Even a headline in The Press and Journal this week says, "Global warming blamed for collapse of salmon runs". That suggests that the fish farmers are not to blame for the situation. Another headline from the week before says, "Research 'clears' fish farms". However, another headline says, "Fish farming increase a serious threat to Scotland's water system" and a further story is headlined "Decline in wild salmon attacked". In those stories, the industry is blamed for what has happened. Such headlines highlight the confusion in the public arena and illustrate why we have to get the bottom of the problem. However, the Government has not made any substantial commitment as far as such research is concerned and although it makes several references in its document to the need for research, it does not back them up with any commitments.

No. I am saying that we all agree with the research priorities. However, we should not have had to wait for four and a half years after the introduction of devolution for resources to tackle such issues. The issue of fish feed has also been raised. We are discussing the expansion of the aquaculture sector, which I think is something that we would all want to happen. However, that expansion must take place on a sustainable basis. We cannot just move into white-fish farming, because such species will require even more feed. That raises a lot of questions about the lack of sustainability of current sources of fish feed.

The minister indicated his current lack of progress in European negotiations. Perhaps if we had more power in Europe, we would have more influence on what happens there. I commend the work that has been done by Scottish Quality Salmon and others in the industry, which have made a great deal of progress in  improving their environmental record. However, there will always be rogues. I suggest to the minister that we must move the licensing system from the farm sites to the operators and, in that way, we will be able to cut the rogues out of the industry. Relocation of farms might be necessary. If that happens, there should be public funding to back it up. Four and a half years into devolution, we are still puzzled about why the code of best practice will not arrive until December 2004. Five and a half years after devolution, we will only just be getting round to ensuring that all the players adhere to a code of best practice. I turn briefly to the main issues for which the Executive has proposed no action in its document. The Crown Estate, which has been mentioned already, is an issue that has been ducked by the Executive. "A Strategic Framework for Scottish Aquaculture" says at point 2.24: "Additional costs imposed uniquely on Scottish producers should be avoided wherever possible." The document goes on to say that nothing much will be done about taking power away from the Crown Estate, which leaves our industry at a competitive disadvantage. As Fergus Ewing said, that situation costs the industry about £2 million a year. Streamlining and simplifying bureaucracy is another issue that has been ducked by the Executive. The document says that the Executive tried to reach an agreement, it could not do so and therefore there is nothing that it can do about it.

If that commitment is in the partnership document, why is it not in the strategy document that we are debating today? Perhaps it should be there. We have to learn from the Norwegian example, because our people have to deal with 10 agencies. Four and a half years into devolution, although the primary legislation is in place, we are being told that we must wait until 2005. Although there are many agencies that the industry must consult, we are leaving it until five and a half years after the establishment of the Parliament before we give local communities a say in where fish farms are sited. Many people have told the Scottish National  Party that the strategy framework should be called the fish-farming strategy, because it virtually ignores shellfish farming, which has huge potential for Scotland. There are few references in the document to organic fish farming or shellfish farming, yet those methods have less of an impact on the environment and huge potential for the Scottish economy, given the consumption of shellfish products throughout Europe. I will conclude, Presiding Officer, because I see that you are about to intervene. We recognise that the Parliament has made a good start. The Executive has not made a particularly good start, but at least we are beginning to address some of the issues that I have mentioned. However, the industry and the environment require more vision and leadership from the Executive. We have to work out why the Norwegian industry is more indigenously owned and why it is doing extremely well. It has a streamlined regulatory framework, but at the same time, its wild fish stocks are increasing. We must also protect the industry for the sake of Scotland's health record, because although we produce so much fish, the strategy document states that fish barely features in the Scottish diet. The industry needs more protection and it has huge potential, but we have no confidence in the current Executive to develop it. I urge Parliament to support my amendment. I move amendment S2M-310.2, to leave out from first "welcomes" to end and insert: "expresses support for sustainable aquaculture and recognises the sector's vital economic contribution to Scotland; urges the industry to strive continually to achieve the highest environmental standards and welcomes progress already made; believes that the regulatory framework must be guided by well-resourced science; further believes that lessons must be learnt from other countries on the streamlining and simplification of the regulatory framework and is disappointed that this is one of many issues that the strategy fails to address adequately; calls for the powers currently exercised by the Crown Estate to be transferred to the Parliament, and further calls for the early introduction of legislation transferring planning control to local authorities in order to enhance openness and accountability to ensure that local communities have a say over the sitting of fish farms."

The minister referred to the UK Government's consultation on the so-called repatriation of regional funding. To help the Parliament's committees, all parties in the chamber and the local authorities, will he put on record a clear view of whether the Executive believes that that funding should be repatriated?

I welcome the debate, which Jeremy Purvis secured, because the subject is going to appear on the Parliament's agenda again and again over the next couple of years. During my first minute, I will wear my hat as convener of the European and External Relations Committee. The committee will be considering the issue because the changes that are going to happen over the next few years are so important to Scotland. Previous committee reports illustrated the value of regional funds to Scotland and the positive impact that they have on the south of Scotland and elsewhere in the country. Unfortunately, the latest United Kingdom Government consultation gave the committee only  a few weeks to consider its ideas, including the controversial idea of renationalising—if we want to use that phrase—the regional funding back to London, which should mean that it should be coming back to Scotland. That issue is very controversial. We are, of course, discussing this subject because of the enlargement of the EU. On 1 May 2004, the EU goes from having 15 member states to having 25, bringing in countries such as Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary. A couple of years after that, Bulgaria and Romania might also be coming into the EU. At the same time, the UK Government does not want to put more money into the European cake. That means that the cake will stay the same size—although it might increase marginally—but it is going to be spread more thinly across 27 member states. We know that that is going to lead to changes in the distribution of regional funding because we are going to get less of that cake. We have battles on our hands. The first battle is to ensure that regional funding continues and that Scotland qualifies. Unless economic disparity in Scotland disappears post 2006—which I do not expect to happen in the south of Scotland—we are still going to need regional funding. That is the first battle that ministers will have to start fighting. The second battle is with Whitehall, which favours renationalising the cash and bringing it back to London because it wants to save money. Whitehall says that Scotland does not have to worry about that because there is a guarantee that Whitehall will match any money that has come from Europe. That has a number of difficulties that have been highlighted by agencies and local authorities throughout Scotland that do not trust Whitehall. One of those difficulties is that the Administration in London might change; future Governments cannot be bound. One Government might say, "Don't worry; we are going to match the funding," but it cannot bind future Governments to that. That means that we could lose cash in future. Let us not forget that regional funding is worth £1.1 billion to Scotland between 2000 and 2006. That illustrates the price that we will have to pay if we fail to get our act together in the foreseeable future. Many people in Scotland do not believe that the guarantee is worth the paper that it is written on and that is a serious issue for ministers. It is important that ministers take a view. At the moment they are hiding behind the Scottish structural funds forum. We do not know what our ministers' views are. Do they support the repatriation of regional funding? We need to know if they are going to stand up for Scotland's interests in the foreseeable future. If they do not,  we could lose hundreds of millions of pounds for peripheral communities in Scotland.

I apologise to the member, but I am in my final minute. My final comment relates to Jeremy Purvis's remarks about the need for consensus. If there is going to be consensus between the Scottish Parliament and its committees, the Government in Scotland and the UK Government, we must have consensus around a particular view. At the moment there is no view and no view is expressed in Jeremy Purvis's motion. He says that he wants regional funding to continue, whether or not the money is repatriated, but if it is repatriated, there might be no funding in the foreseeable future. Not expressing a view is a classic Liberal Democrat position. We need to hear the Liberal Democrats' view because they are part of the coalition. Please get a view. Let us all rally round it and defend regional funding for Scotland's communities.

Does the minister think that incineration is the most efficient means of waste disposal?

Will the member give way?

I thank Linda Fabiani for that comment. I suspect that whatever the minister was taking last night at the parliamentary event held by journalists may still be in his bloodstream. I have a sense of déjà vu because last Thursday some of us—very few of us—gathered in the chamber to debate amendment regulations that also related to environmental matters. Those regulations concerned the water industry, and were an example of the impact of European legislation on the work of the Scottish Parliament. In this case the Scottish National Party supports the introduction of these amendment regulations. I am sure that we all wish to give our warm thanks to the Subordinate Legislation Committee for bringing the issue to our attention. The amendment regulations ensure that the existing regulations will cover all forms of waste disposal, including agricultural waste and non-mineral waste from quarries and mines. I am sure that we all recognise the role that farmers will have to play in improving Scotland's environment in the years ahead. We welcome the wholehearted support of farmers for making that contribution. We have 45 minutes to debate the issue of landfill, which is unfortunate because there are other more important issues for which we could have used the time. One such issue is that of food supplements, on which many MSPs were calling for debating time yesterday. It is to Scotland's shame that 90 per cent of waste is currently landfilled. For too many years, people in Scotland—particularly in industry—thought that, due to the geology of Scotland, the use of landfill sites was easy and cheap. That  allowed people who operated quarries and so on to restore them simply by using landfill. We have learned, however, that there are many disadvantages to using landfill. The older sites have produced a great deal of pollution, and there are uncontrolled leakages. There is now a shortage of sites, and Margaret Ewing referred to the transportation of waste from one site to other sites across the country. That in turn leads to further pollution because of increased road traffic and so on. Landfill sites are unsightly—no one wants one on their doorstep. They are noisy and smelly, which makes them unpopular with the public. The SNP supports the Executive's belief that we should not squander Scotland's valuable resources and energy on landfill. We all recognise that landfill contributes to global warming by producing carbon dioxide and methane. I have already referred to the environmental degradation that results from leakages, and other pollution arises as a result of transportation. The SNP supports the strict regulation of landfill and a reduction in the number of landfill sites in Scotland. Tackling those issues is perhaps one of the biggest challenges facing the Parliament. The Government launched its waste strategy a few years ago, while earlier this year the waste plan was launched. As well as recycling targets and so on, how we deal with Scotland's waste is one of the biggest issues facing the Parliament. It is therefore disappointing that no parliamentary committee has so far considered the issue. I hope that we can encourage the Environment and Rural Development Committee—

I am delighted to hear that, as we have been waiting for four years. Anyone else who wants to intervene has two or three minutes in which to do so. It is sad that the figure for recycling in Scotland is only 7 per cent. The SNP welcomes the fairly ambitious national waste plan that was launched earlier this year. The plan talked about achieving, by 2020, a seven-fold increase in recycling and composting, the target of bringing the segregation of kerbside recycling to nine out of 10 homes in Scotland, and a reduction in the number of landfill sites in Scotland by roughly two-thirds. Those are very ambitious targets, so when the minister winds  up perhaps he could refer to the feedback he has so far received from Scotland's local authorities on meeting them. The targets should perhaps be even more ambitious, but we must ensure that local authorities have the resources and the ability to deliver. We need alternatives to landfill sites, and we cannot move away from using such sites until those alternatives are in place. Some local authority officials are hoping for action to speed up planning applications for recycling plants and the introduction of new regulations on the end rules for the use of compost. Apparently, the law says that if industrial compost includes animal by-products it must be put in landfill. However, although it may not be possible to remove the danger, I understand that composting techniques have advanced and that new legislation will be introduced. People are awaiting that legislation and want it fast-tracked if possible. It is important that the Parliament is vigilant about the environment. Some local shops in Aberdeen—and no doubt elsewhere in Scotland—that deal with the recycling of ink cartridges are running petitions to gain people's support and to highlight that the big manufacturers want to stop those smaller businesses recycling ink cartridges because that takes away business from the big multinationals. It would be bad for the environment if those manufacturers get their way. We must address that situation urgently. I urge ministers, members and the parliamentary committees to investigate the issue. It would be ludicrous if, simply to boost their profits, the big multinationals were to stop the smaller shops recycling ink cartridges—which are used in particular by students and small businesses—to save some cash. We do not want Europe to support that; we want the Parliament to ensure that Europe does not go down that road. The minister could also refer to an issue that was in the news a few days ago. Ninety-four ships are being towed from the United States of America through Scottish waters to Teeside to be scrapped and have their toxic cargos removed. That may pose a huge environmental risk to Scottish waters and Scotland's coastal environment. Some ministers have already voiced concern about the situation, but perhaps the minister could assure us that the Executive will consider the matter. The Parliament can pass as many regulations as it wants, but our job of protecting the environment would be much easier if we could educate the public about how to save energy, recycle and so on. Any comment that the minister can make on what has been done to educate the public and inform people about the dangers of failing to protect the environment would be welcome. The SNP supports the regulations.

When Roseanna Cunningham asked me whether I would like to close in the debate—it is a bit flattering to use the term "debate"—I did not realise that it would be such a privilege. The only member who had a grin on their face at the prospect of discussing water for another 45 minutes was Des McNulty. He must think that Christmas has come early, as he has been able to discuss his pet subject twice in the same day. We welcomed his speech, even though, in effect, it  represented a hijacking of the debate as a members' business debate, as it concerned an issue in his local constituency. However, it took up time. It is not often that we come to a 45-minute debate in which the minister's opening comments are that the piece of legislation that is under discussion is minor and technical and has no impact on the substance of the issue that it deals with. Given that we ran out of time in this morning's debate, we must review the use of parliamentary time. I know that that is an issue for the Parliamentary Bureau but, in his summing up, will the minister indicate whether it was the Executive that requested 45 minutes for the debate? I suspect that the bureau usually takes advice from the Executive. If that is the case, why on earth did the Executive ask for 45 minutes? Usually when a member sums up, he talks about the contributions made by the various members. I am finding that extremely difficult to do. Alex Johnstone did not have much to say. I admit that Roseanna Cunningham made similar points and I do not believe that anyone disagreed with those. The minister says that the order will give Scottish Water the power to make compulsory purchase orders. What is the usual motivation for a water authority to use a compulsory purchase order power? Is it to supply water infrastructure to rural housing, which is an important issue? How often does that happen? Many members who represent rural constituencies would like that to happen more often. How often are obstacles put in the way of the authority purchasing land?

I have an intervention from Des McNulty. I will take the intervention if the member keeps it brief.

I also ask the minister to comment on the balance between compulsorily purchasing land to expand rural housing and doing so to build new treatment plants. It would be interesting to know what he thinks about that. I say to Conservative members that the CPO powers are also an argument against privatisation of the water industry. If we allow water authorities to purchase land compulsorily and then introduce privatisation and increased competition to the  industry, multinational companies will come in, buy up the water companies and suddenly they will own more of Scotland's land. I am sure that that is one thing that most members would want to oppose. On that note, I reassure people in the gallery that the Parliament usually gathers to discuss issues of substance. I hope that we will do so from now on.

I wish to turn to another north-east prison—HMP Craiginches in Aberdeen. Will the minister confirm whether there are any long-term plans to change the role of Craiginches prison? How much of the cash that the minister just mentioned will go to Craiginches to tackle long-term understaffing and overcrowding?

The water supply situation is not just an issue for Scotland; it is an issue for the whole world. In my e-mail inbox this morning, there was an announcement of a speech entitled "The world  water crisis: a Scottish initiative" to be given by a prominent individual to the Scottish Parliament's international development group. It made me think that perhaps the minister's opening speech should have been entitled "Scotland's water crisis: lack of initiative". The Executive's amendment is extremely complacent and seems to tell those small businesses whose plight we have been discussing that they must grin and bear it and everything will be all right on the night. Des McNulty's speech illustrated that the lead minister Ross Finnie's diary contains no meeting with Scottish Water, yet when Elaine Murray, the minister's colleague, stood up and said that she was unhappy with Scottish Water, the Deputy Minister for Environment and Rural Development nodded his head. We know that, at this time, ministers are taking no action whatever to hold Scottish Water to account. That is far from satisfactory. Since the Parliament was set up in 1999, it has wrestled with the water problem. The background to the issue is that, for the first time in about 50 years, we are looking to invest in infrastructure that was neglected for about 100 years. I say to Des McNulty that it was neglected not only by Tory Governments in London, but by Labour Governments, which he conveniently forgot to mention. The issue is another one on which London has let down Scotland for decades. At last we have a Scottish Parliament that can try to improve matters. Of course, investing in sewerage and water is not particularly sexy, which is why local councils, Labour councils and UK Governments did not invest in them. However, if there is one revelation from this debate, it is that we have found an issue that brings Des McNulty alive. We had the most passionate speech from Des McNulty that I have ever heard. We must have more debates on the future of the water industry in Scotland so that we can see Des get passionate. The issue that we are discussing has led to an increase in household bills and bills for non-domestic premises. The situation has been so dire in recent years that we even saw the Executive trying to withdraw water rates relief for charities, although, thankfully, we managed to stop the Executive doing that completely. Today, the debate has been largely about the impact on small businesses. As constituency representatives, we all have examples from our own areas of local businesses that have been hit hard by huge rises. I know about the fish processors in north-east Scotland, which are operating with 1 per cent profit margins yet have seen their bills go up by several hundred per cent. John Farquhar Munro and Fergus Ewing gave other examples.  The difficulty is that my party and other parties in the chamber supported a merger of the water authorities to improve matters, yet although the Minister for Environment and Rural Development said in the stage 3 debate on the Water Industry (Scotland) Bill that one of the reasons why the Executive was merging the water authorities was because it did not want rises in charges that were "out of the ordinary", today we are talking about increases of several hundred per cent. Clearly, there is more work to be done. We must have a financial review. The debate should not be about the ownership of Scottish Water; it should be about the financial arrangements for Scottish Water, so that we can change them. It should also be a debate about scrutinising current expenditure, because we are not scrutinising hundreds of millions of pounds of expenditure by Scottish Water each year. We know that the Executive is not scrutinising that expenditure, because it does not even speak to Scottish Water. We know that there is no appointment in Ross Finnie's diary to meet Scottish Water. We are constrained by the United Kingdom Treasury's spending rules, which is another illustration of why this Parliament should have more financial powers, so that we can take decisions about how our public authorities are financed. At the moment, borrowing is limited because of UK spending rules, so we cannot do what is best for customers in Scotland.

If the minister had been earlier, I would have let him in. We must hold Scottish Water to account. We must ask the Alan Alexanders of the world whether they are doing a good job for customers. If they are not, we must do something about it. Westminster never showed any leadership in relation to the water industry in Scotland. It is about time the Executive showed some of the leadership that has been lacking.

Will the member take an intervention?

rose—

I return to the theme of enforcing subsidiarity and ensuring that Europe adheres to that principle. Once again, I ask the minister to clarify whether he believes that this Parliament and his Government should have access to the European Court of Justice to achieve adherence to that principle.

Does the member suggest that London is better at looking after the Scottish economy than Brussels would be? If so, is the member anti-euro?

It is funny that Brian Monteith should say that the SNP is riven with contradiction, given that the Conservatives seem to be against centralisation in Brussels and elsewhere, but have—against Scotland's interests—defended centralisation within the UK for decades. I read last week that thousands of world war two veterans in the United States pass away every week. That reminded me that we should never lose sight of the reason why so many people wanted a united Europe—it was to bring peace, so that never again will we have a massive European war like the two that we experienced last century.

The SNP has made the point in every international debate and every debate on Europe.

The SNP's anti-nuclear stance shows that of all the mainstream parties in the chamber, we are the most peaceful. It is ludicrous to suggest otherwise. In today's interdependent and globalised world, it is important that nations decide how they can use their sovereignty; when to pool it, share it or retain it. In these important days when many international and European debates are taking place, the question that Scotland must address now is: What decisions do we want to take in Scotland and what decisions do we want to be taken in London, Brussels, Washington, New York or wherever? That is the massive challenge that faces the people of Scotland.

I am speechless from trying to work out the relevance of that point to the debate and to my speech in particular. Scotland must decide where to secede power and where to get power back. The cleverest nations in the 21 st century will be the ones that make the right decisions. The SNP thinks that many decision-making powers must be taken back from London because they would best be made in Scotland. Powers over fuel duty, whisky duty, taxation and all the other powers that are still with London should come back to Scotland. We should also decide where to pool sovereignty with other international institutions. We think that some powers should come back from Brussels to Scotland, such as power over our own fishing grounds—we must have power over that. We must manage our sovereignty here in Scotland. We want to gain sovereignty in other international decisions, such as in relation to nuclear weaponry and to what happens at the World Trade Organisation and other forums; we are currently shut out of all such decision-making forums. We must work out what is in Scotland's best interests. The SNP wants to repatriate from Europe sovereignty over issues such as fisheries, genetically modified crops and so on, and it wants to repatriate from London sovereignty over other issues. We want to take decisions here about where we should pool sovereignty with other people. I will address what is currently happening in Europe. In 1958 there was the treaty of Rome, in 1987 there was the single European treaty, in the 1990s there was the Maastricht treaty, in 2000 there was the Nice treaty and next year we will  have another important treaty, which will decide the fate of many of the decisions that will affect Scotland. The pace of integration in Europe is quickening and there is less and less time between treaties. If we want to have decision-making powers in Scotland, and to have an influence over our society and our economy, it is imperative that we get involved now. The only way to get involved is to get involved directly. We want to determine what sort of Europe we live in. Most members and most people in Scotland want to live in a Europe of the people, not a Europe where big business can drive through policies on issues such as GM crops, and in which the people of Scotland can have no say in what happens in their own environment. That is why it is so important that we have a direct say over such matters. The membership of the EU will increase soon to 25 states—more eastern European states will get on board. The EU cannot be widened at the same time and pace as it is deepened. If that is done, one of two things will happen: either the EU will collapse, which I do not think any member in the chamber wants, or it will turn into a super-state in which democracy is an abstract concept for Scotland. I do not believe that members or people in Scotland want that to happen. There are three solutions. First, we need subsidiarity so that decisions are made at the proper level. We should make decisions about our fishing grounds here in Scotland. Those decisions should not be made by land-locked countries such as Austria or Luxembourg, or by countries such as Croatia, Bulgaria and Romania, which will soon join the EU and will have more say over the Shetland fishing grounds than will the people of Scotland or the people of Shetland. Secondly, we must—on GM crops and other issues—repatriate sovereignty from the relevant authorities. If the relevant authority is an international forum, we must repatriate authority from that and we should do so if the relevant authority is the EU. Thirdly, we need equal status with other nation states. Our north-west European neighbours such as Sweden, Denmark and Ireland have seats at the top table—Scotland should seek that status.

The member has been speaking for more than three minutes and has spent the whole time attacking the SNP. Will she illuminate us as to what she would change about Europe? Perhaps if she had spoken more about those issues during the election campaign, she would have found that her party would not have done so badly—given that the SNP won the elections in North East Scotland and the Highlands and Islands.

Does the minister believe that the Scottish Government and Parliament should have access to the European Court of Justice to ensure that Europe adheres to that important principle?

Brian Pack, who runs the biggest farming co-operative in Scotland, the ANM Group Ltd, which is situated just up the road from the Craibstone site, stated in The Press and Journal recently: "If we lose Craibstone, then SAC also loses something precious and that is something that is not captured in the figures." That sentiment is shared by Aberdeen City Council, which passed a motion opposing the closure of Craibstone; Aberdeenshire Council; Moray Council; the local agricultural advisory committee; and the staff and students at  Craibstone and Auchincruive, who are also opposed to the proposal. That is one of the reasons why so many MSPs have turned out for the debate and why there is such a high demand to speak from members who represent areas the length and breadth of Scotland. I support the comment made by Alex Neil that we must consider not only the economics of one site against another site, but the economic cost to local communities, because any savings from closing the wrong sites will have an economic cost. In the north-east of Scotland, the situation that other rural industries currently face is a problem. I will address the education aspect of the debate, as not too much time has been devoted to that matter. The proposal that is on the table to split the teaching element from the advisory and research elements is wrong because it means that the quality of education will deteriorate. The synergy of having advisers and researchers working with the teaching side is valuable and that would be lost under the consultants' proposal. We cannot consider only the salvage costs of the sites when taking the decision. The consultants admitted to the Rural Development Committee that the fact that more cash would be gained from selling Craibstone, because it is a valuable piece of land, is the factor that disadvantaged Craibstone. It is imperative that the minister takes a hands-on approach to the issue and that the Rural Development Committee—I hope along with the Education, Culture and Sport Committee—launches an inquiry into the issue.

Will the minister give way?

On short-term solutions, given that a number of overseas dentists have come to Grampian to work—there are surpluses of dentists in many European countries—is the minister willing to consider taking new measures to encourage that trend?

Colleagues from all parties will not be surprised to learn that every time the sun shines in Banchory, Mike Rumbles puts out a press release in The Deeside Piper and Herald to take the credit. I congratulate Richard Baker on securing his first debate, which is on such an important issue. There has been a cross-party campaign for the past four or five years to bring the issue to the attention of ministers. In particular, I give credit to the many dentists who first called the cross-party meeting that I, Mike Rumbles, Brian Adam, David Davidson and others attended and which kicked off the campaign a few years ago. As previous speakers outlined, I say to the minister that NHS dentistry in Grampian faces a crisis. Only four of 30 practices in Aberdeen accept NHS patients and only three of 27 in Aberdeenshire do so. Many thousands of people are being disenfranchised from the service. Perhaps one of the most startling statistics is that, as of today, over 54 per cent of people living in Grampian are not registered with any dentist, NHS or private. Therefore, as far as we can make out, 54 per cent of people in Grampian do not go to the dentist. The situation gets worse every month. In January, 776 people fell off the NHS lists in Grampian. Seven hundred and five fell off in February, 1,673 fell off in March and 1,502 did so in April. There is a separate figure for people who have been deregistered because dentists have retired or moved away from the area, which means that between January and May another 6,863 patients in Grampian fell off the NHS lists. The situation is so bad that about 1,000 people phone the local helpline every month in Grampian to try to find out where they can get access to an NHS dentist. The situation is now so chronic in Aberdeen, for example, that only one or two practices accept children as new patients on the NHS lists. That is surely a serious issue for all  members, but especially for the Minister for Health and Community Care, given that we want to get children to attend their local dentist.

The short-term solutions are not easy—there has been more cash, but it has not had a tremendous impact. However, I think that we are talking about the long-term issues and we all welcome the possibility that there might be an outreach training facility in Grampian in the not-too-distant future. Several dentists have proposed another short-term solution to the problem, which is the recruitment of dentists from overseas. In the past few months, one dentist has brought over five Spaniards. Several Scandinavians are about to start working in practices in Aberdeen. There exist in other European countries surpluses of dentists who are looking for practices in which to get experience to start their careers. It is a matter of our getting them to come and work in North-east Scotland and, indeed, elsewhere in Scotland. That means that we must extend to overseas dentists the golden hello, in order to try to get them to come here, and we must also offer them the facility to go back to their own countries perhaps three or four times a year. We must also give support to existing dentists in Grampian to train the new dentists who come from places such as Scandinavia and Spain, because at the moment the existing dentists are not compensated for taking time out of their practices to train overseas nationals who come to work in Grampian. Finally, I call for a survey of the situation in Grampian. As other members have mentioned, there is a lack of available information. There must be flexibility in the available funding and we must get the training facility up and running as soon as possible. We must make recruiting from overseas an absolute priority so that we can start addressing as soon as possible the gaps in NHS dental provision for adults, children and—as Mrs Margaret Ewing said—senior citizens.

I, too, welcome Tom McCabe to his new position. I am sure that, when he saw the topic of his first debate in the chamber, he was brought back down to earth with a bang. The issue is complex. It is one that has taxed the Parliament for the past four years. Indeed, one of the first investigations that was undertaken by the Rural Development Committee in 1999-2000 was on this issue. The committee returned to the issue at the end of the last session and it has also been the subject of members' business debates, other debates and numerous parliamentary questions. Here we are again, at the beginning of a new  session, discussing the same issue. Despite the fact that we have been having this discussion for the past four years, the issues remain virtually the same today. We must resolve the issue, as it is not only a health issue, as some members have referred to it, but also an economic issue. The fishing industry is facing difficult times. If we consider where some of the scallop boats are based, we see that they are based in fragile, coastal economies in which the few remaining jobs in the scallop sector could not easily be replaced if they were to go. Fergus Ewing referred to a letter that was published in Fishing News . It is a fascinating letter, as it contains an analysis of the ludicrous situation that we face in respect of the testing regime for ASP. The fact is that it takes 10 days between the scallop being sent away for testing and the box being closed. Meanwhile, "28,800,000 scallops with supposedly dangerous levels of ASP have been caught, processed and consumed in the last four years with not one case of any ill effect." The SNP will send a copy of the letter to Tom McCabe. I hope that he will read it, digest some of the issues that it contains and respond to them in a positive manner. The fact that we are still talking about undertaking new research in 2003 when we first discussed the issue back in 1999 shows how slowly the wheels of this machine seem to move. We have been waiting for four years for this research to be carried out. Indeed, we are asking the same questions now in May 2003 that we asked four years ago, and only now has a minister stood up and told us that new research is being carried out, even though he does not know its exact nature. However, the research is the crux of the matter. We have to get to the bottom of this problem, because it would be unfair to impose such a ludicrous regime on a small sector of the fishing industry if there might be no justification for it. At a meeting of the Rural Development Committee in the previous parliamentary session, my colleague Stewart Stevenson unveiled the fact that the majority of the FSA's resources—the vast bulk of its budget of a few million pounds—is spent on dealing with and policing this issue. However, I saw an edition of "Panorama" a few days ago, which investigated what is happening, particularly in Holland, with the importation of frozen chicken fillets to the UK and Scotland. The programme discovered that, after water was injected into chicken fillets, beef and pork protein was also injected to hold that water in order to boost the profits of the massive multinationals. We know that the FSA in Scotland should be turning its attention to many other issues. In fact, I have written to the Minister for Health and Community Care on the  matter that I just mentioned, and I hope that ministers will speak to the FSA about its priorities. This issue is another stark illustration of how European bureaucracy grinds some of our key industries to a halt. Indeed, it has taken us many years to reach even this point because we have to wait so many months between the key meetings in Brussels that examine the issue in a European context. The FSA has to hear back from those committees, after which the matter comes back to ministers. Any other issues that might be raised have to go back and be discussed at reconvened meetings. On it goes, taking years and years. The Rural Development Committee asked ministers to use this matter as an example when setting out how issues should be addressed in Europe. I hope that they will do so. I also hope that, the next time that Tom McCabe discusses this subject in the chamber, he brings us some good news for a change. I hope that he continues to discuss the issue with Ross Finnie, who also holds views on it. After all, it relates very much to attempts by the Minister for Environment and Rural Development to develop our rural economy. We should take that matter into account. The SNP will support the motion, because that is the responsible approach to take, but we are utterly confident that, once the research that has been called for today has been carried out, the minister will return to the chamber to explain that the existing regime—never mind the proposed regime—is far too stringent and should be lifted.

The minister indicated that some research was under way. Could he take a few seconds to outline the specific nature of that research? Can  he tell the Parliament whether any of that research relates to the synergy between naturally occurring acids and the acids that lead to scallops being deemed toxic?

Although I welcome the First Minister's commitment to creating sustainable rural communities, is he aware that, as of today, not one penny of the £50 million of emergency aid that he announced in January has been paid to anyone in our fishing communities? Moreover, will the First Minister respond specifically to the alarming comment that the UK fisheries minister Elliot Morley made earlier this month in Derby to an English fishermen's organisation? He boasted that "not a penny" has been paid to the Scottish fishermen and went on to say: "I'm not sure it will be paid". Will the First Minister give a commitment to investigate whether the Department of the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs is trying to block European aid to Scotland?

I reiterate my and my party's belief that sovereignty in Scotland lies with the people and with no one else.  The following members made a solemn affirmation:  Richard Lochhead (North-East Scotland) (SNP) Kenneth MacAskill (Lothians) (SNP)  The following members took the oath:  George Lyon (Argyll and Bute) (LD) Lewis Macdonald (Aberdeen Central) (Lab) Margo MacDonald (Lothians) (Ind)

What a joy it is to follow Tom McCabe's positive contribution. However, it is a pleasure to speak in today's debate. The first members' business debate in the Parliament was on the fish processing industry, which is an Aberdeen issue, and the last members' business debate is also on an Aberdeen issue. It is a pity that no Tories, Liberals or members of parties other than Labour and the SNP have turned up for the debate. One reason why many of us are in the SNP is because we know that Scotland is a rich country, yet it has so much deprivation. That is the case in Aberdeen. It is a cruel irony that Europe's oil and gas capital has substantial pockets of deprivation. Clearly, it is a ridiculous situation that Aberdeen should have pockets of deprivation that are  surrounded by such wealth. One of the difficulties is that Aberdeen's wealth masks the deprivation that organisations such as the GNP try to tackle with the help of the many people who assist them. It is probably harder to be on a low income in Aberdeen than just about anywhere else in Scotland because people have to live alongside some of the wealthiest areas in the whole of Scotland. The price of property in Aberdeen is way beyond the means of many people in the GNP areas. We need to reduce the obstacles that prevent organisations such as the GNP from getting more public funding and Government assistance. One such obstacle is the way in which the Scottish Executive's public funding formulas do not recognise Aberdeen's deprivation, which is masked by the average wealth statistics for the area. There must be a further disaggregation of the statistics that the Scottish Executive uses in allocating public funding so that such areas of deprivation are identified. Aberdeen currently loses out on a lot of public funding because of the formulas that are used. I was given some examples of that when I met representatives of the GNP a few months ago. The GNP cannot apply for the Executive's better neighbourhood funding because Aberdeen's level of deprivation is not recognised. The GNP was able to apply for only a tiny amount of the cash that sportscotland made available for sport and social inclusion because the formulas do not recognise Aberdeen's deprivation. The deprivation is hidden by the area's relative wealth, which comes from the oil and gas industry. I was also told about the pots of cash from Communities Scotland, for which the GNP cannot apply because Aberdeen does not qualify. I mention those Government funding formulas, but I am not pleading a special case. There are genuine concerns about the impact of those formulas on our ability to tackle deprivation in north-east Scotland and Aberdeen. A few months ago, Margaret Curran announced that a slice of lottery funding would be put aside for deprived areas because many areas of Scotland were losing out on their fair share. Lo and behold, there was not one penny for north-east Scotland and Aberdeen. Once again, the formulas that were used did not recognise the deprivation that exists in Aberdeen. As Elaine Thomson mentioned in her speech and as Brian Adam has explained, Aberdeen has a desperate need for that cash. Organisations such as the GNP must be allowed to apply for it.

Brian Adam has outlined the SNP's position. My point is that organisations such as the GNP cannot even get access to the funding that is currently available for tackling deprivation. The successors to social inclusion partnerships will have the same problem unless we change the fundamental issues that prevent deprivation in Aberdeen from being tackled. Elaine Thomson also mentioned the drugs problem in the GNP areas. There is a massive drugs problem in Aberdeen, yet we get the second lowest level of funding in the whole of Scotland because of the perceived wealth of the area. Today's press tells of people who have committed crimes so that they can go to jail and get treatment for drug abuse because they cannot get it by any other means. It all comes back to the same issue of the funding formulas denying cash to the projects that are trying to tackle deprivation and deal with massive social problems in areas of Aberdeen. It is important that we have some clear measurement of the success or otherwise of the initiatives that are trying to tackle deprivation in Scotland. Where exactly are we after four years of the new Parliament? Do we know if we have moved forward or if Aberdeen is relatively better or worse off under the Executive's policies? I argue that we have not moved forward under the first four years of the Scottish Parliament. I also argue that we have to get real powers so that the Parliament can make a real difference in tackling deprivation in Aberdeen and elsewhere and that we need a change of Government because we have had four years of wasted opportunities to tackle deprivation. Scotland has not moved forward. We know that the overall statistics show that poverty is increasing. We have to have a change in the Government and we need more powers for the Parliament so that we can change Aberdeen and elsewhere for the better.

The minister might recall that, when previously we debated amending the 1997 act and the supervision of sex offenders, we discussed Steven Beech, who is a sex offender who lives under supervision in Aberdeen after Cambridgeshire constabulary gave him a one-way ticket there. I understand that talks on that  continue between the Scottish Executive and the Home Office. Will the minister assure Parliament and the people of north-east Scotland that those talks are a priority and that it is hoped that a positive outcome will be achieved not only on Steven Beech's location, but on costs? It costs the Scottish taxpayer £200,000 a year to supervise that individual.

The minister is aware that the Arbuthnott formula leaves Grampian at a severe disadvantage, as the area receives the lowest level of funding in Scotland despite having some of the country's longest waiting times. Is he prepared to address that? I also turn the minister's attention to the views of Grampian general practitioners, who claim that the new GP funding formula will leave them with a 15 per cent pay cut. Will he confirm to the chamber that he will not accept any new funding formula for GPs under the proposed new contracts that will mean that they will receive less funding instead of the expected increase?

I welcome the bill. We are making history today by giving new rights to tenant farmers the length and breadth of Scotland by dragging the appropriate laws into the 21 st century. That vindicates all of us who supported the establishment of the Parliament and believed that it would deliver not just for urban communities but for rural communities. I believe that we are seeing that today. I pay tribute to the SNP's lead spokesperson, Fergus Ewing, who has been a passionate advocate on behalf of tenant farmers in his constituency and throughout Scotland. We have all benefited from Fergus Ewing's passionate input at the Rural Development Committee. It was handy to have a lawyer on the committee dealing with this complex issue. I pay tribute to the Rural Development Committee, of which I am a member, because its 11 members made a huge difference to the bill. We are debating a bill that is very different from the bill that the Executive introduced many months ago, because of the work of the committee. The ministers also have to be given credit where it is due, because they listened to a lot of what the committee had to say and introduced stage 3 amendments, which have been passed today. That is thanks to the members of the committee raising issues on behalf of tenant farmers.  Like other members, I save my biggest tribute for the Scottish Tenant Farmers Action Group and the other farmers who articulated strongly their views and many of the grievances that have been experienced not only by their generation but by many generations over the past few centuries. It was brave of many of the people who are involved in the action group to put their heads above the parapet, especially when they have their landlords breathing down their necks and standing over their shoulders. We know from some of the horrific stories that we have heard how much pressure many of them were under when they came forward and gave their evidence to the Parliament. We congratulate them on doing that. MSPs feel strongly about some of the issues that we have been debating today and over the past few months because of the many cases that have been brought to our attention by tenant farmers and other constituents. We have heard stories about absentee landlords who have never visited the tenanted farms. I have spoken to tenant farmers in the north-east of Scotland who say that the owner of the estate has never spoken to them—they may have visited the estate, but they have never spoken to tenant farmers on the estate. The only people whom the tenant farmers see are the factors, who turn up to tell them about the latest rent rise and collect the rent. Many landlords and owners throughout Scotland have left the tenant farms to rot down the years. We have heard about many generations of the same family having invested in their farm and their land, knowing that there is no chance of them seeing the long-term benefit of all that investment. Down the decades, many landlords have taken the gain without sharing the pain. The bill is also about delivering justice to tenant farmers in Scotland. It intends to ensure that they get a return for the investment that they put in. Compensation at waygo is one of the key features of the bill. How demoralising can it be for farmers to invest in their property and their land when they know that they will not get any compensation? I am thankful that that will change. The bill is also about democratising rural communities and the ownership of our farms and our land. It is about giving tenant farmers equal status with the landlords in the tenant-landlord relationship; it is about changing the imbalance of power. That is why it is so important that the bill gives redress to our tenant farmers by addressing write-down agreements and post-lease agreements, and by giving them, for the first time, the ability in law to withhold their rent. That is an extremely important tool for tenant farmers in addressing the imbalance of power.  Finally, the bill is also about the economics of our rural communities. Setting rent in line with the current economic climate in farming is important, and I am pleased that we have addressed that. That was one of the main concerns expressed by tenant farmers throughout Scotland. The bill is about rejuvenating our rural communities by allowing diversification on farms. In some areas of Scotland, on one side of the road there is diversified land and land use as well as diversified land ownership, and on the other side of the road, there is no diversification and perhaps one estate owner. One can see the difference: on one side of the street, there is a vibrant economy, and on the other side of the street, nothing is happening. That is why we must promote diversification. In conclusion, I say that I welcome the bill, but I must say a few words about the Tory party's amendment. The Tory party is stuck in the 19 th century and at 10 per cent in the opinion polls in Scotland.

It is amazing to think that the Tory party is the only party that got a majority of support among the electorate in Scotland in the previous century, yet today it is at 10 per cent in the opinion polls and it opposes every progressive bit of legislation that is brought to the chamber. The Tories will pay the price for that in May. I conclude by saying that this is a proud moment for Parliament and for our tenant farming community. I urge Parliament to reject the Tory amendment and to support the bill.

The minister heard from members about the excellent track record of the Scottish Parliament in promoting fair trade. However, the Scottish Executive has enormous purchasing power. I asked two parliamentary questions on the issue in November 2001, but I was disappointed to be told that the Executive does not take into account the purchasing policies of its outside catering contractors, nor the choice of fair trade in its own purchasing policy. Will the minister consider that, so that the Scottish Government can play more of a role in promoting fair trade?

At yesterday's Rural Development Committee, the minister said that decommissioning would increase the profitability of vessels that continue to fish. Will the minister  explain how that can be the case, given that he has no plans to take the quota from the decommissioned boats back into the national pool?

Why?

Will the minister consider the impact of the transfer of licences from the white-fish sector to other sectors such as the pelagic sector, and of the likely forthcoming transfers, given the ordering of 11 new pelagic boats for the Scottish fleet? Will the minister measure that impact and not be put off by the so-called disproportionate costs of that measurement?

It is a different policy.

I would like the member to clarify whether his party's policy is now that control of Scotland's fishing grounds should come to the Scottish Parliament and not to the Westminster Parliament, as was its previous policy until today.

Will the member give way?

About two weeks ago, I spoke at a public meeting in Iain Smith's constituency, which was attended by about 60 of his constituents who work in the local fishing industry. Not one of them supported the minister's policy that is before the Scottish Parliament today. Will the member tell us whether, at decision time, he is going to support his constituents or the minister?

This morning's events certainly reinforce the Scottish National Party's view that the Parliament does not have appropriate powers to deliver for Scotland's fishing communities. I take the opportunity to welcome back to the SNP benches my colleague, Winnie Ewing. [ Applause. ] No doubt, she will make a heartfelt contribution later in the debate. Within days of the Parliament being elected in May 1999, we debated sea fisheries and Westminster's decision to shift the fishing boundary in England's favour. Here we are, four years later in the final month of the parliamentary session, debating sea fisheries once more. Today, in May 1999, and in just about every fishing debate in between, there has been a common theme: our fishing communities and, indeed, the Opposition parties have stood united against the policies of the Lib-Lab coalition. Those policies are clearly meant to manage the decline of one of Scotland's most valuable industries. In the face of unprecedented, draconian measures imposed by Brussels, today is the last chance to make Ross Finnie see sense and convert his redundancy package for our fishing communities into a recovery package. I have had the privilege of speaking to many meetings at ports the length and breadth of  mainland Scotland in recent weeks in connection with the current crisis. The message to the Parliament from each and every person who attended those meetings was loud and clear: "Do not let Ross Finnie and Jack McConnell destroy their own fishing industry. Do not let the Government make the industry pay the price for the Government's failure to negotiate a good deal for Scotland in Brussels. Do not let the Government play into the European Commission's hands or the hands of the other fishing nations that have their eyes on Scotland's rich fishing grounds." Their plea is for an aid package that provides support for our fishing communities to see them through the coming months until the unjust and damaging measures concerning the number of days at sea and the quota cuts are lifted and replaced with a sensible and logical management regime for the North sea. The message from the catching sector, the service sector and the fish processors is to keep any decommissioning scheme to a minimum and to ensure that the emphasis of any aid package is on recovery, not redundancy.

If that is the best that the member for West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine can come up with, I suggest that he sit on his backside for the rest of the debate. If we want a fishing industry that continues to employ 44,000 people—mostly in our fragile coastal communities—and which supplies healthy food for our table, we have to help it through the coming months. Ross Finnie must be the only fishing minister in Europe to contemplate spending 80 per cent of his aid package on destroying his fishing vessels. Other countries are building new fishing vessels; our minister wants to spend £40 million of taxpayers' cash writing off his own fishing fleet.

One thing that the SNP would not do is destroy the vast bulk of our own fishing fleet. Over the past three years, the Executive has introduced two aid packages for fishing communities in Scotland: the first was for £27 million, and the second—this one—is for £50 million. In that time, 85 per cent of the aid advanced by the Executive has been devoted to destroying fishing vessels. Our industry does not need enemies when it has friends like Ross Finnie. Once again, ministers simply turn to their favourite policy—consigning the white-fish fleet to the scrap heap.

One does not conserve the fishing industry by destroying it. The minister says that he needs to scrap vessels in order to secure two of the 15 days a month at sea that the white-fish fleet has, for the next five months. However, he continues to ignore the long-term damage that he will inflict on the industry. There is no real reason on earth why, if he refuses to stand up to the Commission, we cannot deliver a smaller decommissioning scheme and examine other ways of reducing effort. In an answer to a written parliamentary question a couple of weeks ago, the minister told me about reduced capacity due to the transfer of white-fish licences to other sectors. We know that licences have been transferred to other sectors, but 11 pelagic boats are on the order books in Scotland, and all will require a further aggregation of licences. Has he measured the reduction in white-fish capacity that that has brought about? He has not. He says that that would take "some time and resources", probably at "disproportionate cost". He is not willing even to look for alternatives to the destruction of his own fleet. Further, it is not only the fleet that will suffer but the onshore sector, such as the ship painters, engineering companies and ice factories—the scores of businesses that congregate around harbours and depend on thriving fishing ports for business. Local fish processors who depend on local supplies of white fish will also suffer. The minister should listen to their voices. He has received submissions to his consultation exercise, but has not made them public. However, we know that every organisation in Scotland that has made public comment opposes the minister's policies. He should listen to the Rural Development Committee, which has called on the minister to  rebalance his package.

Despite what Mike Rumbles says, it is there in black and white in the committee's report, which was published last week.

I want to continue with my speech. The SNP's amendment on the decommissioning scheme would ensure that any such scheme would be sensible. The minister must do all that he can to ensure that it is not just the banks that benefit from decommissioning. We cannot neglect the interests of the crews. That happened last time, and we must address that issue this time. We must ensure that all the debts to the onshore sector are paid—they were not covered last time, either. We should also ensure that any boats that are decommissioned are available for conversion purposes to help to give onshore businesses more business. We must examine the issue of quota. We must ensure that we protect the birthright of our fishing communities for the sake of the future of the industry. Last month, the minister said in the chamber that he was "looking carefully at the rules and regulations that govern the transfer of quota".— [ Official Report , 19 February 2003; c 18288.]  He should have said today what progress he has made, because that is a crucial issue. In that debate on 19 February, he also told the chamber that "our view is that decommissioning is a rational economic response."— [ Official Report , 19 February 2003; c 18286.]  He then went on to talk about the enhanced opportunities for fishermen who remain in the industry. Yesterday, the minister told the Rural Development Committee that decommissioning would increase the profitability of the remaining vessels, but he never once—either during the previous debate or at yesterday's committee meeting—got round to explaining how the vessels that choose to remain in the industry would get to enjoy the quota from the decommissioned vessels. Even if they did get that quota, he cannot explain how they would get more days to allow them to fish that quota. The real fear is that the £40 million earmarked by the minister will take out virtually all the 180 remaining dedicated white-fish vessels. However, the quota will remain with the boat owners and will not benefit the remaining vessels in the industry.  The minister keeps sending out mixed messages. Are we honestly to believe that a crisis that has arisen out of plans to save the cod will lead him to choose prawn boats for decommissioning, when prawn stocks are healthy?

If the minister dedicates £40 million to decommissioning and gives no alternative to the fleet but bankruptcy, there will be applications for decommissioning. If the money is to target boats that catch cod, it is clear that a large section of the white-fish fleet may be forced into decommissioning—there will be no alternative. He must accept the reality. If he emphasised the provision of short-term aid, that would ease the pressure on prawn stocks, for example, and displacement would become less of a problem. Of course, we must use the mid-term scientific review that is coming up to ensure that there are more catching opportunities for white-fish stocks for the Scottish fleet. However, the European Commission is already sending out worrying signals that on 1 July, any new regime will be just as painful as the existing regime. That begs a question for the minister: what will happen between 1 July and the end of the year, given that the Commission has the legal powers to keep the current regime in place until then? If he puts all his eggs in one basket, he is saying, in effect, that there will be no cash for short-term aid after the six months is over and the fleet can just go to the wall. If the fleet goes to the wall, the harbours will go to the wall. If the harbours go to the wall, the onshore businesses will go to the wall, local fish processors will close down and he will have succeeded in decimating Scotland's fishing industry. There is no doubt that boats will queue up for the decommissioning cash if there is no alternative but bankruptcy, but skippers do not want to do so because they know that that is not in the long-term interests of the industry. We must emphasise transitional and short-term aid. The SNP calls on members of all parties to give hope for the future and hope to the tens of thousands of families whose incomes are dependent on fishing that the Parliament is on their side. The issue is not about ignoring the science. The current crisis largely arose from political decisions, not from scientific decisions. Those political decisions were based on out-of-date and incomplete science, as even the minister has said. The crisis also follows the United Kingdom minister's failure to stand up for Scotland in Brussels.  Ross Finnie described the measures imposed on Scotland by Brussels and the UK fisheries minister as "Inequitable, unfair and even crude"— [ Official Report , 8 January 2003; c 16679.]  Quite rightly, Ross Finnie did not return from Brussels and say that the proposals were logical and scientifically sound—they were not. We must ensure that there is light at the end of the tunnel for Scotland's fishing communities, that the necessary support is available and that the industry emerges from the crisis intact, as far as possible. Scotland's fishing communities will not give up without a fight. Too many livelihoods and a way of life are at stake. If the Labour party and the Liberal party, which run this country, are not interested in saving the fishing industry, I have no doubt that the whole of Scotland will be unforgiving on 1 May. Scotland will get behind the SNP, as the SNP will deliver recovery, not redundancy, for our fishing communities. I move amendment S1M-3959.1, to insert at end: "but, in doing so, supports the views of the fishing industry, fishing communities and the Rural Development Committee that the overwhelming emphasis of any Scottish Executive aid package should be on transitional aid for the fleet and onshore sectors rather than the decommissioning of vessels, and urges ministers to respond positively to the proposals by industry representatives on how this can be best achieved."

The minister will recall that the last time that a decommissioning scheme went through the Parliament, there was huge concern about the fact that many of the boats' skippers were unable to settle their debts with onshore businesses. There were no built-in measures to ensure support for the crews. Will the minister tell us how he intends to address those two issues this time?

The minister talks about transitional aid to get the industry through the difficult period ahead. The signs that we are getting from the European Commission are that the difficult period could last for a long time if the current emergency measures are not lifted on 1 July. How does he intend to support the fleet and the onshore sector in the coming months, given that they might face the possibility of going bankrupt if they do not get help?

Will the minister confirm  that the decommissioning scheme is not about conserving fish stocks, but is an economic measure to help fleets through difficult times? Does he accept that there are ways of helping fleets through difficult times other than destroying them? Destroying the fleet means that, when stocks recover, there will be no fleet to take advantage of that?

The minister is determined to use the bulk of his aid package for decommissioning, but he has also said that it is unlikely that there will be new fishing opportunities for the Scottish fleet after 1 July. Will his package result in the Scottish fleet going bankrupt after 1 July?

Does the member accept that Alex Salmond represents the most fisheries-dependent constituency in the whole of the UK, not just Scotland? It used to be a Conservative constituency, but the Conservatives were chucked out because they betrayed the Scottish fishing industry in Banff and Buchan year upon year.

Will the member give way?

Elaine Thomson said that it is important that the white-fish fleet survives. How will the fleet survive if every time a minister does badly in negotiations in Europe he comes back with a decommissioning scheme that will destroy part of the fleet?

I welcome this long-overdue debate. For the past few weeks, Scotland's fishing industry and the white-fish sector in particular have had to come to terms with the most serious crisis that has befallen our fishing communities in living memory. Draconian quota cuts and an unworkable and dangerous days-at-sea scheme have been foisted on the industry. Our fishermen never imagined such a combination in their worst nightmares. Even the Scottish fisheries minister himself has described the measures as pernicious, inequitable, unfair and crude. The deal that the UK Government supported at the tail-end of last year is anti-conservation, anti-fishing and most certainly anti-Scottish. We were told that Scotland need not worry about who led the UK delegation and that we need not be concerned that Scots fishermen did not have their own voice at the top table because our interests would be safeguarded by big influential team UK. A few hours after the First Minister promised Scotland victory, we were left to pick up the pieces following yet another spectacular capitulation by the UK in Brussels. The UK's sell-out in the fisheries negotiations was but the latest in a long line that stretches back over the past 30 years of the common fisheries policy.

I give the champion of positive contributions to debates my reassurance that the SNP would not have accepted this deal, the effect of which will be to destroy a large part of our fishing industry. A couple of weeks after the deal, Ross Finnie came back to the chamber to defend the agreement. He told us how countries such as Denmark simply could not be shifted and that Scotland had, as usual, to take the brunt of the pain of the cutbacks in the North sea. Every other country except Scotland managed to get a deal that it could live with, despite the fact that Scotland is the most fisheries-dependent country in western Europe.

Let me continue a wee while. Scotland's vital white-fish quotas were halved; Denmark managed to save its industrial fishery quota in the same week that some of its vessels were being arrested for illegal bycatches. Danish boats won 23 days at sea per month, whereas the Scottish white-fish fleet, which is the fleet that uses the biggest mesh in the North sea, was told that it would get nine days. The predicted economic consequences for our fishing communities are dire. Buchan and Shetland in particular face massive economic blows. The west coast ports are extremely concerned about the potentially devastating impact of displacement on the prawn fishery. With prices already at a 20-year low, the last thing that the sector needs is more prawns being landed by displaced vessels. Vessels that were frozen out of the deep-water fishery in their own backyards following last year's decision to hand stocks west of Scotland to the French are staring bankruptcy in the face now that their white-fish quotas have also been cut. In some form or another, the whole industry and every port is feeling the impact of the measures.

The difference between the policy of the SNP and that of the Liberal Democrats is that Scotland would have had a champion at the top table not only at December's fisheries council but at every council over the past 30 years. Scotland would have had its own champion if we had been independent. The reasons that I have laid out illustrate why it is so important that the Scottish Executive deliver an effective and appropriate aid package, but the Executive has been unable to get even that right. Ross Finnie compounded matters by announcing an aid package that offers little aid to our fishing communities and, if unchallenged by Parliament today, will simply aid the demise of Scotland's fishing industry. In many debates in the chamber, MSPs from all parties have spent a lot of time informing the minister about the importance of the onshore sector, which includes not just fish processors but the service sector. However, it is difficult to identify any new cash for that sector in the package that  has been announced. The minister said that he was listening, but it is clear that all our pleas have fallen on deaf ears.

Let me continue. So far, there are few new significant measures for the processing sector. Without appropriate help, that sector will lose valuable supplies and skills and will struggle to cope with the costs of insurance and the sea fish levy. There is nothing for the hundreds of businesses that rely on servicing the white-fish fleet, which will be tied up for two weeks every month until July and may be decommissioned by the minister. At the very least, we should give all those businesses emergency rates relief. The minister's decision to allocate up to 80 per cent of the package to destroying Scottish fishing vessels beggars belief. Other fisheries ministers help their fleets to weather the storm when times are tough; our minister fails to defend his industry during vital negotiations. His answer is to inflict two decommissioning schemes on our fleet in as many years. Other fisheries ministers returned from Brussels in December having seen off a threat to stop them from using European cash—our cash is being used to build new vessels for their fleets. Our minister returned to Scotland and announced that he wanted to use our cash to destroy vessels and kick our industry when it is down. To rub salt into the wounds, the European Commission and the UK, which were the architects of the fisheries deal, are set to get off scot free because the £50 million aid package that the minister has announced is to be wholly funded from the hard-pressed Scottish budget. We have been taken for mugs—our European competitors must be laughing all the way to the EU bank. Why is it that, when other nations faced unprecedented fishing crises, Europe's purse-strings suddenly loosened?

The minister has hit the nail on the head. The point is that European cash is our taxpayers' money, which is why we should be getting it to help our fleet. Other states benefit from our taxpayers' money, but Scotland does not. When the EU-Morocco fisheries agreement collapsed in 1999 and a large part of the Spanish fleet was left with nowhere to go, the Spanish Government applied for and secured a €197  million emergency aid package from Europe. That package was to help 450 boats in Spain. Today, €150 million is available from the same emergency fund. Why do the minister and his counterpart in London not apply, as the Spanish did, for some of that money to help Scotland?

I am happy to agree with that important point. Elliot Morley came to the Parliament yesterday. He is clearly not only a dismal fisheries minister, but completely and utterly ignorant. He accuses Scotland of wanting to support a begging bowl culture by applying for money that is rightly ours. This man Morley is not the slightest bit interested in saving Scotland's fishing industry. Scotland's fishing communities deserve what they are entitled to. Ross Finnie must leave no stone unturned and demand the funding that Scots taxpayers sent to Europe in the first place. The emergency aid should be devoted to a recovery plan, not to the redundancy package that the minister has produced. The decommissioning of a huge number of white-fish vessels will turn fishing ports into ghost towns. The minister must get the package right. Last week in Aberdeen, an economist from the Sea Fish Industry Authority told the Rural Development Committee: "without intervention, many vessels simply will not be able to remain in business with a 30 to 40 per cent reduction in throughput, and so could not survive the impact of the short-term recovery measures." He went on to say: "it is clear that the recovery measures will result in thousands of job losses around the coast of Scotland and millions—if not hundreds of millions of pounds—of output being removed from the Scottish economy."—[ Official Report , Rural Development Committee , 11 February 2003; c 4256.] Yesterday, a representative from Eyemouth community council told the Rural Development Committee that the decommissioning of one more vessel in Eyemouth would be devastating for the town. Only a few years ago, Eyemouth had 60 boats, each with a crew of six, but today it has 35 boats, each with a crew of three. If the minister gets his aid package wrong, those predictions will become reality. We must maintain a critical mass, both in the onshore sector and in the fleet. The service sector will be hit hard if the £40 million-worth of decommissioning proceeds—the minister's package will end up doing more long-term harm than good. There might be a case for a decommissioning  scheme, but only a limited, voluntary one. The industry and communities throughout Scotland are united in opposition to decommissioning on the scale proposed. There is also a real concern about what will happen to the quotas if the scheme goes ahead because the vessels, the licences and the fishing entitlements must be surrendered in one package. Ministers must produce proposals to prevent our quotas from falling into the hands of foreign companies and to ensure that only fishermen who are committed to the industry enjoy the benefits of the package. The right to fish Scotland's waters is the birthright of our fishing communities; no one must be allowed to stand in the way of that right. The package is one part of the jigsaw. The other part is negotiating a better deal and ensuring that a proper cod recovery plan is produced to replace the devastating interim measures. We have to secure more quota for our fleet. The minister has to persuade the Commission to separate the management of cod from that of other white-fish stocks so that the haddock and whiting quotas can be increased. When the minister comes to negotiate, let him—for goodness' sake—learn lessons from December's fisheries council. Never again should we allow Elliot Morley, the UK fisheries minister, to lead on behalf of Scotland in negotiations. At the forthcoming important negotiations, Ross Finnie must take the lead. Elliot Morley can mislead and misrepresent as much as he wants, and as he did last night in the media when he said that the devolution settlement does not allow Scotland to lead European negotiations. He is wrong; he is misinformed; he is misleading the people of Scotland. The devolution settlement does allow Ross Finnie to lead negotiations. This Parliament has led negotiations in Brussels before, on education and health, so surely the man who is responsible for 70 per cent of the UK fishing industry should lead negotiations during the next few months to ensure that we save the future of Scotland's fishing industry. I urge Parliament to support the SNP's amendment, and to support a recovery plan for Scotland's fishing communities and not the redundancy plan put forward by the minister today. I move amendment S1M-3914.1, to leave out from first "welcomes" to end and insert: "condemns the deal supported by the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State, Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs at December's EU Fisheries Council; agrees with the Minister for Environment and Rural Development that the deal is "inequitable, unfair and even crude"; rejects the scale of the decommissioning element of the Scottish Executive's subsequent aid package and calls on ministers to agree with industry representatives a recovery plan that includes appropriate assistance for the catching, processing and service sectors and ensures as  far as possible that the industry remains intact; believes that Her Majesty's Government and the European Commission should provide funding towards such a recovery plan; demands that the Executive and Her Majesty's Government renegotiate immediately the days at sea and quota cuts with a view to replacing these measures at the earliest opportunity with a management regime that promotes sustainability and protects the future of our fishing communities; urges ministers to ensure that Scotland's quota allocations only benefit active fishermen in Scotland, and recognises that the Common Fisheries Policy must be replaced by a policy that returns genuine control of our fishing grounds to the Parliament."

Should Parliament therefore reject the Sea Fishing (Restriction on Days at Sea) (Scotland) Order 2003 (SSI 2003/56) until the changes have been introduced by the European Commission? Given the Commission's track record on breaking its word, surely we should not trust it in this matter.

The minister's comments are extremely worrying. I am sure that he is aware that there is unanimous opposition to the Scottish fisheries minister's spending £40 million on destroying the Scottish fleet. If there is to be any kind of decommissioning scheme, will the minister explain to the Parliament what will happen to the quota, given that it is the birthright of our fishing communities? Will he guarantee today that that quota will be taken back into the ownership of the Government and redistributed around the fleet, which is committed to the future of the industry, and that it will not fall into the hands of foreign owners?

To ask the First Minister how the Scottish Executive intends to respond to the European Commission's proposals on the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy. (S1F-2472)

Is the First Minister aware that the decoupling and modulation elements of the proposals could severely disadvantage Scotland, our beef sector and the general level of Scottish agricultural support? Will he speak to the Prime Minister, Tony Blair, to ensure that we learn the lessons from the fisheries debacle in December? Our farming communities are extremely nervous that the UK Government will  sell them down the river in a similar situation to that which was faced in December's fisheries talks. Will the First Minister speak to the Prime Minister to ensure that that does not happen in the talks later this month and over the next few months?

I congratulate Trish Godman on securing this important debate. Alarm bells started ringing for me about the issue when I visited the accident and emergency unit of Aberdeen royal infirmary, where I was informed by one of the ward sisters that admissions of under-13s to hospital with alcohol problems had increased by about 50 per cent over the past two to three years, so that between 50 and 60 under-13s were being admitted with alcohol problems. When I lodged a parliamentary question on the  number of under-16s being admitted to hospital, I was shocked to learn that Grampian had the worst figures in the country, with 107 admissions in 2001-02. That was 15 per cent of the national figure, although I recognise that each hospital has a different method of recording the statistics. The minister should turn her attention to investigating that. Teenage bravado is turning into hospital cases. That is certainly the case in Grampian. Our medical, social work and teaching professions are being left to pick up the pieces. For the last youth lifestyle survey in Grampian, first-year to sixth-year secondary school pupils throughout the region were interviewed. Some of the statistics are shocking. They show that the attitude of young people in Grampian towards alcohol is relaxing. Between 1998 and 2001—when the survey was last carried out—the percentage of young people who thought that drinking too much alcohol can cause health problems fell from 85 to 80 per cent. The percentage of young people who thought that drunk people are unpleasant fell from 56 to 48 per cent. The percentage of young people who felt that once someone starts drinking they are unlikely to stop fell from 46 to 37 per cent. Some statistics increased. The percentage of young people who thought that drinking alcohol was sociable increased from 56 to 60 per cent. The percentage of young people who thought that drinking alcohol was enjoyable increased from 55 to 58 per cent. Indeed, the mean consumption of alcohol among people at secondary schools was 17.8 units. For males, the increase was from 12.3 units in 1995 to 19.4 in 2001. For females, the increase was from 9.7 units in 1995 to 16.4 in 2001. Those are the last available statistics for secondary pupils in Grampian. I know that the Health Education Board for Scotland has run its "Think about it" campaign since 1997, but I suggest that those figures illustrate that the campaign is not having much impact on young people. The minister should address that issue. There is a danger that parliamentarians and people throughout the country, despite the good work of our agencies and police forces in places such as Grampian, are taking their eye off the ball, because we are obsessed about the impact of drugs on young people. Perhaps we have taken our eye off the ball too much. We will not stop under-age drinking; there will always be 16 and 17-year-old kids who want to take a few lagers to their mate's house to have a drink. There is no point in trying to stop that. However, my final plea to the minister is that we identify the underlying trends. People are now more likely to get paralytic, not just merry. Why is that? Why do 57 per cent of young people think  that they must drink alcohol to escape stressful lives and why do a similar proportion of young people think that local communities do not have enough facilities as an alternative to drinking alcohol and taking drugs?

I welcome the minister's point that such a complex system is bound to lead to errors. That is exactly the farmers' point. The system seems to demand 100 per cent accuracy; without that, it penalises the farmers. Does the minister appreciate that that is the farmers' view?

I congratulate Murdo Fraser on his motion. Many of the anecdotes that he has told us today echo cases that we have heard about in our constituencies. I met seven or eight farmers in Ellon last Friday, and the issue was high on their agenda—as was the whole issue of the bureaucracy that they have to face daily in their jobs. I bring to the minister's attention the "Arable Area Payments Scheme 2002" explanatory booklet, which details just one of the many schemes that farmers have to deal with. The booklet has 72 pages and comes with another 17-page leaflet that farmers have to read  as well. That adds up to 89 pages of reading just for one scheme. Farmers are finding that they have to spend hours every day just dealing with the paperwork, the red tape and the bureaucracy—often with members of their families and other workers helping out. At my meeting with farmers last week, one of the burning issues was the British Cattle Movement Service. The payments that farmers receive are a lifeline for them in difficult times. However, the delays and confusion over payments are causing difficulty for many farmers who find it hard to keep track. Errors are brought to their attention that they have to check, then they have to send back amendments and wait to find out whether those amendments are correct and whether the problems have been sorted out. That happens time and time again, and it is difficult for the farmers to keep control of what is happening. The bureaucracy is compounded by the fact that there are many different kinds of errors in the records. As a farmer said to me, there are very few schemes that demand 100 per cent accuracy, but this scheme seems to demand that—if there is only 99 per cent accuracy, the penalty is burdened on the farmer. That is simply not just, and we must do something about it. I have raised the issue many times with Ross Finnie, who has said that, in 2002, 10.2 per cent of claims failed. That is an enormous number, which highlights the fact that there is something seriously wrong with the system. He also said—as Stewart Stevenson said—that SEERAD, the BCMS or the other operators, as well as the farmers, could be to blame for the errors. However, it is the farmers who have to deal with the errors, no matter who causes them. I would like the minister to give us a breakdown of the source of the errors, so that we can find out who is to blame and who is more likely to cause them. Several schemes are affected: the suckler cow premium scheme, the beef special premium scheme, the slaughter premium scheme, and so on. Can we have another breakdown of figures to find out whether one particular scheme is causing most of the errors? That would help. I have also been told that information technology problems mean that the SEERAD computer does not speak to the BCMS computer. That seems a basic flaw that should have been addressed at the beginning. When the minister is addressing those points, I would like him also to address the point that John Scott raised, which is the serious concern throughout the farming community about the proposed sheep tagging scheme. The National Farmers Union of Scotland press release that describes the scheme is amazing. It says that we will have an  "EU-wide sheep identification and traceability system", and that "Animals born after 1 July 2003 must be tagged in each ear with a plastic tag containing details of the country and holding of birth, and an individual indentifier." After 1 July 2003, there will also have to be movement documentation, which means that there must be a movement document for all sheep. Each sheep will have to have seven separate records attached to it, including the identification number, the month and year of birth, the sex, the genotype, the details of destination, the date of departure, and information about the means of transport. It is a bureaucratic nightmare. I know that ministers have expressed concern about the bureaucratic nightmare to which Murdo Fraser's motion—which we all support—refers. I would be grateful if the minister, when he responds, would also touch on sheep tagging, which is an impending big issue.

Clearly, Brian Adam has brought an important issue to the attention of the Parliament. Will the minister comment on the law with regard to diesel spillages? If such spillages are illegal, have there been any prosecutions in the past year or two?

I thank the minister for making available an  advance copy of his statement. Before I begin, I would like to associate myself and the SNP with the minister's comments about our colleagues, Winnie, Fergus and Margaret Ewing, who would have liked to have been here today, and who would have been champing at the bit to ask questions of the minister on a subject that is dear to their hearts. Our thoughts are with them today. At the most recent First Minister's question time, Jack McConnell promised the Parliament that Scotland would win in the most important fisheries negotiations in living memory. However, within 36 hours, the UK had signed up to the worst possible deal for Scotland and to the worst deal secured by any of the 15 fisheries ministers sitting around the table in Brussels. There was no victory for Scotland, only massive defeat. Every other country that treats fishing as a priority left Brussels with a deal that it could live with; many left with concessions that they had gained at Scotland's expense. Is it any wonder that there is a seething anger in Scotland's fishing communities when their counterparts in Europe have the support of their Governments, which fight tooth and nail for their national interests? Our ministers admit defeat even before the battle begins, then they go to Brussels and refuse to rock the boat. After that, they come home to Scotland, shrug their shoulders and talk about downsizing their own industry. Is the minister aware that papers that were released under the 30-year rule show that, when the Tories took Scotland into Europe and the common fisheries policy, they considered the industry to be "expendable"? Is not it ironic that it has taken 30 years and the arrival of a Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition to bring the industry to the brink? Is the minister able to explain how the deal that he brought home promotes the conservation of fish stocks when the Scots, who use the biggest mesh in the North sea, are allowed nine days at sea per month while the Danes, who in the same waters use the smallest mesh, get 23 days per month? How can we conserve fish stocks by giving the fleets that use the smallest mesh the most days at sea? Will the minister also explain how the deal favours Scotland when measures to protect cod result in the haddock and whiting quotas, which are staple quotas for the Scottish fishing industry, being cut by more than the cod quota? Will the minister explain why he is talking about forcing another round of decommissioning down the industry's throat? Is it because he believes that that will somehow strengthen his negotiating position? Will the minister assure us that his strategy is not to boil the fleet down to one vessel because he will then be confident that he will be  able to go to Europe and get a quota that will allow that boat to go to sea? Will the minister explain why Scotland finds itself in a position in which countries such as Spain and Ireland have left Brussels with the green light to use our money to build new vessels for their fleets, while he has come back home to Scotland wanting to use our money to destroy our fleet? I will ask the three main questions on which the minister must get to his feet and give answers to the Parliament and Scotland's fishing communities. Does he agree that we do not need a financial package that will run down the Scottish fishing industry and turn our fishing communities into ghost towns but that, instead, we need a short-term aid package, funded by Europe and the United Kingdom Treasury, to preserve our fishing communities and keep the industry intact? Does he agree that we need to support the fleet and the on-shore sectors through the difficult months ahead until we negotiate a better deal? Will he secure the necessary funds from the UK Treasury and Europe to achieve that aim and ensure that they, not the Scottish Executive, pick up the tab? Will he tour the fishing communities throughout Scotland in the coming weeks and consult on putting together a comprehensive survival plan for those communities? I have a second question that I want the minister to answer. Does he now accept that Scotland should have led the negotiations all along? Elliot Morley cast his votes against Scotland's interests and scuttled back to London leaving Ross Finnie and our fishing communities to pick up the pieces. Morley called the deal "balanced", after signing a death warrant for our industry. Ross Finnie, returning to Scotland, called it "particularly pernicious" and talked of the unequal treatment of Scotland compared to some of the other member states. Morley thought that the deal was good and he signed it—no doubt he is singing in his bath. Ross Finnie thought that it was a "pernicious" deal and says today that he was bitterly disappointed, but given his non-person status in the UK delegation, his view did not count. Does the minister agree that, if there is one lesson that we must all learn from the debacle of 20 December 2002, it is that we can never again allow a UK minister to go into negotiations on behalf of key Scottish industries? I have a final question that the minister must answer today. What plans does he have to challenge the common fisheries policy politically and legally? Does not he realise that landlocked countries, such as Luxembourg—which is the size of Dundee—and Austria, have more influence over the fate of our fishing communities and fisheries management in the North sea than does the Scottish Executive, which represents the most fishing-dependent communities in Europe? The  CFP is a noose around the fishing industry's neck, so what is the minister going to do to remove that noose? When will he do it? When will he have a long-term plan to save Scotland's fishing industry?

rose—

I thank the minister for giving way. Can we take it from the minister's comments that he does not rule out pursuing an interim quota that will allow a more considered management plan to be developed in the near future by the states that are directly concerned with each fishery?

Is Alex Johnstone aware that the Scottish salmon farming industry and fishmeal companies are looking elsewhere for their sources because they want to support the white fish industry? The problem that Alex Johnstone raised is becoming less of a factor.

Will the member give way?

I thank Elaine Thomson very much for giving way. Does she support the views of Aberdeen City Council, which is part of the North East Scotland Fisheries Partnership and which believes that no draconian cuts should be implemented at next week's talks and that no decision on any new recovery plans should be taken? The council believes that instead there should be a breathing space so that everyone can consider those measures that have already been adopted and so that, in a few months time, a carefully prepared management plan for the North sea can be brought forward. Does Elaine Thomson agree with her local authority?

It seems that, at about this time every year, we say that we are in the run-up to the most important fisheries talks in living memory. This year, that is no exaggeration. Our fishing communities and the 40,000 people who depend on fishing for their employment await more deals behind closed doors next week in Brussels as the politicians and unelected officials get together to determine their fate. Anyone who saw the coverage of the protests yesterday throughout Europe, witnessed last week's march and rally in Edinburgh or looked at the size of the 40,000-signature petition that our fishing communities handed to the Parliament can be in no doubt that those communities are determined to prevent the axe from falling next week. No one in the fishing industry will let anyone devastate their industry and way of life with the stroke of a pen in Brussels. The industry is fed up with backroom deals. It stands outside the smoke-filled rooms while the politicians inside come up with their usual deals. Families who are dependent on the industry for income sit at home wondering whether they will be able to pay the bills in the year ahead. Time and again, successive Labour and Tory Governments have sold out the industry at such negotiations. A memo that was released last year under the 30-year rule showed that, even all those years ago, Whitehall considered fishing expendable in the pursuit of wider European objectives. Despite all that, the fishing industry is still crucial to Scotland. It is responsible for generating £250 million for the Scottish economy each year and employs more than 40,000 people. However, the industry is fed up with bending over backwards and getting no credit for it at all. All the new measures that have been introduced—the decommissioning scheme and new mesh sizes—have been ignored. All those measures were taken to conserve white-fish stocks, but the fishermen still have to fish alongside other fleets that do not use those measures and that use smaller mesh sizes. Our fishermen also still have to fish alongside the industrial fisheries fleet in the North sea. Is the minister aware that four Danish vessels were arrested yesterday? The illegal white-fish bycatch from those vessels alone could keep a number of Scottish vessels going for the whole year. A few days ago, two other Danish vessels were caught with an illegal white-fish bycatch. That, too, could have kept several Scottish vessels going for a year. Those Danish vessels turn all their catch into soup, while our fishing industry bends over backwards to conserve fish stocks for human consumption. Indeed, 12 Danish boats are still  waiting to go to court in Denmark for huge illegal white-fish bycatches. Our fishing industry is fed up with playing by the rules while other fishing industries throughout Europe do not. If they are unlucky, those other fishing industries get a slap on the wrist and are perhaps told to tie up for a month or so. We are the good guys and our ministers are always the good guys, but, at Brussels, our industry has to play by the rules. The figures that Europe released last week show that United Kingdom vessels committed only 1 per cent of the infringements in 2001, whereas Spanish vessels committed 46 per cent of the infringements. We are still miles away from a level playing field in Europe. What is the Scottish industry's reward for all that sacrifice? We know that Europe has ignored the conservation measures that the Scottish industry has adopted and that the industrial fishery TAC for 2003 will not be reduced by any significant amount, but Franz Fischler tells people in our industry that their livelihoods will have to end to save the cod. Franz Fischler betrayed Scotland over the deepwater fishery, which continues to be an issue. We get only 2 per cent of the quota for stocks off Scotland's shore. Franz Fischler is hell-bent on destroying the Scottish industry.

The SNP has never suggested doing nothing. I am coming on to the SNP view on the way forward. The industry in Scotland has been told that it will have to end, although the scientists' figures indicate that haddock is at its highest level for 30 years. The figures also indicate that saith biomass is at a 20-year high, whiting is at a 10-year high, prawn stocks are robust and even cod biomass is up by 25 per cent. No account whatever has been taken of Scotland's mixed fishery.

If Robin Harper will wait a few moments, I will address that issue. In his ridiculous open letter to the European fishing industry, Franz Fischler admitted that even scientists get it wrong. Indeed, in 2000, the  scientists proposed a zero TAC for blue whiting and yet this year they are setting a TAC of 700,000 tonnes. The scientists know that they got it wrong in 2000. Most of the outrage that is felt in the industry has been caused by management advice, rather than by scientific findings. No assessment has been made of the measures that the Scottish industry has taken or of other factors including climate change. The arguments that have been rehearsed in recent weeks on those subjects have not been taken into account. It is a scandal that there has been no economic assessment of the Commission's proposals. When the SNP met Commission officials in Brussels last week, we asked them what economic assessment they had made of their proposals. They said that they had made none. They also said that they had had one week to put together a 170-page proposal about the future of European stocks. That sums up how the CFP is entirely failing Scotland. The way in which the Commission is making decisions is absolutely appalling. What we need for next week's talks is a strategy. That is why it was appalling to hear what Labour MEP Catherine Stihler said last Wednesday in the European Parliament. She said: "At present there is no specific UK/Scottish counter-proposal to what the Commission is proposing." I repeat that that statement was made as recently as last Wednesday. There is a way out of all this. There are fish in the sea and there are ways in which we can take appropriate action over the coming weeks to conserve fish stocks and fishing communities. We know that a rushed decision next week would be the wrong decision. The history of the CFP is a history of rushed decisions. That is why we are in this position in the first place. It is also why the CFP will be reformed next week. The strategy should not be to go to Brussels and simply barter down the 80 per cent cuts to 30 per cent or 40 per cent. We need time. The industry is calling for time, as are Scotland's local authorities that have fishing-dependent communities.

I ask Mike Rumbles to let me finish the point, as I am sure that he wants to ask me about it.

We need time to address the measures that have been taken and the impact that they are making on stocks. We need  time to put together carefully considered and prepared management proposals such as those that have been put forward by the North sea states that are concerned about the stocks. We need to split the CFP discussions next week from the cod and hake recovery plan discussions. We know that there is no way in which both issues can be dealt with sufficiently on one agenda at the one series of talks. We have an opportunity next week to introduce zonal management, to set quotas and to let the fleet go back to sea. We could invite the North sea and Irish sea states to introduce their considered management proposals in a few months, once they have had time to consider and assess all the measures that have been taken so far. We are facing a crisis. We need extraordinary responses. Members are shaking their heads and saying, as the minister did in his opening remarks, that we cannot do what I am proposing.

The minister said that that was not possible, but it is possible. Other states are doing it as we speak. As the SNP told the minister in a meeting today, anchovy stocks were made the subject of an interim quota in 1999. There is a precedent for interim quotas. Not only was that interim quota set for anchovies, but the proposals that the Commission published yesterday set another precedent for that stock. We need to look at what the Spanish have achieved. I refer members to the Commission's proposals, which are published on its website. Members will see that a 19,800 tonne TAC has been set for anchovies. The footnote to the figure shows that the situation is unique. It says: "This TAC will be reviewed during 2003 in the light of new scientific advice". In the past, interim quotas have been set. As we speak, the Spanish have reached a deal in Brussels with the Commission. It is perfectly possible to pursue that strategy. That is why the North East Scotland Fisheries Partnership, which comprises all industry representatives and local authorities, supports such a proposal. When we put the proposal to the Commission, we were told that the idea was refreshing but that it would have to be proposed by a member state. I repeat that, if the proposal is made by a member state, the Commission will consider it, because it is a new, fresh idea. That is why it is so important that Ross Finnie should officially lead the UK delegation in Brussels next week.

It is ridiculous that the First Minister said—

I will just conclude on this point, Presiding Officer. The First Minister says that Scotland will lead in appropriate circumstances. Scotland has led the delegations for education and health in the past and we cannot think of a more appropriate circumstance than now, at the height of a fishing crisis in Scotland, for the Scottish ministers to lead for the whole UK. They should take charge, lead from the front and deliver a deal to secure the future of Scotland's fishing communities at next week's talks. I move amendment S1M-3700.2, to leave out from "supports" to end and insert: "urges the Scottish Executive to officially lead the UK delegation at next week's Fisheries Council with a view to opposing vigorously any draconian cuts in fishing opportunities; calls on the Executive to propose that viable quotas be set that will allow the fleet to return to sea in the new year, providing the opportunity for states with a direct interest in the North Sea and the Irish Sea to bring forward management plans later in 2003 that promote fisheries conservation and secure a future for our fisheries communities, and further calls on the Minister for Environment and Rural Development to engage directly with other EU states and Norway to achieve this objective."

The minister accepts that not everything can be concluded at next week's talks. Would not it make more sense, therefore, to decide on the new CFP reforms next week and to allow the North sea states to produce their recovery plan in a few months' time? That would allow them to make the decisions in the cold light of day rather than as part of an overcrowded agenda. If that is his belief, why does he not try to speak to other states and get them to agree to that?

Does the minister appreciate that industrial fishing and its impact on white fish stocks is one of the biggest concerns of Scotland's fishing communities? Can he explain why, in a written answer this week, he said that he has made no attempt to consider the impact of industrial fishing on white fish stocks, despite the fact that he has more than 250 scientists in his employ? Does he agree that that is shameful? Should not he be trying to find evidence to take to Europe to help him fight Scotland's corner?

I welcome the debate, sponsored by the Tory party. However, a sense of irony prevails, as the Parliament was left to pick up the pieces after the 18 years of Tory Government during which substance misuse in Scotland went through the roof. It is extremely difficult to think of any successful initiative by the Tories to tackle substance misuse in Scotland during their 18 years, but thankfully, the Parliament is beginning to address the issues and to undertake desperately needed new initiatives. One reason why I take a close interest in the issue is that I want to help people who are on drugs to live productive and healthy lives and to contribute to Scotland in the future, and to save their families much grief. Another reason is the need to cut drug-related crime, which is one of the biggest social issues—if not the biggest issue—that faces many of our communities throughout  Scotland. That is the case in Grampian, which I represent. Aberdeen has the second-highest crime rate in Scotland, but double the national average figure for house breakings. In Scotland, 80 per cent of house breakings are drug related. Every day one can pick up any newspaper from north-east Scotland and it will be riddled with stories about people who have been jailed or given drug treatment and testing orders for drug-related crime. It is essential that the debate concerns cutting crime as well as helping people to get off drugs. We know that putting people in prison does not work. A revolving-door syndrome is involved. Even in Craiginches prison, where 80 per cent of inmates test positive for drug use, the limited services are virtually collapsing. Three drug agency workers and three Scottish Prison Service staff are supposed to be based in the prison to deal with drug issues. A few months ago, I discovered that only two of those six posts were filled, although the prison has one of the biggest drug problems in Scotland. After public outcry, the situation was addressed and some posts were filled, but I found out this morning that the prison's drugs co-ordinator has resigned. A few months ago, most of the posts were filled to help to get inmates off drugs, but now, only two of the three agency staff posts are filled and only one fully trained prison staff member is in post. We are back to square one. The situation in the prison continues to worsen rather than improve. What does that mean? We must look outside the prison to help to get folk off drugs and to tackle the problem. We want a drugs court in Grampian. Of all the places in Scotland where a pilot should have been established, Grampian should have been chosen, because it has had the biggest increase in drug misuse in Scotland in the past 10 years and has the third-biggest drug misuse problem. The local authorities have identified 1,700 opiate users in Grampian, 1,300 of whom have used treatment services. Some estimate that there are roughly 3,500 opiate users in the region and others put the figure as high as 5,000. That is the scale of the problem, which relates to heroin and more recently to crack cocaine. After many people leave prison, they end up back on the streets. They continue to use drugs and commit crime, then return to prison. That must stop. I suspect that one reason why Grampian has not had a drugs court is that it does not have the resources to service a drugs court. The situation is as simple as that. As Roseanna Cunningham said, Grampian has the longest waiting list for referral to the local drug problems treatment service. Addicts who are committing crime now were referred to the service 18 months ago, but still wait for their  appointments. They want to get off drugs and most of them are committing crime, but they are being told to return in a year and a half, when they can perhaps be helped. The situation is unsatisfactory. In 1992, 250 referrals—excluding alcohol cases—were made to the local drug problems treatment service. One consultant psychiatrist and one registrar worked for the service. In 2002, several thousand referrals have been made to the same service, but still only one consultant psychiatrist and one registrar work for the service. The number of psychiatric nurses who work for the service has increased to about 24 and other senior staff have been employed, but no increase has been made in key posts over the past 10 years. Demand for the service is going through the roof, which is one of the reasons why people are told that they have to wait 18 months.

I do not dispute Keith Raffan's point, but other parts of the country, where there is less demand on such services, have more consultant psychiatrists and other staff. I am thinking of Glasgow, which I believe has three consultant psychiatrists. We must look at the share of resources around the country. To put the icing on the cake, of all the health board areas in Scotland, Grampian has the lowest level of drugs funding.

I welcome the new minister to his post and ask him to turn his attention to the situation in Grampian. Drug treatment and testing orders have been piloted in Aberdeen where they are meeting with success. I will finish by giving an example of their success, which shows that it is worth while to go down the road of giving the courts alternative disposals and not simply putting people in jail to get them off drugs. I asked the local council for a case study to highlight an individual's progress through a drug treatment order. The council gave me the following example: "A is a 30 year old male, who has been involved in heroin use since the age of 16. At the time of being referred to the Drug Treatment and Testing Order Project, he had a total of 88 previous convictions and had served 24 custodial  sentences ... He was made subject to an 18 month Drug Treatment and Testing Order in February 02". The case study concludes: "He has built relationships with his family and is presently in a permanent relationship and investigating the possibility of securing a mortgage in order to buy a flat." I finish by saying that we must build on successful initiatives such as that. We have to ensure that such initiatives are up and running in Grampian, which has lagged behind in securing the resources that are needed to service them. Finally, the economics—

We would have saved a lot of cash for society if the individual I mentioned had been enabled to get treatment earlier in his life.

I congratulate John Farquhar Munro on securing this important debate. The lack of rural housing is an issue for the whole of rural Scotland and is particularly important in Aberdeenshire and  north-east Scotland. It is terrible that young people in Aberdeenshire, throughout the Highlands and Islands and elsewhere simply cannot afford to live and work in the areas where they were brought up. Such a situation is disgraceful in the 21 st century. Now that we have the new Scottish Parliament and a Government in Scotland, we must stop protecting the landowners who hold so much power and have so much influence in this country, and we must introduce a radical agenda that will help our young people to have a future in their communities. According to briefings that have been issued by Shelter and other organisations, a third of the houses in rural Scotland were built before 1919, compared with only 19 per cent of houses in urban Scotland. Four per cent of rural houses are below tolerable standard. Moreover, 5 per cent are tied houses, and landowners or others basically enslave their employees because they are in charge of their housing needs. That situation is outdated and ridiculous in a modern Scotland. We have a chronic lack of social housing in Aberdeenshire. For example, 4,000 people are on the waiting lists, including 642 people in the Mar area alone. Indeed, Shelter's briefing on rural housing says: "In 2000 Aberdeenshire Council estimated that around 65% of households in housing need were unable to afford even the cheapest owner-occupied or rented housing." Part of the difficulty is that the oil industry is based in north-east Scotland. People who earn a packet in the city live out in the country, which means that local people simply cannot afford to compete. The last plot of land that sold in Aberdeenshire went for £200,000; it was small and described as not particularly good. How on earth can local people afford to bid for that? A few weeks ago, I was speaking to a tenant farmer and his son. The son looked out the window and said, "I can't afford to buy a property in this area; I can't even afford to live near the farm." He pointed to an empty property owned by the estate on the grounds of the farm. He cannot afford to bid for it or live in his own community near his father, who is the farmer on the family farm. That is a disgraceful situation. We need radical policies from the Parliament. I think that local councils should compulsorily purchase land. People, too, should have the power to purchase land compulsorily if they are local and have a local connection. They should just be able to get land off the local landowner, who should have no say in the situation. We have to zone land, so that local people can get it and people from outside cannot move in and outbid them. We have to come up with such radical solutions.  On all the north-east estates that are owned by greedy and selfish landowners, there are loads of empty houses, but local people cannot get their hands on them because the landowners do not want them to be occupied. They want to sell off new plots of land and build houses that go for £200,000 each, which only incomers can afford. Once again, local people are excluded from not only the land, but the existing empty houses on it. I finish by telling John Farquhar Munro that he raised some excellent points, but cash is not the only issue. We need more money to help to build social housing and to help people to buy houses in their own localities, but we also need to change the law so that it is on the side of the local people, not the landowners.

I welcome the debate and the fact that we have finally reached this point. It indicates that the wheels of government move quite slowly, given that the last case of foot-and-mouth disease in Scotland was reported at the end of May 2001. We have had to wait 18 months to have this debate on the way forward and to hear some of the ideas that are in the pipeline to ensure that such a terrible outbreak never happens again. It is difficult to imagine what people who were affected by the outbreak went through, particularly those in the Borders and in Dumfries and Galloway. We should remember that the disease hit not only agriculture, but tourism. Indeed, the report notes that, although the agricultural sector lost £60 million, the tourism sector lost £200 million. We must learn lessons this time. For example, all the reports have recommended that burning of animals should be the last option. Of course, the Northumberland report back in 1967 or 1968 said the same thing. Perhaps we should learn that lesson this time, because we obviously did not do so then. We must acknowledge that Scotland dealt with the crisis better than it was dealt with south of the border. One reason was the existence of Scottish ministers, the Scottish Executive and our Parliament and Scottish institutions. Their response shows that we can respond better to  Scottish circumstances. However, we should look for more powers and a greater Scottish response in the future, because we would have been able to do even more had we had the authority. One difficulty that came out of the situation was the fact that because the minister had limited powers, he had to use them to be seen to be doing something. Most of what the minister did was worth while and was supported by all parties, but there is a feeling that the minister was over-zealous—for example in the way that the 20-day rule is still being applied—because he lacked the powers to tackle the root causes of the outbreak. My constituents feel that they are still suffering from the foot-and-mouth outbreak despite the fact that there was never a case in north-east Scotland. The 20-day rule is causing great inconvenience to the stratified system of farming in north-east Scotland, where the right resource has to be on the right grounds at the right time, particularly in autumn and spring. There have to be many movements of livestock in a short space of time, which cannot happen with the 20-day rule. That is why there is so much concern that the rule's imposition might become permanent. There is a feeling that in too many areas the minister continues to take his lead from DEFRA. We must have a Scottish response to Scottish circumstances. There is no doubt that use of the 20-day rule has been influenced by what DEFRA is doing south of the border, and there is a feeling in the industry that the starting point for the rules is what DEFRA does. The Scottish Executive seems to be saying, "There has been more relaxation in movements, but we're not going any further because DEFRA is refusing to budge south of the border."

I shall give the minister an example of what I am talking about. The industry has been calling during the past 18 months for risk assessments and a cost benefit analysis. That was not forthcoming, but a decision was eventually taken because DEFRA decided that it was time to put such a scheme into place, and a few months ago we got it off the ground. However, that scheme should have been in place ages ago so that we could have put the rule to one side. Imports are the root of the problem, and our farmers feel that they are bearing the brunt  because the minister has limited influence. The root cause of the outbreak was illegal imports; that is where we must tackle the problem. It is one thing to try to prevent the spread of the disease if it happens again in Scotland—we supported most of the measures that were taken—but the key is surely to prevent it from happening in the first place. That is what the farmers want. In July I went to several south-east Asian countries. I came back to Aberdeen via Heathrow, and was not checked once for illegal meat imports. There was one brief announcement at Heathrow airport, which is not good enough—I could have brought anything into the country. There was no check, which is still the situation today as far as I am aware. We need more urgency on controlling imports and the minister must have more authority.

The minister will be aware that the 20-day rule is causing a great deal of inconvenience for many of Scotland's stratified farms, particularly those in areas of the country that never suffered a case of foot-and-mouth disease. Will he indicate when the earliest possible opportunity will arise for him to announce that the regulation will not be made permanent?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether any new scientific work has been commissioned with regard to white fish stocks. (S1O-5918)

Has the minister taken any steps to investigate why European scientists have not assessed the impact on white fish stocks of their recommendations on total allowable catches for the industrial fishery in the North sea? That fishery simply hoovers up juvenile white fish to turn them into soup for pigs and chickens, removing the cod food supply from the North sea. Will the minister get his scientists to start working to defend Scotland's fishermen and ensure that Europe hits the right target, which is the industrial fishery, not our fishing communities? Will he also acknowledge that the European Commission's proposal to cut quotas by 80 per cent would devastate those communities?

Does the minister accept that drugs courts play a crucial role in reducing drug misuse? Will he explain why there is not therefore one in Grampian, where drug misuse has gone through the roof, as has drug-related crime. Only last night, an elderly couple in their nineties were robbed in their home for a small quantity of money. That was, no doubt, another drug-related crime. What measures is the minister taking over and above drugs courts, which Grampian does not have, to reduce such crime?

Does the minister think that it is appropriate that people in Grampian have to commit crime in order to get drug treatment?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

First, I welcome the Lord Advocate's condemnation of last night's hoax calls to the fire service. Every decent person in Scotland will also roundly condemn those actions. I make no apologies for highlighting the situation in Grampian and Aberdeen in my speech. After all, the city of Aberdeen has the second highest crime rate in Scotland; for example, housebreaking is 144 per cent above the national average. At the moment in Grampian, we have a prison that is more than a third overcrowded and sheriff courts that have the longest waiting times in the country as far as bringing criminal trials to court is concerned. Indeed, in response to the weight of work in those courts, there will be four extra sittings this month and next month. Of course, the problem of drugs misuse is behind the recent rise in crime in Grampian. The police reckon that more than 80 per cent of crime  in Grampian is drugs related. There has been a dramatic rise in drugs misuse in the area in recent years, especially problems with heroin and, more recently, a very severe problem with crack cocaine. However, one of the reasons why Grampian has such high crime rates is that the area has a chronic lack of drug rehabilitation services. I want to turn the minister's attention to an article in the local press.

No, I want to finish this point. The article read: "An Aberdeen drug addict who stole from his mother's home to fund his habit asked a sheriff to send him to prison for better treatment ... His defence agent claimed" that the addict "was eager to go to prison to kick his drug problem, as he felt there was little help for him outside jail." Two weeks ago, I met privately with six drug addicts in the city. I sat around the table with them and heard how they spend their days on Union Street asking for money because they do not want to commit crimes to feed their drug habits. One couple told me that it costs between £90 and £120 a day to feed their habit. The other people did not tell me how they got the money to feed their habit, but if we put two and two together, we will get four. They begged me as their MSP to take up their cases. They said that in April 2001 their general practitioners referred them to the local substance misuse service, which is run by local the primary care trust. They were told they would have to wait a long time but, 18 months later, they have still not heard back. Since April 2001, they have had to fund their habits on a daily basis. If I was a drug addict and left the chamber today to commit a crime in Aberdeen—if, for example, I broke into a house and the police turned up on my doorstep tomorrow and found stolen goods in my house—I would appear in court the following day to plead guilty and the sheriff would ask for background reports. Three or four weeks later, or even two or three month later, I would appear back in court in Aberdeen and would be given a drug treatment and testing order. That same day, I would be assigned three workers to help me with my drug addiction and I would get immediate treatment. Many thousands of addicts do not commit crime, but must fund their habits. Indeed, many people who commit crime to fund their habits, but who have not been caught, are told to come back in 18 months because the authorities—which are supposed to be funded by the Government ministers who are sitting in the chamber today— cannot help. I ask the ministers: What sort of message are we sending to drug addicts throughout Scotland who are in such situations? The matter is urgent and the minister must intervene. Grampian has one of the lowest levels of funding in Scotland for coping with drug misuse. However, communities, individuals and families in Grampian—which has among the highest crime rates in the country—are paying through the misery of losing someone to drug addiction or through having their houses broken into time and again. I know people in Aberdeen who will not leave their houses because they have been broken into three or four times in the past two years. That is an unacceptable situation. I invite the minister to go to Aberdeen and sit down with drug addicts—I can set up a private meeting for him. I ask him to sit around the table with them and hear their stories first hand. It is not only drug treatment services that are the problem, but police funding. In Aberdeen, we have the lowest numbers of police officers in the country. I ask the minister to address those serious problems, to get in touch with reality and to do something about the situation.

I thank the minister for her statement and turn her attention to the quality and availability of housing in our rural communities. Is she aware that many landed estates in rural Scotland would rather hold on to scores of empty houses than make them available to local young people who want to continue to live and work in the areas where they were born? What steps is she taking to ensure that that housing is made available to local people, not just for renting but for ownership, so that local young people can commit their futures to their rural communities?

I welcome the minister's indication that the industry should be at the heart of negotiations. Is there potential to second representatives of the fishing industry in Scotland to the civil service for the next few weeks and months of crucial negotiations, so that expert advice is at the heart of the civil service process?

Will Rhona Brankin give way?

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. When a member blatantly lies to the chamber, should not the Opposition have the opportunity to set the record straight through an intervention?

Will the member give way?

rose—

rose—

rose—

The minister has alluded to whatever we do in future, which clearly refers to new technical measures that might require funding and investment in the industry to secure its future. However, he told Mike Rumbles yesterday that European cash would not be available for such measures. Will the minister confirm that, for the coming year, Europe has set aside hundreds of millions in cash under the new common fisheries policy for this very purpose? Is it not his opinion that Westminster will block Scotland's fishing industry from accessing that cash, which will go to other member states instead?

This week, Scotland's fishing communities were left reeling from yet another blow dealt by the bureaucrats in Europe and by Government offices in Scotland and London. Although many stocks continue to thrive in Scottish fishing grounds, the valuable white-fish sector faces several weeks of unprecedented anxiety in the run-up to December's quota negotiations. The fishing industry was warned this month that all Scotland's white-fish grounds may have to close in eight weeks' time to protect cod. If ever there was a perfect example of why the common fisheries policy and the management regime are not working, that is it. It is a disgrace for Franz Fischler of the  European Commission to blame Scotland's fishing communities for the current state of affairs when he, his officials and their predecessors have over the past 20 years created the mess in which we now find ourselves. He is the Commission official who recently betrayed Scotland over its deepwater fishery. When he ignored the science and handed a victory to France, Scotland lost. Last year, politicians in the Executive and in London helped to sow the seeds of today's crisis by ruling out tie-up schemes as a conservation method. Their refusal to support the fishing industry's voluntary tie-up last year and their defiance of democracy after the Parliament supported the industry's dignified protest has come back to haunt them. We are again steeped in crisis management and trying to deflect knee-jerk and panic policies from officials and scientists. A blanket closure or anything remotely like it would destroy many fishing communities the length and breadth of Scotland. Overnight, it would throw tens of thousands of hard-working individuals out of a job and end a way of life that has survived since time immemorial. If a closure took place, Scotland's waters would be brimming with fish in a matter of years, but no industry would be left in Scotland to take advantage of that. Fishermen from other EU member states who have feasted their eyes on Scottish fish stocks for years must be rubbing their hands in glee. How on earth can any scientist or bureaucrat tell a prawn fisherman in Pittenweem, Eyemouth, Mallaig or Fraserburgh whose cod bycatch is virtually zero that he cannot go to sea because we want to protect cod? The news that fishermen expected was that nephrop quotas would increase, not be stopped. How can we tell fishermen in Peterhead, Aberdeen, Shetland or any of the islands who target haddock or whiting that they cannot return to sea in eight weeks' time? How can we tell the thousands of workers in fish processing factories throughout the nation that factories will have no deliveries of haddock or prawns because cod stocks are low? If severe restrictions were imposed, even the Arbroath smokie would become a thing of the past. Let us think about the impact on employment at our ports and harbours around Scotland, which ranges from people who work there down to the local newsagent or cafe at the quayside. It would be lunacy to close all or a large section of Scotland's fishing grounds to respond to difficulties with one species. There is no doubt that the science is worrying. If cod stocks are in danger of extinction and can be saved, fishermen—more than anyone—will want to save them. The industry is keen to support any proven and effective steps to achieve that. Members are not fisheries scientists, but we do  and should respect their work. However, even scientists get matters wrong or their work can be incomplete. Most important, the existing science must be put into context. Even the scientists say that the current advice has a 40 per cent margin of error.

I am happy to tell Phil Gallie that one reason for the industry's state today is that it was misrepresented by 18 years of Tory government. The most striking aspect of the scientific advice is that it is not up to date. It is galling for fishermen to know that they have bent over backwards in recent years to adopt new technical measures such as a bigger mesh size and new panels. The industry has undergone the pain of a decommissioning scheme only to find more bad news on the horizon that is based on a scientific analysis that takes little or virtually no account of its sacrifices. The Scots industry has been at the forefront of white-fish conservation in Europe. It even fishes in the North sea alongside other vessels that use smaller mesh. Is it any wonder that the industry is angry and frustrated? The fact that 100 boats were decommissioned in the past year has not been taken into account. One hundred and seventy boats were decommissioned throughout the UK. Even Denmark decommissioned 70 cod catchers, but none of that was taken into account in connection with the North sea. The scientists' advice is that the implementation and enforcement of these measures has not yet been evaluated. The haddock and whiting advice is that "Several technical conservation measures have been or will be implemented from 2000 onwards ... No complete evaluation of their likely impacts has yet been undertaken".

I am not saying that. I am about to deal with that issue. The measures that are in place are working. That is shown by the fishing fleet's statistics that only 49 per cent of the haddock quota and 34 per  cent of the whiting quota have been caught this year. The technical measures are working and the scientists should take them into account. Last year's cod total allowable catch was even increased, yet this year complete closure is proposed. The scientists' advice is that in recent years, the growth rate of North sea cod has declined. The reasons are not known. The scientists and the decision makers in Europe must take all the other factors into account, such as climate change and warmer waters, and the distribution of the food supply in the North sea. A couple of days ago, I spoke to the scientists who take the decisions. They told me that they undertake much scientific analysis of cod stocks, but little on the location of the cod stocks' food supply. No correlation is made between the location of cod and their food stocks. That is ludicrous. Scotland's fishing industry depends on the outcome of the work of the 300 scientists who work for Fisheries Research Services, only a handful of whom are working on the future of fish stocks. That has to change. Industrial fishing impacts on bycatches as well as on the food supply. When will the European Union and the Scottish ministers get round to tackling industrial fishings? The quotas for sand eels, Norwegian pout and sprats have either been static in recent years or have increased, yet this year, as a result of scientific advice, the industrial fishing sector is still in line to get hundreds of thousands of tonnes. Why are the European Commission and the politicians threatening the livelihoods of our fishermen and making them jump through hoops when white fish is being caught as a bycatch by the massive fishery that takes valuable white fish and turns it into pig feed? Surely priority should be given to human consumption. We need ministers who will turn their warm words into action over the industrial fisheries. This has been a huge issue in the Scottish Parliament for more than three and a half years, yet ministers have achieved virtually nothing.

No. I am sorry, but I have given way twice already. I want to turn to the fishermen's role in pursuit of their own livelihoods. The science has to be reinforced by the experience and knowledge of the fishermen. They spend more time at sea than anyone else and they are at sea for longer periods of time than anyone else: they do not simply go out to sea now and again to take samples. Yesterday, in a joint initiative between the  fishermen and the scientists, the industry published the "North Sea Stocks Survey". It reveals that there is no case for massive conservation measures to protect cod. We have to take that finding into account, as fishermen have been utterly ignored so far in terms of the management of their own livelihoods. The report of the £1 million project that was funded by the Executive last year is still at the printers. That means that it has not been taken into account. We should be seconding fisheries representatives to join the United Kingdom delegation in Europe. That would ensure that Ross Finnie and his counterparts get decent advice for once. We have to take new funding initiatives. The minister has to clarify today—because he said no yesterday—that European funding is available to help our fishing industry. Is the minister and the Scottish Executive going to access that funding? I have two final points about the minister's tactics for saving Scotland's fishing industry. First, he has to get going around Europe. He has to start speaking to other fisheries ministers. He should convene a meeting of those ministers in Scotland, which is Europe's most fisheries-dependent nation. He should start to build alliances in northern Europe to save the future of our fishing industry. The minister's best tactic and the one that would boost the fishing industry's morale would be to seek designation officially to lead the UK delegation at the fisheries council. Yesterday, the minister admitted that Scotland represents more than 70 per cent of the UK industry.

We know that Ross Finnie likes to give the impression that he leads the negotiations in Europe. Being in the room to mutter the occasional word is one thing, but commanding the torch of authority as the UK's official representative is another thing completely and that is what Scotland and Scotland's fishing industry demands. There is not one fisherman in the whole of Scotland who does not think that Ross Finnie should lead the negotiations. Yesterday, Ross Finnie misled the Parliament when he said that he may lead the negotiations or that he has led the negotiations from time to time. We also heard Whitehall briefing yesterday—that in no circumstances will Scotland lead the negotiations.

I will conclude by saying that this is not the first time a Liberal has been  hung out to dry by Labour. It usually happens in Scotland, but it seems that this time it is happening in London. Ross Finnie is busy telling the Scottish Parliament that he intends to lead, but Whitehall is briefing behind his back. There is no way that Labour ministers in London will let a Liberal minister lead the negotiations. Yet we know what can happen: parliamentary answers have indicated that Scotland has led on education and health at the Council of Ministers, but not on fishing—an industry in which Scotland has a predominant national interest. That is a scandal and the minister has to address it. The minister has to show leadership, determination and political will—

He has to do that by demanding to lead the negotiations and by fighting for Scotland's future. I move, That the Parliament recognises that sustainable fisheries are essential for the well-being of our fishing communities but rejects any advice to close Scotland's mixed fishery as part of a cod recovery plan given the devastating and unjustifiable impact that such a measure would have on our fishing communities and associated sectors; calls on the Scottish Executive to work in partnership with the fishing industry with a view to drawing up proposals for the future management of all fish stocks; notes that technical conservation measures and the recent decommissioning scheme have not been fully taken into account; further notes that other states that fish Scottish waters, or impact on local stocks, have a duty to adopt similar measures including a reduction in the industrial fishery, and believes that any further measures, for which the necessary funding should be made available, should be delayed given that they would be most effectively generated through the new mechanisms proposed as part of the reformed Common Fisheries Policy that will be adopted in a matter of weeks and that Scotland should seek to officially lead the UK delegation during forthcoming European negotiations on which the future of the fishing industry depends.

I welcome this debate, which is sponsored by the SNP. Mike Russell's opening speech was excellent. Most people to whom I speak in Scotland are fascinated by the fact that the Parliament does not have responsibility for broadcasting, although we have responsibility for matters such as education, culture and economic development. Members from all parties believe that we should have legislative responsibility for broadcasting and media issues in Scotland. In 2000 we debated the future of Grampian Television and regional identity  in Scotland. That debate was well attended by members from all parties, who are keen to make use of any opportunity to discuss broadcasting issues in the Parliament. The history of Grampian Television, which plays a crucial role in maintaining regional identity in the north and north-east of Scotland, is very pertinent to today's debate. Regulation of the media and broadcasting industry is a key issue for Grampian Television, which plays a distinct role and has produced award-winning programmes. However, the history of Grampian Television illustrates some of the challenges that regional identity in Scotland faces. In the 1960s, the station had 300 employees, but now it has only 100. Unfortunately, the station's regional programming time has been cut again, to seven hours a week. That happened despite the fact that the former Deputy Minister for Environment, Sport and Culture, Allan Wilson, told the chamber that he supported an increase in the regional quota for Scottish television stations. Scottish Executive ministers do not have the power to influence decisions on these important issues. We live in competitive times, and Scotland faces the challenge of protecting not only its regional identities but its national identity. The media sector plays a crucial role in promoting culture, identity and democracy in Scotland. It helps to hold the Parliament and our other politicians to account. For that reason, it must be protected. The communications bill is on the horizon. That includes a proposal to relax restrictions on non-European Union ownership of broadcasting companies in the United Kingdom. It also promotes light-touch regulations, which entail a further relaxation of the safeguards that are currently in place. It is no wonder that Philip Schlesinger of the University of Stirling wrote recently: "Opening the door further to overseas multi-media corporations will not make regulation easier. Any distance between owner and media market is likely to diminish the sensitivity to questions about Scottish content." That is a very important statement. This debate is all about the issue that Philip Schlesinger raises. The Parliament needs to do more to address the challenges that face our identity and culture in Scotland. The communications bill raises the prospect of one owner buying the whole ITV network. If Grampian Television had to fight to maintain its identity within the SMG, what will happen to Scottish Television, Grampian Television and the SMG if they have to fight within a large multinational corporation, such as Disney or Microsoft, which may buy the entire ITV network? That is the seriousness of the challenge that we face. Scottish broadcasting needs a strong regulatory framework. For that reason, we should  campaign to have a voice on the board of the office of communications. Twice during First Minister's questions, the First Minister told me that he was fighting to get a place on the board of Ofcom. Unfortunately, he lost that battle. I have received a letter from the Deputy Minister for Tourism, Culture and Sport, in which she states: "OFCOM itself is designed to be a small strategic body ... It is proposed that there should a Contents Board, which would have many of the functions of the existing broadcasting regulators, and a Consumer Panel." That is backtracking. The Executive is settling for second best, which is not good enough for Scotland. The ministers are telling the Parliament that they fought for Scotland, but failed completely. By accepting this decision, Jack McConnell is admitting that he has lost and has no power or influence to secure a good deal for Scotland. I challenge members of the other parties represented in the Parliament to contact their Westminster counterparts. MPs do not want to promote Scottish broadcasting, because they think that that will result in their having less time on our TV screens. That is why they are busy setting up all-party groups at Westminster to promote "Coronation Street", rather than fighting for the Scottish broadcasting industry. We remember the Falkirk West MP who said that there is too much Scottish news in Scotland. We know what the MPs' agenda is. I ask MSPs from other parties to fight to get a good deal for Scotland in the communications bill and to persuade their Westminster colleagues to see sense and to fight for Scotland.

It is important that, as a new Parliament and a new democracy, we do our utmost to learn from other countries. We are going through a learning process in running our own country, so we should look to the nordic countries. I congratulate Kenny MacAskill on securing this timely and interesting debate. The league tables that sometimes appear in the Financial Times showing the quality of life or the standard of living in countries across the world show that Norway comes top and that Sweden and Denmark come within the next four or five places. That tells us something that we in Scotland should learn from. The nordic countries do many things very well, although we are hoping that they do not do too well with their joint bid for Euro 2008, because we want to beat them. Until recently, Scotland's salmon farming industry was largely owned by the Norwegians. The Dutch have now bought a fair chunk of it, but we should learn. How did Norway end up owning Scotland's salmon farming industry? It runs its salmon farming industry much better than Scotland does and we should learn from that. Norway is one of the top maritime nations in the world. It has a population of only about 5 million, but I think that it has the second largest tonnage of merchant shipping on the planet. That shows its clout in that sphere. It is also Europe's other major oil producer and Scotland has many links with it through the oil industry. Recently, I was privileged to be part of an all-party group that went to the offshore northern seas exhibition in Stavanger, where I spoke to officials from the Norwegian oil sector. We met officials from Statoil, which is the state-owned oil company in Norway. It is clear that it has got its act together. Again, we should learn from what it has done and what it is achieving. A £55 billion oil fund has been built up for future  generations of Norwegians. Perhaps we should have learned to do that a long time ago in this country. Norway and Scotland have many sea fisheries links. Next week, talks will begin between the European Union and Norway over the future of white fish stocks in the North sea. Believe it or not, quotas are decided by those talks and not by the rest of the EU. Scotland will not be there, but Norway will, despite the fact that it is not a member of the EU. Consider the renewable energy industry in Denmark. Scotland is the best-placed country in Europe to develop a renewable energy industry, but Denmark has developed such an industry and owns all the technology. We should learn how it did so, find out what we can do and work closely with it to develop our sector. Recently, Finland has stolen much of Scotland's timber market and paper industry. It is making inroads and we should work closely with it in that sphere. I should not admit this, but my first two cars were Volvos, which is a reminder that Sweden still has its car manufacturing industry. Many academics in Scotland are experts on nordic rural policy and land ownership patterns, which are pertinent to what we are discussing. In recent decades, we have failed to learn what we should have learned from what has happened in the nordic countries. When I was a student, I went to Denmark to do my dissertation on managing sovereignty in the EU. I wanted to find out how small nations do so and found that the Danish, like their counterparts in Sweden and Finland, are comfortable as members of the EU. They feel that they have real influence. Such influence was demonstrated when Denmark brought Europe to a halt with its vote on the Maastricht treaty in the early 1990s. Through speaking to politicians, civil servants and others in Denmark, I found an enormous affection for Scotland. Such people want to see Scotland play a greater role in Europe. As enlargement takes place, the Europe of the future will be a Europe of many circles. People will work together on common agendas. It makes sense for Scotland to join the nordic countries. We have more in common with such countries than with many others. Last week, the Danish presidency announced that the nordic countries will come together after the next EU Council to discuss Europe. Would not it make sense for Scotland at least to listen, go along and engage in dialogue with those countries about what is happening, so that we can learn about agendas that affect that part of Europe? A couple of months ago, the President of the Norwegian Parliament visited the Scottish  Parliament and I had the privilege of meeting him. The idea of a cross-party group on the nordic countries was discussed and the Norwegian parliamentarians would certainly support it. I hope that we can progress more joint initiatives, such as the seminar in a few weeks' time, which will be interesting, and an all-party group.

I welcome the minister's commitment to oppose a blanket closure of Scotland's fishing grounds. However, action and achievements speak much louder than words. Our fishing communities are seething and ready to fight back following the events of last week. If the threat to their future is not lifted, last year's protest will pale into insignificance. The fishing communities will not take any lectures from the European Commission when it is the politicians and a common fisheries policy driven by the likes of Franz Fischler and his cronies for the past 20 years that have inflicted so much damage on the industry. Will the minister give a commitment to our fishing communities and to the Parliament that he will seek officially to lead the United Kingdom delegation at the forthcoming European negotiations, which are the most important ever for Scotland, where most of the white-fish sector is based? Will the minister tell Parliament whether he plans to introduce the necessary investment for further conservation measures, such as the tie-up  schemes, which remain on the table but have so far been rejected by the Government? Will the minister also tell us whether he has contacted his counterparts who represent other fishing communities in north European nations, with a view to building alliances to protect the future of our fishing communities?

Begging is a growing issue in the streets of Aberdeen. Given that the mainly young people who are involved tend to have drug or alcohol problems, does the First Minister believe that the issue is related to the chronic lack of drug and alcohol rehabilitation services in the north-east and throughout Scotland?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is in regular contact with British embassies. (S1O-5763)

I spoke to an ambassador in a European embassy a couple of weeks ago who informed me that she is briefed only by Whitehall departments on policy issues, including issues that are devolved to the Scottish Parliament. On checking the websites of any of the British embassies around the globe, one can find pages that promote Buckingham Palace and Big Ben, but finding any reference to Scotland is like finding a needle in a haystack. Will the minister speak to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and remind it that there is a place called Scotland, which it should be promoting as well, because—for the time being—Scottish taxpayers continue to fund the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and those embassies?

I welcome the publication of the committee report, which is an influential and tough report that does the Parliament credit. It serves as an illustration that our new democracy in Scotland is  working well. I joined the committee on the visit that it made to Peterhead prison a few months ago because I wanted to see at first hand the expertise at Peterhead. The trip was fascinating. One of the best points about the consultation is the fact that the minister accepted the case for keeping Peterhead open. We should congratulate the local community on its dignified and effective campaign. However, they are not at the finishing line yet and the minister needs to back up his verbal support for the prison by putting some hard cash on the table. That would demonstrate that long-term investment in the prison will be made. When Christine Grahame asked the minister about time scales, he mouthed something that sounded like "100 or 200 years". Is that not long term? The minister has to give us an indication of the time scale for long-term investment, because the community does not want to have to rehearse its past campaign. Those people want to know that a long-term commitment to the prison has been made. Perhaps when the Deputy Minister for Justice winds up today, he will make that long-term investment pledge. Reference has been made to the Spencer report, which said that sex offenders should be housed in a single location. That report also set out the need for more sex offender places. Let us press ahead and build the new block on the Peterhead site. I cannot understand why ministers cannot give that commitment today. The committee report mentioned the importance of rehabilitation; rehabilitation is vital and we would not be talking about building new prisons if we had managed in the past to put good rehabilitation measures in place. Reoffending would have been cut drastically, which would have reduced the need for new prisons. I welcome the mention of rehabilitation that the minister made in his opening remarks, but a system is not in place that could measure the success of rehabilitation. In March this year, I asked a couple of parliamentary questions on prisons. In the minister's reply to a question about individual prisons' effectiveness in cutting the reoffending rate, he said that no system is in place to measure the effectiveness of local prisons. That means that we cannot measure the effectiveness of one prison against another. Surely we need to do that in order to discover which are successful so that we can replicate that success in other prisons? I also asked about the measurement of rehabilitation success. Tony Cameron's reply was that "It is not possible to measure rehabilitation".— [ Official Report , Written Answers , 25 March 2002; p 272.]  Surely it must be possible to measure rehabilitation. If someone with a drug habit goes to prison, is put on a programme and six months down the line is not using drugs, surely that is a measurement of rehabilitation? Surely it is possible to discover which prisons are managing to achieve such objectives? I do not accept Tony Cameron's answer and that issue has to be addressed. Both the prison estates review and Jim Wallace's statement in September indicated that investment would be made in a number of prisons. Craiginches prison was not mentioned in either, but the Thursday after Jim Wallace's statement, the chief inspector of prisons felt it necessary to take the unprecedented step of publishing a special report on the state of HMP Aberdeen at Craiginches, which he described as the worst report on any prison in Scotland. Craiginches prison has been crying out for investment since 1997 but, five years later, we continue to wait for that investment. The chief inspector of prisons reported on the prison, but the minister has neither mentioned it nor has he made a commitment to spend on it one penny of the £110 million spending he announced. Craiginches is a prison in which 85 per cent of the inmates use drugs. The prison has virtually no rehabilitation services—

I will take an intervention if I have time to do so.

I say to the minister that we need action on Peterhead, Craiginches and other local prisons in Scotland that do not have adequate rehabilitation services. Effort needs to be made to reduce reoffending. Action also needs to be taken on the accountability of the Scottish Prison Service's management. Tony Cameron must go; prison officer morale will not lift until he does. Will the minister please sort out the SPS management problems?

To ask the First Minister what steps have been taken to secure a place for Scotland on the board of the new Office of Communications. (S1F-2132)

When the First Minister indicated to the Parliament in May that he had made a number of representations to the UK Government to secure a place for Scotland on the Ofcom board, the Parliament and the broadcasting community in Scotland welcomed his comments warmly. However, we have a real problem, because London said no. Will the First Minister indicate today how he will overcome that problem? Will he reiterate his view that we must secure a place on the board so that we can protect the interests of Scotland's broadcasting community and protect Scottish culture and identity?

Will the minister confirm that effective prisons play a key role in building safer communities? In the light of the chief inspector of prison's damning report on Craiginches prison, will the minister also ensure that some of the new resources make their way to that prison? Its name was missing when Jim Wallace listed in his recent statement the prisons that will receive new investment.

Will the minister give way?

George Lyon. [ Laughter. ]

rose—

I welcome the debate, which is on a very important subject, although I lament Alex Fergusson's woeful performance in his opening speech for the Tories. The best thing about the Tories today is the colours worn by Annabel Goldie. It is good to see the impact that the SNP is having on setting trends. I commend her for wearing a lovely shade of heather. The SNP will support the Tory motion, but the striking thing about it is that it could have been lodged and supported by the SNP in any of the 18 years when the Tories were in power, because it is as relevant to the 18 years of Tory Government as it is to the three and five years of Labour Government in Edinburgh and Westminster respectively. The Government's record on making progress in rural Scotland in the first three and a half years of the Scottish Parliament has been appalling. Despite the fact that the budget is apparently going up to £26 billion in a few years, I do not think that anyone in Scotland, particularly in rural Scotland, would trust the Government to spend any of the cash wisely in rural Scotland or to make the blindest bit of difference. That is why it is so important for rural Scotland that we change the Administration at next May's elections to the Scottish Parliament.  One of the difficulties about the debate is in defining rural businesses. When I made an inquiry at the Scottish Parliament information centre, I was told that "it is very difficult to provide information about the status of 'rural' businesses" and that "the Executive said that 'there is no official measure of rural businesses'." One thing that we have to get right at the beginning is information and statistics about the health of the rural economy and the number of rural businesses. All of us who represent rural constituencies know fine well that our rural communities face enormous challenges. In recent years we have seen a downturn in the agricultural and fisheries sectors. The manufacturing sector has taken hits because of the strength of the pound and tourism has taken hits because of foot-and-mouth disease and other issues. We know that a challenge that faces the Parliament is to stimulate economic growth in the rural economy if we want to create jobs and build our rural economies in the future.

Mike Rumbles clearly does not understand the situation, which is that some farmers get up to £300,000 while other farmers get almost nothing. The SNP supports family farms and believes that they should get more support. The point that we are making is that support should not go only to the big farmers. The Rural Development Committee has run two important inquiries into the state of the rural economy. The first one was on changing employment patterns in rural Scotland and the second was on identifying obstacles to rural development. We have heard woeful stories from around the country from our rural communities. The submission from Argyll and the Islands Enterprise indicates that the population in that part of the world is declining. It states: "All areas are depopulating other than North and Mid Argyll, Mull and Cowal." That story is replicated throughout many rural communities in Scotland. It is worrying that even when the population is increasing the number of young people in those communities is decreasing, because they are going to the cities to get a future and to get jobs.

I want to move on. We are finding out from the evidence that is coming in from rural communities that small businesses are closing down and collapsing. Boarded-up shops litter the high streets of our rural towns and villages. Supermarkets are taking a big share of all the business and no one is doing anything to protect the high street shops. Aberdeenshire has lost 181 shops over the past 20 years. The situation is going from bad to worse under the Executive. All our communities have lost their banks and post offices.

The message that we are getting from all rural communities is "Infrastructure, infrastructure". If we get the transport infrastructure right the rest will happen naturally. Broadband is a huge issue. We must do more to improve broadband infrastructure in rural communities. Bob Downes, from BT Scotland, wrote yesterday in Business a.m. that broadband will not help many rural communities because of the costs and the lack of infrastructure. We must ensure that geographical location is not a factor for businesses. We can do that only by making sure that we have a modern economy. Regulation is a huge issue. Who on earth would want to work in many of our rural industries? I am holding up a summary of the fisheries regulations, which the Executive issued a few weeks ago. I challenge anyone to understand 27 pages of the most complex fisheries regulations. It is no wonder that people want to leave that industry. I also have a 70-page document that outlines one scheme and it is accompanied by a 17-page leaflet. That is for only one of the many farming schemes. It is no wonder that the farming community has to divert valuable resources to employ people to fill in the forms for them. That cash should be staying in the pockets of the farmers.

It is not only about infrastructure. We must ensure that we have powers in the Parliament to deliver for our rural communities. The aggregates tax and other macroeconomic matters, which are damaging our rural communities, are reserved to Westminster. There is nothing that the Parliament can do about them.

There is also the issue of European representation. Ross Finnie, the Minister for Environment and Rural Development, apologised recently to the people of Scotland because Margaret Beckett, the UK Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, turned down agri-monetary compensation for Scottish farmers. We lost £11 million for rural Scotland because we do not have our own representation. I conclude by saying that our message to the Executive is to deliver the infrastructure to take rural Scotland forward and to ensure that the Parliament acquires powers so that we can represent our rural communities in Europe and elsewhere. Perhaps then we will be able to release the potential of rural Scotland. I move amendment S1M-3418.1, to insert at end: "and recognises that Her Majesty's Government has ignored the plight of our rural communities and calls for the many powers that it currently has to be transferred to the Parliament in order to boost the rural economy."

Will the minister give way?

Does Alex Fergusson accept that Mike Rumbles's point is erroneous? The average may be £19,000 per farmer, but too much of the money goes to too few farmers, and we must cap the amount of cash that goes to the bigger farmers to spread the cake more widely.

Will the minister give way?

Does Mike Rumbles accept that one of the reasons why we have a problem in Grampian is the lack of dentists moving to the area to work? Does he agree that one way round that might be to ask the Scottish Executive to fund a feasibility study into the potential for having some kind of training facility in Aberdeen?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to protect the interests of any deepwater fishermen whose livelihoods have been jeopardised by recent decisions of the European Union Fisheries Council. (S1O-5561)

I thank the minister for his answer. Many deepwater fishermen have contacted me in recent weeks. They are utterly disillusioned and at their wits' end following Europe's decision to lock them out of their own back yard to the benefit of foreign fleets and to impose a management regime that will endanger  the future of deepwater stocks. Will the minister give a commitment to raise the issue at next week's fisheries council and stand up for Scotland? Will he also indicate what steps he is taking to manage the displacement of fishing capacity that will arise if the regulation is not reversed in the near future?

I, too, congratulate Irene McGugan on securing this debate. I live in Aberdeen now, but when I was elected to this Parliament I lived in Dundee. I have many fond memories of living in the city—the beer was a bit cheaper, it did not rain all that much and, of course, the city had many cultural attractions that I used to enjoy regularly. I still represent the city as part of the North-East Scotland constituency. I used to work for the economic development department of Dundee City Council, dealing with inward investment. The issue we are discussing today is an economic issue. When we try to attract companies to locate in cities, we do not just tell them about the skills base of the city, the available factory space or the financial incentives; we try to sell the quality of life in the city. We used to make great play of that in Dundee, trying to get folk to come to the city. That is done by explaining the cultural backbone of the city, its identity, and its attractions. Our brochures and promotional material featured the Verdant Works and Discovery Point, as well as Camperdown country park and other attractions. Quality of life is essential for the economic future of the city. That is why today's debate is so important. I ask the minister to take that point on board. We set up a film initiative to attract screen work to the city—to promote the city as a location for promotional videos for businesses, pop videos, television programmes and film work. Lo and behold, the number 1 attraction that was used to promote that initiative was Verdant Works. The other attractions in the city were also important.  We cannot afford to let such places close. The issue is about not just the identity of the city or its culture, but economics. I think that £120,000 is a cheap price to pay for promoting those issues and values. I ask the minister to give a positive response to today's debate.

The minister refers to productivity. Does he agree with the oil and gas industry's view that the new tax will reduce productivity in the North sea? If so, what will he do about that?

Will the member take an intervention?

George Lyon will appreciate that agriculture plays a crucial role in the Scottish economy. He recently complained that Margaret Beckett makes anti-Scottish decisions when she is in Europe. Does that not show the case for a change in constitutional arrangements so that we can take good economic decisions for Scotland in Europe and elsewhere?

I thank the Deputy Presiding Officer for bringing that rant to an end. I will begin by explaining to the minister some of the events that took place at the London Stock Exchange at the beginning of this year, when a number of flotations took place. Owing to global economic conditions, out of the handful of flotations that were successful, two involved Scottish companies: the Wood Group and Venture. The companies had those successes in common and also the fact that they are successful oil and gas businesses, started by Scots in the north-east of Scotland and with company bases in the north-east of Scotland. Instead of rewarding that success story, a decision was taken elsewhere—outwith Scotland, which is the home of the oil and gas industry—in London. The decision that was taken undermined the success of that industry. Scotland does not have that many successful economic stories at the  current time, but the oil and gas industry is one.

I was going to mention that all of the Scottish companies that I spoke to at the various stands at the exhibitions we attended complained about the 10 per cent oil and gas tax that was introduced by the Westminster Government and the impact that that tax is having. One of the companies that I spoke to was quoted in an article yesterday. The chairman of Paladin Resources, one of the independents, which is managed by Scots, said that the 10 per cent tax is "'ill-conceived' as it led to fiscal uncertainty, which would erode stability vital for the industry and investors in a mature hydrocarbon province". He went on to say that the tax would "make it more difficult for new entrants to secure finance and would also accelerate the demise of the North Sea."

No. The debate is about trying to persuade ministers that they need the powers to help Scottish industries to develop and take Scotland forward. To do so would allow us to create the wealth to invest in Scotland's social services. That is what is important and that is what we are trying to get across to ministers today. The 10 per cent tax is extremely important. It was not a decision that was taken by the Scottish Parliament, despite the fact that the Deputy Minister for Enterprise, Transport and Lifelong Learning is supposed to be responsible for promoting enterprise in Scotland. He should be banging on doors in London and trying to persuade UK ministers, who are taking such anti-Scottish decisions, to help him to promote enterprise in Scotland. The 10 per cent tax is already having a devastating impact. It has not even been introduced yet and has already dented confidence in the North sea. Heaven knows what will happen when it is actually introduced. In his opening remarks, the minister said that he wanted to promote Scottish manufacturing and engineering. In the quarter before the oil and gas tax was announced, orders in the oil and gas sectors were up by 38 in Scotland. However, since  the tax came onto the agenda, they have fallen by 23 in the last quarter. That is a direct impact of the tax.

We are seeing a resource flight from the North sea. Because it is more profitable to work in other parts of the world, people and equipment are leaving Scotland and going elsewhere. The minister said that we must create a skills base in Scotland. However, I should inform him that, because the tax is slowing down exploration in the North sea, people, particularly those on the rigs, are going to work in countries such as Mexico and India. We need those skills to boost the Scottish economy, but the young people who are going into the industry are finding it more attractive to work elsewhere. This issue is a perfect example of why the Parliament needs more powers. We need to help the Scottish economy and secure our future. Although the oil and gas industry is essentially Scottish, decisions are being taken in London. That is where civil service jobs and the headquarters of some oil companies are based and where taxation decisions are being made. Although the minister must secure more powers to help the Parliament to deliver for Scotland, in the meantime he should use what influence he has to fight the Scottish case. Indeed, he should go down to London and try to help the Scottish economy by getting the oil and gas tax removed.

I congratulate Margaret Ewing on securing this important debate. I welcome her back to the Parliament—she is back with a bang. SNP parliamentary group meetings over the past few months have not been the same without her. The problem exists not only in Moray but across Grampian. I have with me a letter that is being sent to all the patients at Westhill dental practice this week by the eight dentists who work at the practice and who serve that large community, which is outside Aberdeen. The opening line of the letter, which indicates that the practice will no longer take NHS patients, says: "We have continually strived to maintain and improve standards, but this has become increasingly more difficult under the National Health Service." The situation pertains elsewhere in Grampian. New figures today show that, in Aberdeen, only three out of the 38 practices take NHS patients. That is a tiny percentage. Indeed, the dental health line that was set up in Grampian 18 months ago because of the number of people who were looking for NHS dentists receives—believe it or not—3,500 calls a month. If someone has an examination at a dentist on the NHS, they have to pay £5.32, which is topped  up by the NHS to £6.65. A scale and polish costs £13. A dentist sees around four patients an hour, which means that, if they all get an examination and a scale and polish, the dentist gets about £60 for that hour. Out of that money, the dentist has to pay for trained nurses, all of their equipment, control of cross-infection, a receptionist, rent for the premises and a living wage for themselves. That is the root of the problem. As Mike Rumbles said, we have to address that situation. If a dentist goes private, they can charge £25 for an examination alone, so the economics of the situation are evident. Salaried dentists are a small step forward. The ones in Grampian have huge waiting lists and can make only a limited impact. There is a time-bomb element to the problem as well because, if someone has not been to the dentist for 18 months, their membership of that practice automatically lapses, which means that that practice will not readmit them to the NHS list. We need an education campaign to counter that. Salaried posts are not the only issue, as the problem in Grampian also relates to a shortage of dentists. Today's figures show that 40 out of 190 posts in Grampian, including Moray, are vacant—that means that there is a 21 per cent shortage of dentists. Grampian cannot attract dentists because dentists see the area as "professionally isolated", to use the official phrase. In order to get adequate training in the area, we have to consider the consultants' position in hospitals, which is also under stress, and we have to establish a dental school in the area. Dundee dental school has five applications for every place, which demonstrates that there is a demand for places. We should create those places in Aberdeen. The problem is a serious matter for Grampian and many issues relate to it. We seem to be putting obstacles in the way of people who are trying to lead a healthy lifestyle and we have to address that urgently.

Will the minister investigate the chronically low level of drug rehabilitation services at HM Prison Aberdeen at Craiginches so that we can reduce reoffending and crime in our local communities?

To ask the First Minister what the outcome will be of his visit to the sustainable development summit in South Africa. (S1F-2038)

I welcome the fact that Scotland was represented through the First Minister at the summit in South Africa, despite the fact that it was not at the heart of the negotiations, where many of us would like it to be. Is the First Minister aware that many people are referring to the summit as the world summit of shameful deals, because there was no clear road map towards sustainable development in the action plan that was produced? Does the First Minister recognise that here in Scotland, we do not have our own strategy towards sustainable development? Will he explain why that is the case, and will he give an undertaking to the chamber today to bring one forward in the near future, so that Scotland can make her own contribution to saving the planet?

I pay tribute to the Peterhead campaign, the Peterhead community and the support of Stewart Stevenson and Alex Salmond. One reason for the increase in prisoner numbers is society's failure to reduce reoffending. I direct the minister's attention to Craiginches prison in Aberdeen. In that prison, 85 per cent of prisoners are drug users. The area has some of the highest rates of drug-related crime in Scotland, but there is a pathetically low level of drug rehabilitation services in the prison. Craiginches did not merit a mention in the minister's statement, despite the fact that it faces some of the biggest challenges in the prison estate. Will the minister consider the drug rehabilitation services in Craiginches? Will he say what investment he intends to give to Craiginches to begin to reduce reoffending?

When we recall the discussions that have been taking place in Johannesburg, we should all remember that we are lucky in that most people in Scotland have access to drinking water. However, massive improvements are required because we would not otherwise have one report containing eight recommendations before us today, and another helpful report from the regulator. I remind the chamber that the first and biggest outbreak this year of cryptosporidium was in the Aberdeen area, where there were 143 victims. Usually we would expect 60 to 65 cases in Grampian a year, but the recent outbreak left 143 victims in its wake. Most people will not know that because no ministerial task forces were set up and the media did not cover the story because it was  not in Edinburgh or Glasgow. However, it was a serious outbreak that caused a great deal of concern. The outbreak was identified at the end of January, but not until early March was the potential source at Invercannie treatment works, near Banchory outside Aberdeen, was identified. Grampian NHS Trust and the water authorities held a news conference on 11 March. It would be constructive for the minister to consider that case and turn his mind away from Edinburgh and Glasgow for a few moments to find out why the delay occurred. We are still waiting for the outcome of the case control study that was set up. I spoke to the Scottish centre for infection and environmental health this morning and discovered that we still, months after the outbreak, do not know the exact source. That raises questions about rural supplies of water. Invercannie, many other treatment works and the infrastructure in rural Scotland have lacked investment down the decades. The report that we received today was quite shocking. As MSP for North-East Scotland I was shocked to learn that 233,000 people in the Aberdeen area live in three of the seven high-risk areas for cryptosporidium. There are also 59 moderate risk areas—I do not know where they are, but I suspect that they are rural. Indeed, half of Aberdeen is in a high-risk area. I was previously unaware of all that information and I am sure that the people of Grampian were unaware of it, too. I ask the minister to turn his attention to rural investment. I was speaking to someone who works in the operations side of the water industry in the north-east, who told me that his budget is a fraction of what it was in the 1980s. We know that the water authorities have been shedding staff. Finally, it would be helpful if the north and north-east of Scotland were given a voice on the new board of Scottish Water, given that one of the members of the board lives in London. There is no one on the board from the north-east of Scotland, where the high-risk areas are.

I begin by apologising for missing the minister's opening remarks. I was delayed in getting to the chamber today, having returned from Shetland. I will take great delight in responding to some of the comments that the minister's Labour colleagues have made. I welcome the debate. The issue is sensitive not just for the Parliament but for those in communities throughout Scotland who are concerned about how the Parliament and the Government respond to sex offenders and former sex offenders in our communities. Let us make no bones about the matter. The bill is before us because of the case of Steven Beech, which is an extreme and high-profile case. Steven Beech has 115 convictions and was front-page headline news throughout England. He was described as England's most notorious sex offender. In spite of that, Cambridgeshire constabulary gave Grampian police 24 hours' notice that it would provide a one-way ticket for that individual, who had chosen to live by the seaside and had chosen Aberdeen on the map.  That is not a satisfactory situation and I do not think that any member of any political party would think that it is.

One of the Labour members is shouting "So?" It is an extremely important point. The matter gave Grampian police an enormous headache. They received a phone call telling them—

Will the member let me finish the point that I am making? This is an enormous issue for Grampian police, which was given 24 hours' notice of the fact that Steven Beech would be in its patch. Steven Beech is still deemed to pose a risk to the public. Surely that is an important aspect of the debate.

I will return to the point that the member makes about Sewel motions. Today we are here primarily to debate an extremely important and sensitive issue relating to sex offenders and how the Parliament should respond. The arrival of Steven Beech has created headaches not only for the police. The people of the north-east of Scotland were terrified when they read in the papers that Beech was coming to live in the area. There was a complete outcry—almost every MSP representing the north-east was contacted by members of the public who were concerned about the issue. Huge public concern was expressed, not least by women's organisations in the north-east.

I ask the member to let me finish. We welcome any attempt to close a loophole and protect the public interest, but there are wider issues that the Parliament must address, such as cost. It has been revealed that it may cost the north-east of Scotland £200,000 a year to look after Steven Beech. No one is arguing that a penny of that £200,000 is wasted; it is important that we spend the money. However, is it right that the situation should be allowed to arise without the public authorities in the north-east of Scotland being notified of it? We must take account of the fact that the individual concerned is receiving treatment in the north-east—treatment that he did not receive south of the border. We should discuss with the authorities in England the treatment that is  provided to sex offenders. Michael Matheson argued that the Scottish Parliament should legislate in this area. The Parliament was elected by the people of Scotland and is responsible for justice. Surely we are obliged to legislate on issues such as this, which are important to communities the length and breadth of Scotland. Sewel motions have been abused. They were supposed to be used only rarely. This is an emergency situation, and the Parliament should pass emergency legislation. The man Sewel himself says that he is extremely surprised by how often the Executive uses Sewel motions to get Westminster to legislate on Scotland's behalf. This is a very sensitive issue on which we should legislate here in Scotland. The people of Scotland elected us to do that, and we should do it today. We owe it to the people in the north-east of Scotland, who continue to be extremely concerned that Steven Beech is living in their community. Despite the fact that his offences were committed south of the border, Scotland is expected to pick up the tab for looking after Steven Beech, who is still deemed to be a risk to the community. We owe it to the people of Scotland to legislate on such matters in the Scottish Parliament.

Is the minister aware that the publicly funded youth initiative, the Young Scot card, allows young people to use the card to get a free burger at McDonald's restaurants and discounts from other fast-food chains? Does the minister think that that is a sensible use of public funds? Will the minister investigate the policy adopted by Young Scot, given that the Health Education Board for Scotland sits on the board of the Young Scot initiative? Does the minister think that that Young Scot policy helps to promote healthy lifestyles for our young people?

The minister rightly points out that the battles lie ahead. The fear in the industry, especially in light of the Commission's stance earlier this week on the deep-water fishery, is that the regulations will be watered down as the European Union's southern states in particular start to shout loudly. Will the minister outline what steps the ministerial team has taken to build alliances with other member states, so that the regulations will not be watered down and, indeed, will be strengthened, particularly with reference to historic fishing rights?

Will Irene Oldfather give way?

I thank George Lyon for giving way. I reiterate that the SNP is concerned about the medium and long-term future. The Council of Ministers regulation that contains the CFP gives more delegated powers to the European Commission. The Scottish Fishermen's Federation expressed concern about that and the SNP is expressing concern about it. Will George Lyon also express concern about it?

rose—

I inform Tavish Scott that we were, of course, referring to the long term. I think that all of us in the chamber want Scotland's historic fishing rights to be maintained in the long term. Is Mr Scott aware that Spanish commentators have said that the CFP amounts to the scrapping of relative stability?

I do not know whether the minister attended the "Taste of Grampian" food festival in Inverurie on Saturday, where I tasted many delicacies from our seas. That food festival shows the fishing industry's value to Scotland. We should remember that we have a fleet that goes to sea virtually daily to bring fish to the table. Too often, fishermen must make the ultimate sacrifice to do that. We all know that the catch and processing industries sustain employment in many coastal communities that would not otherwise exist. The industry runs through the fabric of Scotland. Today's debate is about securing the industry's future. The CFP has a role, because we cannot manage stocks alone, but the one-size-fits-all approach, the political horse-trading and Scotland's lack of influence down the years have led to a decline in stocks and related employment. The industry involves thousands of talented individuals and companies and our fishing communities rely on a good outcome for the CFP. We owe it to them all to get the new CFP right. The policy must reflect Scotland's needs by  protecting our historic fishing rights, treating conservation as the number 1 priority and putting economic and social objectives at its heart. If we can achieve that balance, we will secure the future for our fishing communities. I tell the minister that there is much to be welcomed in the new CFP and that some proposals have much cross-party support. We welcome the retention of the essential six and 12-mile limits, the new emphasis on multi-annual management of fisheries and the emphasis on technical conservation measures. We know that we cannot rely on TACs alone and that we must eliminate discards as much as possible, although any measures must be sensitive to Scotland's mixed fishery. We welcome the level playing field for enforcement in our seas. The lack of a level playing field has been a sore point for many years. However, we are concerned about the proposal to impose quota penalties. That might have implications for relative stability, if quotas went to other nations and they were allowed to build up a track record through that. We welcome the plans to bring fleet capacity throughout Europe into line with available resources. It is imperative that other countries share the pain. As we all know, this nation has been through the pain in recent years. It is now the turn of other nations. We welcome the retention of the Shetland box, but are concerned about the question marks that remain over it. We also welcome regional advisory committees, which are a step in the right direction of moving away from the disastrous one-size-fits-all approach that the CFP has adopted. However, the committees must have genuine influence. The industry will sign up to the new CFP only if those committees are seen to have influence in final decision making. The Commission has said only that it may explain how it dealt with committees' advice. That is very kind of the Commission, but as the European Committee's report on reforming the CFP said, the regional committees must have more influence than the CFP documents say that they will have.

I am delighted to.

The Commission would be foolhardy to turn down such advice, but it has done so in the past. Only this week, the  Commission ignored the united voice of the deep-water fishery from not only Scotland, but the rest of the UK. Science is important and the SNP welcomes the improving link between science and the Commission's final decision making. That link is imperative. From the debacle over last year's prawn quota, we all know what happens when the science is not listened to and how the industry's trust over European decision making on fisheries is lost. Scientific doubts continue about monkfish and other quotas and over the deep-water fishery, which has just been subjected to shenanigans in Brussels. The Commission's proposed regulations for that fishery must have scientific justification, but do not appear to have it. I urge the minister to fight to ensure that the European centre for fisheries research and management comes to Scotland, because there is no more appropriate home for it. I welcome the aquaculture proposals, especially the commitment to further research into aquaculture. However, any expansion of the aquaculture sector in Europe and in Scotland must not come with the price of more industrial fisheries, so the promised research should be into alternative food supplies for salmon farms and aquaculture. However, all is not rosy and the SNP must highlight its fundamental concerns. The key objective of the exercise is to prevent Scotland's seas from becoming a free-for-all and to retain our historic fishing rights. That is why the principle of relative stability is fundamental—it is the cornerstone of the CFP. On the face of it, we seem safe, but if we dig a little deeper, there is a completely different story. Chapter 4 of the proposed Council regulation on the conservation and sustainable exploitation of fisheries resources under the common fisheries policy states: "The Commission proposes that the allocation of Community fishing opportunities among the Member States, based on the principle of maintaining relative stability of fishing activity, should be maintained." That sounds safe on the face of it. However, the proposed regulation also states: "the Commission considers that progress towards more normal economic conditions in the fisheries sector would permit a revision of these arrangements in the longer term." Equally worrying, section 3.8 of the European Commission's road map on the reform of the common fisheries policy, on the economic management of fisheries in the Union, states: "The Commission considers that the fisheries sector is still characterised by specific features which make the application of normal economic conditions, such as free competition between producers and freedom of investment,  difficult to apply in the short term." We need those features to be kept to protect Scotland's rights and we do not want them for just the short term; we want them for the medium and long term and the Government has to secure them. Page 23 of the road map, which must set alarm bells ringing in Scotland, states: "If the Community takes action to address these issues, on the basis of proposals now put forward, it will gradually create a climate that will be more favourable to the introduction of more normal economic conditions and the elimination of such barriers to normal economic activity as national allocations of fishing possibilities and the principle of relative stability." We all know the Commission's agenda; it wants to scrap relative stability and Scotland's historic fishing rights. That might be in the CFP for the short term, but the minister has to go to Europe with his UK counterpart and fight tooth and nail to maintain Scotland's historic fishing rights, for the long term, not for the short term.

I would love to take an intervention, but I cannot. I turn briefly to representation in Europe. It has to be battle stations for the Government. The minister faces his biggest test and the last thing that the industry requires in this crucial period is ministerial complacency or naive optimism. Other member states will be queuing up to secure their objectives; Scotland has to do likewise. To ensure that Scottish priorities are reflected in the final CFP, it is imperative that the minister, who represents two thirds of the UK industry, leads from the front. He has to demand that he lead the UK delegation within Europe. No misleading comments from the First Minister persuade anyone that Scotland leads from the front in fisheries councils. Now, more than at any point in the history of the CFP, is the time for the minister to lead from the front, lead the UK delegation, fight for Scotland and win a deal for Scotland to protect our historic fishing rights and give us a decent CFP. I move amendment S1M-3197.1, to leave out from "welcomes" to end and insert: ", while welcoming many of the developments in the revised Common Fisheries Policy, calls for the Scottish Executive and European Union to guarantee that Scotland's historic fishing rights will be incorporated into the Common Fisheries Policy in perpetuity; believes that the proposed regional committees must have genuine decision-making powers to make a difference; notes that the EU continues to pursue damaging fisheries policies including the proposed inappropriate regulation of the deep-sea  fishery, and calls on the Minister for Environment and Rural Development to demand that he leads the UK's delegation during the forthcoming negotiations in order to secure Scotland's objectives."

Will the minister take an intervention?

What steps is the minister taking, or does he plan to take, to ensure that Scotland's historical fishing rights are enshrined in the common fisheries policy in perpetuity?

I start with a plea to move the Parliament to Aberdeen permanently, so that I can get some routine into my life and play squash twice a week every week throughout the year. The debate is important because time and again in the chamber we have discussed Scotland's health record, particularly obesity in young children. The most exercise people get these days is pressing the accelerator or clutch in their cars or walking down their local high street to McDonald's to buy more burgers to accelerate heart disease. Young people have been mentioned in the debate several times. It is important to catch people when they are young to try to encourage them to adopt a healthy lifestyle. That means getting them to play more sport and to participate in physical exercise when they are young. The shortage of PE teachers—mentioned eloquently by Margo MacDonald and other members—is crucial. Rhona Brankin says that other teachers can fulfil the PE function and, although that is true to a certain extent, those teachers have other preoccupations. In 1998, there were 52 full-time specialist teachers in Aberdeenshire, a number of whom were PE teachers. In 2002, we have 25 full-time specialists so the situation has become a lot worse. In Aberdeenshire, there are only eight full-time equivalent PE teachers for 158 schools and 20,500 pupils. Those eight PE teachers are delivering only a quarter of the PE provision that is recommended by the Executive. That is what is happening at the coalface in our schools. Some secondary school PE teachers in Aberdeenshire to whom I spoke told me that they are noticing a huge difference in the kids who are  coming through from the primary schools. Those kids are less fit and less willing to participate in exercise and sport. We must take into account that that has a big impact on their futures. I am astonished that Rhona Brankin keeps intervening on all speakers to say that the debate is not particularly important because there are other ways round the problem. However, as Margo MacDonald said—

There she goes again. I am delighted to take an intervention.

Rhona Brankin is right to suggest that many issues are involved. However, in this litigious age, other teachers are terrified about getting involved in all the sports in their schools. They would rather have a trained specialist—in case anything goes wrong or to ensure that nothing goes wrong in the first place. Schools often do not have facilities. Often, by the time that kids get changed and move all the tables in the dinner hall that they have to use as a gym, the half-hour PE period has been cut to 20 minutes. When the Parliament was in Aberdeen, I had a members' business debate on drug misuse in Grampian. Drug figures from throughout the country show that it is mainly young people who turn to substance misuse. Why do they do that? They tell me that it is because their communities have no facilities. They want sports facilities. They say that education to get them off drugs is very useful but that what they really want is other facilities to let them fill their time. However, there is a shortage of sports facilities. We should be trying to get those kids to participate in sport and not to participate in substance misuse. Especially in rural areas, the lack of facilities is a huge issue. We should have a formula. We would not allow communities to be without health facilities or police stations so, similarly, we should work out a formula to prevent communities from being without sports facilities. Areas with populations above a certain level should have access to affordable sports facilities. Not only would that address Scotland's health problems, it would allow people to be much more active. The world cup has been mentioned. I notice that  today's papers are talking about how Denmark was able to knock out the world champions. Denmark is a small country—it is the same size as Scotland. However, it has many things that we do not have—and not only its own Government. It has many sports facilities as well. The papers are saying that the reason why they have done so well in the world cup is that they have excellent sports facilities. Footballers in this country have been contrasting our sports facilities with those in Denmark. Sweden, Ireland and Denmark—all north European countries—are doing extremely well in the world cup. Not only do they have better health records than Scotland, they are doing better than us at football. I want to pick up on Alex Johnstone's point about role models. Peter Nicol is the number 1 squash player in the world. I was speaking to his father at the "Taste of Grampian" food festival on Saturday. He told me that many other people who are coming through the same squash club, at Westhill outside Aberdeen, could be among the top players in the world. However, they get no support. Peter Nicol is from Westhill in Aberdeenshire, but he represents England in the squash world championships because, south of the border, all the support services, such as physiotherapy and hotel accommodation, are laid on for him. We need more Peter Nicols. He should be doing a fantastic job for Scotland, although recently he has been doing a fantastic job for England. The Government has a bad habit of producing glossy brochures and meaningless motions. Just for once—to change the way in which Scotland operates, to improve our health record, to get more people involved in sport and to be more successful at sport—the Executive should introduce some radical solutions.

Is the minister aware that out-patient waiting times in Grampian, which have been published today, show a 40 per cent increase in waiting times since Labour was elected to power in 1999? The figure has risen from 67 days to 71 days. Furthermore, the percentage of cases that  are seen within the nine-week target has fallen to 45 per cent. Does he agree that we are never going to improve the NHS infrastructure in Grampian as long as Grampian NHS Board, which carries out 10 per cent of NHS activity in Scotland, receives only 9 per cent of Scottish funding?

After the damage that has been caused by 20 years of the common fisheries policy, I am sure that all parties and the First Minister welcome the CFP's new emphasis on decentralisation, creating a level playing field and long-term planning for Europe's fishing fleets. Does the First Minister share the SNP's view that the proposed regional advisory councils should be more than just talking shops? Does he also agree that any remaining question marks about Scotland's historic fishing rights—such question marks still exist in the new proposals—should be removed immediately? Will he stand up for Scotland's fishing communities during the crucial months ahead by demanding that Scotland leads the UK delegation at the next EU fisheries council?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Presiding Officer, should not Parliament be informed why the Minister for Rural Development, Ross Finnie, answered in response to a parliamentary question that the  Scottish Executive has not led any fisheries councils in Europe?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I believe that it was Jim Wallace, the minister responsible for external relations, who recently gave a written parliamentary answer saying that Scotland had led at only three EU Councils, on education and health topics. Is it not therefore the case that, when the First Minister told the Parliament that we had led at EU fisheries councils, he was misleading Parliament?

Well, how do we get any redress?

Mike Rumbles said that he passed a park-and-ride car park that was empty. He should have got out of his car and used the bus to get into town—that is why it was empty. Although I welcome this debate, I do not think that Elaine Thomson is in touch with her constituents. No one can write a motion about transport matters in the north-east of Scotland and not mention the western peripheral route or the Aberdeen bypass. I do not know whether that was an oversight or whether Elaine Thomson is utterly embarrassed. She knows fine well that the Labour party's credibility in the north-east of Scotland on transport matters is in tatters. It is three years since my SNP colleague Brian Adam raised the matter in a members' business debate and virtually nothing has changed since then. At this rate, it will be decades before we get a western peripheral route, if we ever get one at all.

I will give way and perhaps Elaine Thomson will give way to me next time.

Elaine Thomson knows fine well that we still have no commitment for a bypass for Aberdeen. That is a gross injustice. Aberdeen is almost the only city in the UK that does not have a bypass, yet it is the centre of the oil and gas industry. Over the past 25 years, £170 billion has gone from this region's natural offshore resources to the London Treasury. That £170 billion is just the revenue from oil and gas and does not include income tax, VAT and revenue from the other industries that generate wealth for the Treasury. All that we want for a western peripheral route is £247 million, spread over 15 or 16 years. We are  asking for £247 million after the Treasury has taken £170 billion in oil and gas revenues. Yet here we are, still campaigning and tearing our hair out just to get a bypass like those we see in every other city in the United Kingdom. It is not just a bypass that we are lacking in the north-east of Scotland. We lack general transport funding. I received an interesting parliamentary answer a couple of days ago. About four weeks ago, on 26 April, I received an answer from the Government saying not only that we are near the bottom of the transport funding league, out of all Scotland's regions, but that we are at the bottom of the league by far and that the second-bottom of the league is miles above the north-east. When I raised that matter with the Executive, the response I got was, "Well, look at that answer if you want, but it does not take into account extra spending commitments since November 2001." I tabled another parliamentary question asking for a recalculation that included all spending commitments in transport in north-east Scotland from November 2001 to the present. Guess what? The situation is even worse. We have gone down from 58 per cent of the national average to 57 per cent. Things are getting worse, not better. North-east Scotland is getting an even less fair share of transport resources. The minister and, indeed, the First Minister—who has, unfortunately, left the chamber—should read The  Press and Journal supplement "A New Dawn", which I highly commend. All the supplement's articles refer to transport and infrastructure and the need for their development in the north-east. The Government's job is to intervene where appropriate. In some regions of Scotland, that might be done for the skills base or for restructuring. The north-east needs Government interventions in transport and infrastructure—that is the number one priority. The Government will lose all its seats in this neck of the woods unless its starts to stand up for an area of the country that happens to generate just about more wealth than any other part of the UK for the Government's coffers. The minister must give a commitment that he supports a bypass and other necessary transport improvements for the north-east. That is the only way in which we will get a new dawn and turn the vision outlined in the supplement "A New Dawn" into a reality.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

I welcome the debate. The issue is important and I am glad that, following discussions between the SNP and the Executive, it was agreed worthy of debate. The SNP has no particular view on the individual nominees in the Executive motion, although we noticed that all nine nominees are male, which is one of the reasons why we were keen to have the debate. We welcome the fact that the Executive has taken on board the lack of women nominees. The other reason why we wanted a debate on the nominations is that the issue goes right to the heart of the debate on how Scotland is represented in Europe and raises the Scottish Executive's lack of enthusiasm and determination to ensure that Scotland's voice is heard at every level and in every forum in Europe. We are told that there is an informal agreement between the Executive and the Department of Trade and Industry in London on nominees for groups I and II. When it comes to group III, we are told that there is no informal agreement  whatsoever between London and Edinburgh. That is unacceptable because it means that the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, which is responsible for the group III representatives, does not even have to pick up the phone and speak to Scotland about who will be on the committee on behalf of the UK. Scotland could be invisible in relation to the group III nominations. Scotland's lack of representation is a joke. It is also a joke that the Executive is not doing more to guard Scotland's interests. We should have a fixed share of the Economic and Social Committee, as we do with the Committee of the Regions. However, that is not the case. The minister is laughing and smiling; he thinks it is all a bit of a joke, but it is serious. The ESC has an important role to play, although it is a bit of a talking shop. We have to make sure that it is reformed so that it is listened to. I contrast this situation with Denmark's discussions on the EU presidency. Denmark will be discussing what representatives will be sitting on the Council of Ministers and their representation in all the formal networks throughout the European Union. Scotland occasionally discusses its representatives on the Committee of the Regions, which is an advisory body, and today we are discussing our representatives on the Economic and Social Committee, which is also an advisory body. Denmark has a right to nine members on the Economic and Social Committee, whereas we do not have any members by right. We have only an informal agreement through the concordats between the DTI and Edinburgh. That is unacceptable. The Scottish Executive is not exploiting every opportunity to ensure that Scotland is represented in European fora. The SNP is constantly cajoling and prodding the Executive to ensure that we exploit the limited opportunities available to Scotland. The convention on the future of Europe is a perfect example of that. Scotland has ended up in a situation where its democratically elected leader, Jack McConnell, is simply the rapporteur on behalf of the Committee of the Regions to the convention on the future of Europe. Other countries are represented by ministers, members of Parliament, and officials, while we are in the most embarrassing situation possible.

I hope that the Parliament supports the SNP's amendment so that we can make the most of the limited opportunities available to Scotland in terms of European representation. It is time that the Executive and the Parliament started fighting for Scotland's  interests. The Executive has to stop needing to be cajoled and prodded—it should be fighting for Scotland as of right, so that we can get the best deal out of Europe. We welcome the debate. I move amendment S1M-3162.1, to insert at end: ", and calls on the Scottish Executive to insist that Scotland has a fixed allocation of representatives on all three groups that comprise the committee."

Will the minister give way?

I thank the minister for giving way. The minister indicated that voices have been raised during the debate. Voices were being raised about the 10 per cent tax that Westminster imposed on oil and gas profits. I ask the minister to answer a simple question. Was he or any of his counterparts in the Executive consulted by the Treasury in London before that tax was announced in Westminster?

Will Tavish Scott give way?

The member talks about impact assessments of new projects and so on. Does that not reinforce the case that the introduction of the 10 per cent tax should be delayed until an economic impact assessment of it has been carried out?

The north-east of Scotland is absolutely furious with new Labour following the recent budget announcements. There has been an utter breach of faith. As the minister well knows, the industry was just recovering from the 1999 slump. Things were beginning to get back to normal and investment was coming back on stream.

The minister did not wait long, but I am delighted to give way.

Members of the industry contacted me a few days after the announcement to say that, had the tax been announced a few weeks previously, many investments that they had just committed themselves to would not have happened. That means that, in the foreseeable future, many investments will not take place, because of the 10 per cent tax announced in the budget. All the good will that has been built up between the industry and the Government in recent years was ripped up overnight. All the commitments and all the pledges were not worth the paper that they were written on. The members of Pilot are furious. The Government was committed to dialogue and consultation, but the 10 per cent tax came out of the blue. In 1997, when new Labour won power, it consulted on possible changes to the industry. The consultation lasted more than 24 months, after which Labour decided not to make any changes—to the relief of everyone in the north-east of Scotland. What happened then should be contrasted with the 10 per cent tax increase now. This time the industry was not consulted; Scotland's Parliament and Government were not consulted; and poor wee Brian Wilson, who spent so much time building bridges with industry, probably was not consulted by Gordon Brown. Brian Wilson builds the bridges and Gordon Brown burns them down. No doubt poor wee Lewis Macdonald, the MSP for Aberdeen Central, many of whose constituents depend on the oil and gas industry for their jobs, was not consulted by the UK Government on the potential impact of the 10 per cent tax on his constituency and the north-east of Scotland. Perhaps he will confirm that when he winds up. Lewis Macdonald's views simply do not  matter to Gordon Brown who, as Andrew Wilson said, sees only pound signs when he looks north.

I draw the minister's attention to recent headlines from the north-east of Scotland, such as "Gas giant says new tax will cost £90 million" and "North Sea Investment At Risk Warns ExxonMobil". There have been dozens of similar headlines. Dozens of experts have said that the tax is detrimental and will have a negative impact on the economy of the north-east of Scotland.

I am sorry, but I am running out of time.

There will be long-term damage to the industry if the 10 per cent tax is imposed without proper assessment. We may not see that damage next week or the week after, but there will be long-term damage. That concern is widespread in the industry and in our communities in the north-east of Scotland. We will be less competitive. I do not know whether the minister has seen UKOOA's graph, produced by Wood Mackenzie, showing that we are only the 30 th most competitive province in the world—and that analysis was carried out before the 10 per cent tax. This is a global business: people are considering the Mexicos, the west Africas and the Russias. Global decisions are being taken. People in Aberdeen have to bid for investment from Houston and elsewhere in the world. How will they do that now that they have an extra 10 per cent tax? We are now less competitive and there is a lack of confidence. Industries will look around for places to invest knowing that there is now fiscal instability in Scotland. That is detrimental to the industry and to the north-east of Scotland. The minister must take on board an important point. We are talking not only about the massive global companies and the multinationals, but about local companies in the supply chain. It will not always be the multinationals that suffer  because of the tax change. Like many large businesses, the multinationals will pass on costs to their suppliers. The suppliers employ tens of thousands of people in the north-east of Scotland and they will bear the brunt of that. If the multinationals decide to turn their attention to provinces elsewhere in the world, companies in the supply chain in this part of the world will follow suit. They will have no choice. That will be detrimental to attempts to prolong the life of the oil industry in the North sea.

I will turn briefly to diversification.

In the north of Scotland, we cannot have all our eggs in one basket. We should learn lessons from elsewhere in Scotland and from Scottish economic history. We have the opportunity to transfer skills from oil and gas to the renewable energy sector. That is why it is so important that the energy institute be established in Aberdeen. The critical mass in both public and private sectors is in Aberdeen and the energy institute must be in Aberdeen to allow us to achieve diversification. The Government and the Scottish Parliament must stand up for the communities of the north-east and for the Scottish economy. That is why we are here and why the people of Scotland elected us. For the Liberals to argue that we cannot make representations to Westminster, while in the same breath saying that we should make European representations for agriculture—

The Liberals should hang their heads in shame for not standing up for the north-east of Scotland's offshore industry.

I ask the Parliament to support the SNP amendment and stand up for the offshore industry in Scotland.

The member has mentioned Pilot, which is the industry-Government  initiative. Before proceeding with the 10 per cent tax, should the UK Government have consulted Pilot and others in the industry?

Should Pilot have been consulted before the tax was introduced?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister explain why, when more than 90 per cent of UK oil and 52 per cent of UK  gas comes from Scottish waters, only 31 per cent of UK offshore jobs are based in Scotland?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

I begin by thanking all those, from a number of the parties, who signed my motion. In this day and age, it is utterly appalling that, despite the technology and wealth that we all take for granted, many of our communities lack one basic right that we all expect: the right to feel safe. Hundreds of thousands of people throughout the nation do not feel safe in their communities. I will tell the minister about Aberdeen, because we are meeting in that great city. It is a city in which a buddying system has been started in recent weeks to protect elderly people who are on their way home after collecting their pensions. It is a city in which many newsagents have packed in their jobs because they are fed up with being assaulted and robbed, and it is a city in which shop staff now lock shop doors during quiet periods because it makes them feel safer. I know a woman in this city who will not leave her home because her house has been broken into three times in less than a year. It is a city in which the incidence of violence and aggression against local national health service staff has gone through the roof. In many high-rise flats in the city, the elderly will not leave their homes after 6 pm. Aberdeen has more than double the national average number of house break-ins—the highest in the  country—and still has the second highest overall crime rate in Scotland. The common theme behind all those problems is drug misuse. Drug-related crime and drug misuse are eating away at our communities. Substance misuse is the biggest social problem facing the north-east of Scotland: 80 per cent of all local crime in the north-east is drug related. Indeed, 80 per cent of inmates test positive for drug misuse on reception at HM Prison Aberdeen at Craiginches. In fact, we might as well turn Craiginches into a secure rehabilitation unit. If we did, we would make much more progress. Almost every family in the north-east has felt the impact of drug misuse. Either they have a family member who has a drug problem or they know someone who has. Perhaps they have been victims of drug-related crime or they know someone who has. We are aware only of drug misusers who contact our local agencies, so we do not know the true scale of the problem. Local users live in urban and rural communities throughout the region. They come from low-income and wealthy backgrounds. The police are doing a marvellous job of trying to stop drugs from getting into the north-east. Thanks to intelligent policing, they have seized record levels of illegal drugs in recent months. However, they know that, as long as demand exists, drugs will make their way into our cities and rural communities. They also know that their job is not made easier by the reduction in HM Customs and Excise cover that has left our coasts exposed to drug smuggling. The Peterhead, Montrose and Dundee customs offices have all lost staff in recent years. I ask the minister to take up that issue with his Westminster counterpart. However, although every kilogram of heroin that is seized, and the locking up of drug dealers might help, most of us agree that the solution lies in reducing demand. Drug addiction is an illness and therefore requires treatment. It is worth noting that it is much cheaper to treat addicts than it is to lock them up, but the real benefits of treatment are that we can help addicts to lead drug-free lives and that we often end criminal lifestyles. Surely, given that one addict can commit hundreds of crimes in a year, we should place much more emphasis on treatment services than we do. We should also bring our justice system and other services closer together, as we discussed in a previous debate today. Drug testing and treatment orders are in place in Aberdeen, but we also need a drugs court in the north-east of Scotland. Glasgow has one and Fife has one; now, it is the north-east's turn. It is appalling that, despite Aberdeen having one of the highest rates of drug misuse in Scotland  and the highest rate of drug-related crime in the country, we come next to the bottom of the league on drug treatment funding. As a result, local services struggle to cope with demand. Members will understand my frustration when a constituent whose son decided that he wanted help to get off drugs approached me. His local general practitioner referred him to Grampian's drug problem service last May, but he is still waiting for an appointment 12 months later. Even when young people want to get off drugs, the system cannot deliver. If someone wants help in Grampian, they must wait for two months if they are a high-risk case, and up to 16 months if they are deemed to be a low-risk case—in other words, if they are over 16, not pregnant and not injecting. I request that the Deputy Minister for Justice order an immediate inquiry into the drug funding formula and its impact on north-east Scotland. The Arbuthnott formula already leaves Grampian short-changed in general NHS funding, and it is wholly unacceptable that an Arbuthnott-related formula is used for ring-fenced drugs funding. The police will confirm that Grampian is targeted by drug dealers from Liverpool and the west midlands. That, combined with other factors that I have mentioned, illustrates the need that exists, but we do not have a needs-based funding formula. More funding for Grampian will save lives, cut crime and help our communities. There is also a problem in Tayside where, I hear, the increase in resources has not matched demand. We must consider how the cash is spent and we must question the accountability of the responsible agencies. The plethora of agencies that is involved is mind-boggling. It is a nightmare to try and tell who is in charge of tackling drug misuse in Grampian—or indeed anywhere else in Scotland. It might be that different agencies have a role to play, and that there is no one solution to this complex issue, but if we are spending millions of pounds while the problem is getting worse, surely the minister should be holding someone somewhere accountable. I ask the minister to investigate the role of each public agency involved. I ask him to turn his specific attention to the drug action teams. They have rotating chairmanships, which makes it difficult to know who leads them. No one seems to hold those bodies to account or to monitor their activity. We need local and identifiable leadership in tackling drug misuse, but I do not believe that people in this region are getting that.

I accept that point. I am not specifically criticising local DATs; I am saying that they need to have identifiable leaders, whom the public and the Government can hold accountable. Society must address the root causes of drug misuse. Tackling poverty and inequalities must be high on our agenda. When I speak to community representatives, however, the reason that is given for drug-related problems is the lack of options for young people. In many communities, the only option for them is the local high street, which they just walk up and down to pass the time. Surely more national lottery cash should be used for providing affordable sports and leisure facilities in communities throughout Scotland, which would cut substance misuse while making people healthier, which is one of our other priorities. In speaking about drug misuse, we cannot forget about alcohol. In so many ways, alcohol is just as great a problem for society as are drugs, both in Grampian and throughout the country. We are losing the battle against both and, if we are to make progress, the Parliament and the Government must be prepared to take tough decisions in the coming months and years. I do not have time to go into all the possibilities, and a debate south of the border has already opened some avenues that might be worth exploring. I believe firmly that one way forward would be the creation of a Scottish standing commission on substance misuse. We need a rolling analysis and appraisal of drugs policy in this country, which would help us to respond to this constantly evolving issue. That should be paralleled by a parliamentary cross-party group on substance misuse, which I know the Deputy Minister for Justice—in his previous life as a lowly back bencher—supported. Tackling substance misuse is one of the biggest challenges that face our new Parliament and I urge the minister, whose track record illustrates that he cares deeply about the matter, to rise to the challenge and help save communities and save lives. The public do not want soundbites, they do not want endless research initiatives and they do not want posturing—they want leadership from the Parliament and they want it to do whatever it takes to make them feel safe again. They do not want a repeat of the situation in Grampian last year, when 41 people died from drugs. Our drugs policy is failing Scotland and tough decisions need to be taken sooner rather than later. I therefore urge the minister to respond positively to the drugs crisis in the north-east of Scotland.

The minister has rightly placed a lot of emphasis on information and communications technology. Is he aware that many obstacles must be overcome to deliver an adequate service in our rural communities? What is he doing to ensure that that happens?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to review the formulae used to distribute funding to public bodies. (S1O-5211)

Is the minister aware that central Government funding for transport, drugs, health and enterprise funding in Grampian always tends to come bottom or near the bottom of the league? Is he aware that it is becoming increasingly difficult to deliver an adequate level of public services in Grampian because of the formulae? Will he undertake to review the formulae to assess their impact on Grampian and make any necessary changes?

To ask the First Minister whether the draft UK communications bill will have an impact on Scottish culture. (S1F-1915)

Does the First Minister share the concerns that many people in Scotland have expressed that the draft bill poses a serious threat to regional broadcasting in Scotland because it will open the door to faceless multinational companies and allow them to take over the independent television network? Is the First Minister aware that the other devolved Administrations in the UK have made representations to the UK Government to secure a place on the board of the new regulator, the Office of Communications? Has he done the same to protect Scotland's interests? Will the First Minister ensure that the Scottish Government plays a full part in the debate on the bill and its impact on Scotland?

A few weeks ago, 81-year-old Mary Innes had to spend £4,000 of her life savings on simple eye surgery. Does the minister not agree that, rather than expect the elderly to spend their life savings on eye surgery, we should give Grampian NHS Board its fair share of the cake?

I notice that, despite being the fourth member to speak in the debate, Margaret Smith droned on for a quarter of an hour and then left the chamber. It would have been much more helpful if she had left the chamber before she made her 15-minute speech. We have to remember that the NHS is owned by the people of Scotland and that it exists to serve the people of Scotland. That is why we want to deliver the best standards of care and why we have to ensure that safety in our hospitals is our number 1 priority. We have discussed at some length hospital acquired infections, their implications and their relationship to hygiene. Another challenge that  faces the NHS in Scotland is to reduce what are called, in the official language, adverse events. In essence, those are the clinical errors that human error causes in our hospitals. Although human error is perfectly understandable, such events can also be caused by the use of cheaper alternative equipment because funds are not available to allow hospital staff to use the best quality equipment. At the same time as we are challenging that issue, we have to maintain a blame-free culture in our hospitals. Studies have shown that two thirds of adverse events in our hospitals were clearly preventable, as it was likely that they arose from deficiencies in ward care. Those occurrences can arise as a result of the use of older equipment. The minister might care to note a survey that was undertaken in Grampian a couple of years ago, which showed that a quarter of all general medical equipment was beyond its standard life span. South of the border, the chief medical officer for England commissioned the report "An Organisation with a Memory", which was about learning from past mistakes in our hospitals. In Scotland, there has been no equivalent report. The chief medical officer found a high standard of care in hospitals south of the border, but he also found evidence of serious failure. We have to find out about the situation in Scotland. Soon after I was elected, I asked a parliamentary question that elicited the information that litigation costs for hospitals in Scotland amounted to more than £3 million a year and that legal costs incurred by the NHS in defending cases was £500,000 a year. Litigation results in clear costs to the NHS and the figure is not going down—it is going up. In August 2000, I asked the minister's predecessor "what percentage of the clinical or non-clinical mishaps or accidents in respect of which claims were made against NHS Trusts in the last five years the NHS Management Executive considers to have been avoidable; what type of interventions would have prevented these incidents, and what plans are in place to implement any such preventative measures." Susan Deacon answered: "This information is not held centrally."—[ Official Report , Written Answers , 21 August 200; Vol 7, p 574.] The ministers do not know what the situation is with regard to clinical errors in our hospitals, what the implications for patient care are and what the costs are. If we cannot quantify the problem, we cannot do anything about it. However, if we do something about the problem we can save more people from becoming ill, save lives and, in the long term, save the NHS a fortune. At the moment, in Scotland, we are playing  catch-up. That is because last year, south of the border, the National Patient Safety Agency was created. When I asked Malcolm Chisholm what we are doing about that in Scotland, the reply that I was received was that we were doing nothing, but that we would see what could be learned from what was happening south of the border. Surely we should not be playing catch-up in Scotland. Surely we should be proactive. We should be setting up bodies like the National Patient Safety Agency in Scotland. Only a few months are left in the current parliamentary session and yet we are only now beginning to hear about bodies that will improve the situation. Grampian is one part of the country where a lack of investment is causing many problems. I make no apology for raising the issue again with the minister, as he refuses to accept that there is a problem with health funding in Grampian, even though we have 10 per cent of NHS activity in Scotland and yet only 9 per cent of the funding. Some of the longest waiting lists in the country are to be found in Grampian and yet the minister, on his recent visit to Aberdeen, said that he could not foresee any problem with funding in Grampian. That is despite palpable and blatant problems to do with the chronic shortage of funding in the region. Grampian has the third-worst drugs problem in Scotland and yet our drugs funding is 20 per cent below the national average. That is because even drugs funding is linked to the Arbuthnott formula. That formula is not delivering for Grampian. I ask the minister today to investigate the impact of the Arbuthnott formula on health care in Grampian. At present, Grampian NHS Board is implementing cuts of £4 million and yet it is the most efficient health board in the whole of Scotland. Perhaps the minister would intervene on that issue, which is also leading to difficulties for the voluntary sector. The sector is losing money from the local health board even though that money saves a fortune for the board in the long term. The minister wrote to me last month and acknowledged the valuable role that is played by the citizens advice bureau in Aberdeen, which has a health outreach service at the local hospitals. He went to great lengths to praise that service and recognised the part that it has played in improving health care in Grampian. However, Grampian NHS Board announced last week that it is pulling the plug on that project, because it disagrees with the minister and because it has financial difficulties. I ask the minister to intervene in that case. He has acknowledged that local voluntary organisations—the CAB is not the only one suffering such cuts—are playing an important role in addressing health inequalities in Grampian, but  they are having the rug pulled from beneath their feet. We cannot raise standards in our health service without investment, but it is not just cash that we have to invest. We must also invest fresh ideas, innovation and common sense but, unfortunately, the Executive's track record illustrates that it is lacking in those attributes.

He knows all about them.

Since the Parliament was established, we have discussed the national health service and the police force, so it is about time we discussed and recognised the role of the fire service. I welcome today's debate and many of the aims that are outlined in the Executive documents, particularly the emphasis on prevention. Recently I attended an open day at Ellon in Aberdeenshire, at which members of the fire service were present in great numbers. Many people from the local community also turned out, as they welcome the efforts that local fire services make these days to build bridges with communities. Fire services in my area—Grampian and Tayside—are under as much pressure as those in other parts of the country. One outstanding issue that has been mentioned is pensions. I recognise that the Government has provided £5 million to address the issue, but that is only short-term help. I ask the minister to indicate what long-term solutions the Executive is considering, for example the idea of a central pensions agency, which has been mooted by some brigades. We must explore all the options. In Grampian, one third of fire service employees are set to retire in the next five years, which will impose a huge additional burden on the service. There are also financial issues relating to the building of new fire stations in Aberdeen. We are in the ludicrous position of relying on Tesco, a supermarket chain, to supply new fire stations for the service in the city. I understand the financial pressures that have led to that situation. Tesco said that it would buy the current major fire station in Aberdeen and build two new fire stations elsewhere in the city in exchange for the site. That  is great, but in this day and age should we have to rely on supermarket chains to modernise our fire service infrastructure and build new stations? According to the fire service, because of funding constraints, that is the only option available to it. Can we address that issue? I do not think that the answer lies with the private sector. The last thing that we want to do is to involve the private sector in running our fire service. People who join the fire service do so to serve the community, rather than private shareholders. We must find solutions in the public sector.

I will.

I accept much of what the minister says, but building even one or two new fire stations would cost £10 million or £12 million.

Unfortunately I cannot give way to the member, as I have only two minutes left. I am interested in some of the ideas that the fire service has mooted, such as the suggestion that commercial premises that run faulty alarm systems be charged for causing false alarms. Perhaps we should consider that. I turn to the situation with retained fire services in rural Scotland. There is a looming crisis in fire cover in rural Scotland and the minister should turn his attention to that in his closing remarks. We all welcome the role that people play in serving the local community through the retained fire service. I phoned Tayside fire service this morning and heard that 40 out of 260 places are vacant. That is a vacancy rate of 15 per cent, which is double the rate for 2000. In Grampian the rate is 17 per cent, as 83 out of 478 places are vacant. Last year, 68 places were vacant, so there is an upward trend. Alasdair Morgan eloquently laid out some of the challenges that our rural communities face, given the changing nature of dormitory towns. People do not live and work in their communities any more; they go to the city, or wherever the work is, and that leads to problems. A variety of solutions have been suggested, such as getting more females  involved, providing child care facilities and introducing more attractive pay schemes. People who are in the Territorial Army receive tax benefits, but retained firefighters who work the same hours do not get such tax benefits. I urge the minister in his closing remarks to guarantee that some of the rural fire issues will be pushed higher up his agenda and that he will address the issues that have been mentioned in the debate.

Will the minister give way?

The minister will appreciate that one of the debates on the future of Europe is about where executive power should lie, that is, whether it should lie with the European Parliament or the European Commission. What is the Scottish Executive's view on that?

Will the minister give way?

The minister talked about Scotland punching above its weight in Europe. Scotland should be punching above its weight in the Council of Ministers. Under the devolved set-up, how many meetings of the Council of Ministers has the Scottish Executive been represented at this year?

I, too, congratulate Irene Oldfather on helping the Parliament to mark Europe day through this evening's debate. I pay special tribute to Winnie Ewing, who is Scotland's best link with Europe. If Sean Connery is Scotland's most famous film star, Winnie Ewing is certainly Scotland's most famous European. I know that they are good friends and I am thankful that both happen to be members of the SNP. The Parliament can draw on Winnie's experience and wisdom in European matters, as the SNP often does. I welcome the debate especially because it shows that Parliament is marking Europe day. I only wish that the Scottish Government—or indeed, the UK Government—had gone out of its way to try to mark Europe day, but that has not  been the case. I understand that the First Minister had a photo call today and that he will attend a reception organised by the European Commission this evening, but that is the extent of the Scottish Executive's involvement in Europe day. That is quite disappointing. Before I came to the Parliament this morning, I listened to the BBC. The BBC talked about the English team in the world cup, Arsenal winning the English league and the Queen's jubilee, but it did not mention once that today is Europe day. That is disappointing, but the Scottish media are no better. As we all know, some of the Scottish papers have withdrawn from attempting to cover European matters in any detail. I hope that the Parliament can express the view to the media that they should do more to raise awareness of European issues throughout Scotland.

I am delighted to hear that. One can always trust the BBC's "Newsdrive". Last week, I started to read Primo Levi's "If This Is A Man", which is the author's story of how he spent the last year of the second world war in a work camp near Auschwitz. As I was reading the book and thinking of today's debate, I thought that that book should serve as a reminder of why we are in Europe in the first place. The European Communities were founded to maintain peace in Europe and to spread democracy and tolerance throughout the continent. That should put all the other complaints about Europe into perspective. We should never lose sight of that fact. However, the reality is that many people in Scotland think that the European institutions are remote and out of touch with opinion on the ground. One need only look at the common agricultural policy, which has spent billions of pounds, yet Scotland and Europe now have fewer farmers, who have less income. Similarly, we have hundreds of regulations under the common fisheries policy, yet Europe now has fewer fishermen and smaller fish stocks. It is important that Scotland have a voice in Europe. As the motion says, we need to participate in the European debate. However, Scotland is missing from the convention on the future of Europe. Scotland's political leader, Jack McConnell, has no higher status than rapporteur to the Committee of the Regions, which itself has only observer status. Other small nations in Europe, such as Denmark, are at the heart of the debate over the future of Europe. Those countries have influence, but the Scottish Government does not use what little influence it has. In conclusion, if we want to make our vision of  Europe a reality, we need real influence in the heart of Europe. That means that, one day, we will need to celebrate not only Europe day, but independence in Europe day.

Does Irene Oldfather agree that it is not just the duty of the Parliament to spread awareness of Europe throughout Scotland, but the duty of the Government?

I congratulate my colleague Alasdair Morgan on securing this important debate and on his eloquent speech. I also congratulate the many members from all the parties who have made eloquent contributions to the debate. The Scottish Parliament is at its most dignified  when we discuss international issues. I wish that we did that more often. I do not want to go down the road that was advocated by Ken Macintosh, who wants to stick to parochial issues. I am sure that other members also do not want to do that. The Scottish Parliament is Scotland's voice. Many people to whom I have spoken are extremely concerned about what is happening in the middle east. We would be abdicating our responsibility as Scotland's political forum if we did not discuss those concerns. I was at Aberdeen's mosque last Friday evening. My colleague Angus Robertson MP and I fielded questions from about 70 or 80 people who were in the mosque for prayers. The people present represented about 28 nationalities. Almost every question, in over an hour and a half, was on the topic of the middle east. I do not want to go back to the mosque, look those people in the face and say that we are not willing to discuss the middle east crisis. I would also not want to go and speak to the Jewish community and say that we were not willing to discuss the middle east crisis in the Scottish Parliament. People cannot believe that the topic is not being discussed more frequently in political circles in Scotland and that it is not higher on the public agenda. Today's debate fulfils an important obligation to those people. We are all appalled, at what is an early stage of the 21 st century, when we look at our television screens and see the horrific scenes in the middle east. As many members have said, Israel's behaviour is despicable, but there has been unforgivable violence on both the Palestinian and the Israeli sides. We are all tearing our hair out about the fact that, in this day and age, people do not realise that tit-for-tat killings get us nowhere; they only build up reservoirs of resentment and hatred that will last for years. We are all concerned that Israel is trying not only to catch the terrorists in the Palestinian state, but to dismantle that state. The SNP supports the UN Security Council resolution that requires the withdrawal of Israel's troops to the pre-1967 boundaries, the Arab world's acceptance of the legitimacy of the Israeli state and the establishment of a viable, self-governing and independent Palestinian state. I believe that Scotland has a role in trying to achieve that. However small that role is, we should play it and do our utmost to achieve peace in the middle east and throughout the world. Many Scots, including Lloyd Quinan, have visited the middle east during the recent crisis. I pay tribute to Professor Derrick Pounder from Dundee, who went with Amnesty International and performed some autopsies. We should learn from Norway. The Norway accord of 1993 showed that small countries can  participate in some way in trying to achieve peace. Scotland should play any role that it can in trying to achieve peace in the middle east. Let us all hope that the rule of international law prevails.

People in Grampian welcome the new measures on general dental practitioners. However, the biggest problem in Grampian by far relates to dental services at local hospitals, where people have to wait for up to four years to see an orthodontist. I hope that the minister agrees that that is wholly unacceptable. Will she outline the short-term and long-term measures that she will take to address that problem, particularly in relation to young children who are waiting up to four years for treatment at a very important stage of their development?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

rose—

Will the minister give way?

I thank the minister for giving way. Can she explain why, in 2002, just about every other western European nation enjoys a much higher standard of living than Scotland, despite their having less resources than Scotland and despite the fact that Scotland has had several Labour Governments.

Among at least three of the four main parties, there is a deal of consensus to get some change, but one difficulty is that the motion says nothing. It does not contain a commitment to introduce legislation to implement the changes that we have discussed. Will the minister outline the legislative timetable for the changes that we have discussed?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. During his speech, Alasdair Morrison indicated that members are unable to take interventions during three-minute speeches. Is that in the spirit of the debate and of Parliament's procedures?

Will Euan Robson give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

Will the member give way?

rose—

I welcome today's long-overdue debate. The SNP is delighted that the Parliament has finally got round to debating the future of Scotland's freshwater fisheries sector. I was surprised that the minister began with what was potentially a new announcement. I have to tell him that on 26 July 2001, Rhona Brankin announced that there would be an economic impact study of the value of angling to Scotland. Unfortunately, there were few new announcements in the minister's speech. Despite the green paper's good intentions, there is no timetable for legislation. I reiterate Brian Adam's concerns and appeal to the ministers to  present a legislative timetable. If they do not give us such a timetable today, the debate will simply raise false hopes among those people who want to see substantial change in our freshwater fisheries sector. There are many challenges facing the sector and a radical overhaul of the complex and confused regulatory regime is long overdue. In the dark days of Westminster rule, all that ever happened was that Governments in hock to the landowning classes were able to push through legislation that would protect only their interests. From the Tory amendment, it is clear that although the rest of us have moved on and seek to address the real challenges and opportunities that face the sector, the Tories are content simply to protect the interests of the landowning classes. Westminster has left Scotland with a fragmented and piecemeal management regime that has seen the decline of the species that are managed whereas the species that are not managed are left to wither on the vine. It is the task of the Parliament to modernise and democratise the management of wild fish stocks in Scotland. Today, we are talking about Scotland's rich natural heritage as well as angling, a popular sport and economic activity that pumps millions of pounds into the rural economy each year. The assessment of the economic value of angling tourism to Scotland is long overdue. We should not get too bogged down in the economics. Scotland's rivers are inhabited by many unique and world-renowned species, which maintain the health of Scotland's river systems. We need a freshwater policy that maintains biodiversity through healthy and sustainable native wild fish stocks and which recognises and boosts the contribution of angling tourism to the rural economy. We must develop an effective, fair and democratic management regime for our freshwater fisheries. We need a national policy to help achieve those objectives. I hope that today we are beginning the process of creating a national policy. Although I accept that the Atlantic salmon is one of Scotland's most famed and valuable species, we must create a policy that serves all species, communities and anglers. As many submissions to the Government's review pointed out, it is time to adopt a holistic view of our rivers. It is folly to regulate migratory species but ignore everything else. We need to manage whole freshwater river systems and the totality of our fish stocks on a natural catchment basis, rather than what we had before, which was on a single species basis. It is essential that any policy is ecologically sound. We welcome the proposals mentioned by the minister to regulate the introduction of non-native species to rivers and the transfer of species between catchments throughout Scotland. If we do not regulate that area, biodiversity can only be  compromised further and our ecosystem will be disrupted. It is ludicrous that, given the raft of regulations already in place, such matters are ignored. That sums up the mismanagement of Scotland's fisheries by Westminster down the years. Although the SNP supports a presumption in favour of native stocks, we urge the minister to take on board the concerns of all the coarse anglers who have been in contact through the review. They want clear definitions of non-native species and decisions to be based on science. We also favour the regulation of stocking, hatcheries and the use of live baits to ensure that the biodiversity and integrity of our rivers come before any commercial interests. Thankfully, the salmon farming industry is starting to get its act together in protecting wild fish. As has been discussed many times in the Parliament, there is a crying need for on-going research on the impact of salmon farming on wild fish stocks. The loss of migratory fish during the marine phase of their life cycles also remains a mystery and that, too, should be the subject of on-going research. It is essential that all fisheries management is based on robust science. As far as protecting fish stocks is concerned, we welcome moves to protect river habitats.

I agree that the salmon farming industry needs assistance from the Government. I welcome the fact that various partnerships involving all the sectors have recently begun to provide that assistance. We must ensure that research is being done, and the Government has a key role in funding that research. We must recruit all land users and owners with land adjacent to rivers, especially farmers. Only two days ago, a slurry spill threatened the life of 40,000 trout in one of the rivers in the north-east of Scotland. We must use the land management contracts that are in the pipeline to help recruit farmers and pay them for helping to improve river habitats. The SNP favours a national policy, but it is extremely important that any such policy is delivered locally and through representative bodies that cover each catchment area in Scotland. We support the idea of area management committees that bring together all the various interests. However, once the committees are up and running, we should review the role of the district salmon fishery boards, which will have to be assessed once the new management regimes are introduced. In the  meantime, the boards should be democratised and modernised, and we urge the minister to introduce proposals to ensure that a wide range of interests, especially local community representatives, serve on them. Our national policy must be socially just; our rivers and wild fish stocks are part of our national heritage and all people, not just the wealthy, should benefit from them. The SNP believes that, as we move towards holistic management of our river catchments, the next logical step may be a single umbrella body to manage all our fish stocks. At the moment, a plethora of agencies and bodies is involved in managing our rivers and wild fish stocks, and the SNP does not believe that we will be able to deliver an effective national policy with so many organisations. For the sake of biodiversity in our rivers and our rural economy, it is important that we use this opportunity today to strike a balance between conservation and exploitation. If we get the balance right, Scotland's environment, heritage, economy and people will reap the benefits for centuries to come. I move amendment S1M-3021.2, to leave out from "endorses" to end and insert: "welcomes the development of a long-overdue national freshwater fisheries policy; recognises that such a policy must be ecologically sound, regionally appropriate and socially just; calls on the Scottish Executive to publish a legislative timetable for the achievement of such a policy and calls for the publication of an annual report on the health of the sector including its economic value to the rural economy, and recognises the need to address the number of agencies and the complex legislative framework involved in the management of freshwater fisheries."

Will the minister give way?

rose—

The outcome of the debate, in a couple of months' time, will be a defining moment for the Parliament. It will influence the way in which we will do business in the coming years and the way in which future Governments and Parliaments will fulfil their obligation to serve the people of Scotland. The question that we are addressing is whether we should go down the public route or the private route. Like the majority of speakers in the debate, I wholly oppose the privatisation of Scotland's  public services, including the prison service. Privatisation is the wrong road for us to go down. People who are in favour of PFI give a couple of reasons why we should go down that road. The first is mobile capital—one can put more capital into public services and therefore deliver services more quickly. However, if we go down the PFI road, we will commit future generations and future Scottish Governments and Parliaments to the large expense of paying off PFI projects and curtail how those Governments and Parliaments serve the people of Scotland—we would be mortgaging our future.

No. I will take an original intervention from any other member, but I will not take an intervention from Mike Rumbles. The second reason given by those who favour PFI is that it is cheaper. Is PFI really a cheaper option for the Scottish public purse? I do not think so. Recent history is littered with examples of PFI projects, such as the channel tunnel and the Skye bridge, that were several times more expensive to the public purse than was originally intended. PFI becomes the cheaper option because staff are paid less and have poorer working conditions. The costs are transferred from the private sector back into the public sector, because the Exchequer ends up picking up the costs of paying low wages. Chancellor Brown's budget yesterday contained a range of welfare initiatives. If we pay prison officers a lower wage in future, they will end up receiving more tax and child care credits. At the end of the day, we will subsidise shareholders' private profits, because we will pick up those costs. In the long run, we will not save any money. It is no wonder that, in the mid-1990s, Alistair Morton of the Government's private finance panel said that PFI is "the Heineken of privatisation—taking the private sector to the parts of the government machine not reached by previous privatisations." It is no wonder that the private sector embraces PFI and the Government's plans to privatise our prison service, or that all the academics and commentators are lining up to condemn the plans that the Liberal minister, Jim Wallace, has produced.

I certainly agree that we need an independent assessment, as we have not yet had one.  PFI simply transfers public capital into private cash. It is not even as if private shareholders in Scotland will benefit, as the multinationals will end up owning the Scottish Prison Service. We will put public cash from Scotland into the pockets of overseas private shareholders. Peterhead is the ideal case for leaving a prison to get on with its good work. I went to the prison with members of the Justice 1 Committee. The only negative aspect of our visit was that not all 129 MSPs were present—had they been there, we would not be having this debate today as the plans that we are debating would have been thrown out. Every member of staff was signed up to a whole-prison culture that cannot be replicated elsewhere. People at the prison are absolutely stunned that their good work will be wrecked if Jim Wallace has his way. I urge every MSP to tour Peterhead prison when the Parliament is Aberdeen, so that they can see what is happening there. If MSPs who support Jim Wallace's plans make such a visit, they will change their minds. It is imperative that we reject PFI. If not, we will be casting a vote of no confidence in Scotland's public sector and in the many people who took up a public profession in order to serve their communities and their country. We should also reject any plan to close Peterhead prison because to do so would be to commit an act of social vandalism that every member of the Parliament would come to regret.

Mike Rumbles has picked the strangest of issues on which to display loyalty to his party leadership. I draw to his attention the fact that there are currently nine prisoners in Peterhead from Aberdeenshire and that the chances are that, on release, they will return to their communities, which are perhaps in his constituency. Would not Mr Rumbles like to be assured that they have had the best possible opportunity for rehabilitation? As Professor Marshall and many other commentators on sex offences say, that means keeping Peterhead open.

Will the minister give way?

Given the fact that much of the crime in the north-east of Scotland to which Elaine Thomson referred is due to Grampian's drug misuse problem, will the minister investigate the level of rehabilitation after-care services in the north-east of Scotland? In recent years, there has been an enormous rise in drug misuse in the region. If we were to increase the level of such services, we could reduce crime.

I will try to keep to my time limit. It is disappointing that, almost three years into the session, we find that our income from tourism is down by £0.5 billion and we have many fewer visitors to Scotland. That is an indictment of Liberal-Labour policies during the past three years. Not everything that has happened has been the Government's fault, but it is not blameless. Thankfully, some of our tourist boards are trying hard to promote their areas. In particular, I welcome the initiative announced by Fife Tourist Board in conjunction with Grampian and Aberdeen Tourist Board and Angus and Dundee Tourist Board. I hope that that will be a successful initiative for that part of the world. I was disappointed to see that the Liberal Democrat Jamie Stone attacked that initiative in the press yesterday. How short-sighted and pathetic for an MSP from another part of the country to attack one region for having its own initiatives. He seems to be concerned that tourists might be attracted to the east of Scotland, as opposed to going to the Highlands and Islands, whereas I think that it is positive to attract as many people into Scotland as possible, on the understanding that once they are in Scotland they will visit various locations. It is good that those tourist boards are promoting that part of Scotland, because no one else is. As Kenny MacAskill said, we cannot rely on the British Tourist Authority. The authority's brochure titled "Hidden Britain: A Touring Guide" is ludicrous. It should not have been printed, never mind funded by any Scots taxpayers. The document should have been called not "Hidden Britain", but "Hidden North-East Scotland", "Hidden Shetlands", "Hidden Moray" or "Hidden Western Isles". That British publication covers every English region, but much of Scotland is missed out. We should not give that publication one penny. The minister wrote to me after that publication was brought to his attention and said that VisitScotland would call in all such documents and examine drafts. I welcome that response, but we should go one step further by not sending those people money and by publishing our own stuff. During the summer, I bumped into an Irish tourism official who works in England. His job is to attract people from England to Ireland. Ireland does not rely on the British Tourist Authority, so why should we? He thought that our efforts were pathetic, because his industry was booming. Ireland manages to fully fund offices with many staff around the world. We should aim to do that. We have a new minister, so we have new glossy documents, too. However, all that we have is the  same old tinkering at the edges. As Kenny MacAskill said, we must deal with the fundamentals, such as the transport infrastructure. Today's issue of The Press and Journal contains an article about the advantages that Ryanair's new air route from Aberdeen to Dublin will have for the tourism industry, including the hotel industry, in north-east Scotland. Local hoteliers are launching a publicity drive in Ireland to take advantage of the new route, but complaints are being made that the local tourist board does not have the money to launch such a drive. We must address that. A few months ago, while I was on an overcrowded train from Edinburgh to Aberdeen, I spoke to disgusted Italian tourists. It is ludicrous that Scotland is in such a situation in the 21 st century. We must deal with the rail network, all our rail strikes and the fact that our trains are overcrowded—what sort of welcome are they for people who visit Scotland? I remind the minister that if the Parliament needs more powers to boost our tourism industry, we should call for those powers. I ask the minister to stop producing glossy documents and tinkering at the edges, as that will get the Parliament and the tourism industry nowhere.

I think that the Deputy First Minister's statement has delivered a blow to the north-east of Scotland, to the community of Peterhead, to prison staff and to the justice system itself. As someone who represents the town of Peterhead as a regional list member and as someone who lived there for a number of years, I can tell the minister that the prison plays an enormous role in the local community. As Henry McLeish and others have said, that must be taken into account. Has the Deputy First Minister spoken to or consulted any authority in Scotland, apart from his own civil servants, that has indicated support for closing Peterhead prison? Can the Deputy First Minister today give the chamber an assurance that the consultation to be carried out over the next three months will be genuine, and that if the case for retaining Peterhead prison remains overwhelming, he will give a guarantee to save it?

The minister is aware that, in the regeneration of rural communities, it is important to improve the transport infrastructure. A major challenge exists in rural Aberdeenshire, given that the area has little access to bus services and few rail links. Indeed, there is not one inch of rail track in Banff and Buchan. Will the minister explain how the statement will be of benefit to Aberdeenshire and the transport infrastructure in the north-east of Scotland?

Nothing is more important to our rural communities than land use and ownership. The issue is important for Scotland because, unfortunately, land ownership is at the heart of the power structures of 21 st century Scotland. I was reminded of that when I spoke to a senior public figure last year. He told me that he had asked a landowner to take the top ceremonial role in his organisation. When I asked him why he chose an obscure landowner to take on such a role, he told me that because he is a landowner, the man could open doors to the Scottish Executive that no one else could. Parliament is here, in the 21 st century, to democratise Scotland. We must tackle the fact that 1,500 landowners own the majority of Scotland's land area. Indeed, 10 per cent of Scotland is owned by 18 individuals. The debate is important because it is about dispersing power within Scotland. The bill is about liberating and empowering communities and individuals. Of course, diversifying land ownership is crucial to the regeneration of our rural communities. If the Parliament is to be remembered for anything it does in its first four years, it must be remembered for removing the dead hand of concentrated land ownership in order to bring economic and social progress to our rural communities. It is essential for rural development that we spread land ownership. If members go to Aberdeenshire and stand in the middle of a particular road, they will see on one side a garage, a caravan park and lots of houses on land that was sold off a number of years ago. If they look at the other side of the road, where the land was not sold off years ago, they will see two big farms, which are—no doubt—tenanted. One local community body in the north-east bought an area of woodland that sustained no jobs. A gamekeeper visited the land for a couple of hours every year. Now, that little area of woodland, which was bought by the community, sustains one full-time job. I was on Skye two weeks ago, where some women have got together in Broadford to start a campaign to buy a parcel of land, because they cannot get a parcel of land on which to build child-care facilities and sports facilities for their children. Also in Sleat on Skye, a community wants to open a shop, but it cannot get a little bit of common grazing land on which to build one. That is an illustration of how important the diversification of land ownership is to rural regeneration.  I hope that we do not have to wait for another 100 years—as Labour members keep reminding us—for really radical proposals, because the proposals that are before us will not make much of an impact on land ownership in Scotland. Communities should not have to jump through so many hoops. We must increase the scope of the bill in terms of land ownership. I welcome the new rights that the bill will give to crofters—that is important—but where are the rights for our tenant farmers? There is in my constituency a tenant farmer on a farm that is owned by someone who lives in England and who has never visited his farm. That farmer has been served with an eviction notice for May 2003. The bill will do nothing to help that tenant farmer and others like him in my constituency, who are sitting with eviction notices on their desks. The Land Reform (Scotland) Bill is an extremely important bill for the Parliament but, at stage 2, we must make it more radical. We will be subjected to intimidation and scaremongering, and we will be treated like idiots by the land-owning classes, who still think that they run this country; however, by passing the bill we will show them who really runs Scotland.

Will the member give way?

Will the minister tell the chamber what percentage of Scottish land he estimates will change ownership each year under his proposals?

Will he remind us?

Will the member give way?

I want to begin by telling the chamber about Dr Donald Bissett, who is a cancer specialist in north-east Scotland. Nine months ago, he was involved in a tragic hill-climbing accident and was paralysed from the neck downwards. Only a few weeks ago, he returned to work in the north-east as a cancer specialist and now sees 50 patients a week with the help of full-time personal nurses and carers. We all associate bravery, determination, courage, dedication and professionalism with Donald Bissett and pay tribute to him. We also associate dedication and professionalism with our NHS staff. The difficulty is that our professional and dedicated NHS staff are being undermined by the Executive's policies. NHS services in Grampian are in danger of shrinking—that is one reason why we are having this debate. In Grampian, the local trust carries out 10 per cent of NHS activity in Scotland with only 9 per cent of funding. As a result, hospitals in Grampian have cut their services to the bone in recent years. In fact, they are probably the most efficient hospitals in Scotland. Indeed, Alec Cumming, who gave evidence to the Audit Committee in February, said: "Our cost-base—the average cost per patient—is very low. It is 10.6 per cent below the Scottish average. That is a major issue. In any speciality area, our costs of keeping patients in hospital are well below the Scottish average."—[ Official Report, Audit Committee , 5 February 2002; c 985.] Against that backdrop, Grampian NHS Board has brought forward reviews to make further cuts, as it faces a £6 million deficit. The first review proposed cutting £1.9 million of services as a result of duplication with the creation of Grampian NHS Board. I do not think that many members could argue with cutting some jobs and services; however, as a result of the deficit and the funding difficulties, it has brought forward a second review, which proposes cutting £4.3 million of non-clinical services. It would be a disaster for the NHS in Grampian if that proposal were implemented. It would mean that the non-clinical functions would be transferred to the front-line staff. That would  have a tremendous impact on patient care. Nicola Sturgeon and I visited a hospital in Grampian a couple of weeks ago.

I get the point. Perhaps the member could make different interventions in future debates and contribute something positive. A couple of weeks ago, Nicola Sturgeon and I visited a hospital in Grampian. We discovered a service that is underfunded, overstretched and understaffed. It cannot handle any more cuts. We met the staff—nurses, management and consultants. The situation in Grampian is serious. Some 12 per cent of beds are blocked and there are nursing vacancies—the area is short of 17 paediatric nurses. How will people be attracted to work in Grampian if there are even more cuts? No one is denying that there are challenges ahead for the NHS. However, we are talking about Scotland's—and Europe's—oil capital. The NHS is struggling to cope. It is discriminated against in respect of Government funding. The situation is ludicrous. I urge the minister to visit Grampian to see the situation at first hand and to act. If he takes the trouble to visit the hospital, I hope that he will see that there is a strong case for a slice of the £200 million underspend to go to Grampian to improve patient care and help people such as Dr Donald Bissett and his colleagues to continue to deliver a first-class service for patients.

Will the minister give way?

I, too, welcome the visitors in the gallery. I had the pleasure of showing visitors from Barbados and Grenada around our new Parliament before the debate. They are studying at the Robert Gordon University in my constituency. It is important for MSPs to take part in every available international forum and to speak with members of other countries' Parliaments to learn from them what they are doing and teach those countries what we know. After all, our Parliament is new and has recently been set up. We are in a  good position to share our experience with countries around the world. Last September, I was lucky enough to go to Australia as one of the Scottish delegates to the CPA's annual conference. There were 500 delegates at the conference—500 members of Parliaments from around the world, from countries that are a fraction of the size of Scotland to countries that are the size of India. We discussed a whole range of topics. Mike Russell touched on a couple of topics that are regularly discussed by Commonwealth nations. We discussed how to be better parliamentarians and how to improve our parliamentary democracies. One topic was obscurely called "Towards being a Professional Knowledge-based Parliamentarian". Under that, we heard from MPs from countries such as Malaysia about technology that they are using to improve their parliamentary democracies. One Malaysian MP raved about his digital cards, which he uses instead of business cards. He gives them out to people such as his constituents. By contrast, people in some developing countries are struggling even to set up telephone networks in their Parliaments or acquire e-mail addresses. That highlights the fact that the parliamentary democracies in the Commonwealth are at different stages. I met a number of Nigerian MPs who were literally battle-scarred from attempting to secure parliamentary democracy. They had come through military dictatorships, civil war and revolutions and shared their experience with me. Of course, Scotland and Nigeria acquired their parliamentary democracies in the same year—1999. In Nigeria's case, that was after 20 years of military dictatorship. We also discussed poverty alleviation and the international trafficking of people. The Ugandan delegates told us about how they had only just introduced free education for primary school kids and the Botswana delegates told us about how they have had to introduce micro-credit schemes as commercial banks refuse to operate for the ordinary people in their country. We discussed huge up-and-coming issues such as globalisation and its threat to developing countries. I made a speech at the conference on how we must regulate the multinationals, many of which are seen as a threat to developing countries as they are in them to exploit. All the Commonwealth countries should work together to come up with ideas on what we can do about such threats. After I made the speech, a queue of MPs from the developing world waited to speak to me. They wanted to say how much they agreed with what I said. Such conferences—the dialogue between Commonwealth nations—should not just be talk.  There should be action. There is no point in talking about what multinationals are doing that threatens emerging democracies. We should act to stop such threats. That means that all the parliamentary democracies throughout the Commonwealth must have more power to do that. I hope that Scotland can be part of that dialogue.

Many members have made the point that economic growth should, as much as possible, be driven by indigenous companies. What measures does the minister intend to introduce to ensure that that is the case?

I congratulate Colin Campbell on securing tonight's important debate. I welcome the fact that the debate is of a more general nature than was anticipated, as it allows me to make a few points about the economy of the north-east of Scotland. The north-east has not suffered as much from  losing heavy industries as other areas have, but we are in danger of losing some of our lighter industries. There is cross-party consensus on the view of the Scottish economy that, too often in the past, too many eggs were put in the one basket. The north-east's economy is largely dependent on the energy sector but, of the jobs that are in non-oil sectors, 20 per cent are in industries that are experiencing difficult trading conditions. In the past few weeks, jobs have been lost in the paper industry and in the food processing industry. Our remaining textile industry is going through difficulties, while fishing and farming do not have their problems to seek. In the north-east, a major debate is taking place about diversification, because we cannot allow all our eggs to stay in the one basket. It is unfortunate that the Government does not seem to realise that the key to regeneration is to try to avoid the need for regeneration in the first place. All the economic commentators in the north-east keep mentioning Ravenscraig to make the point that the Government should not wait for another Ravenscraig. The Government should do something now to protect the existing industries, especially those in the non-oil sector that I have mentioned. Unfortunately, the Government does not seem to have any short-term solutions available to help out those industries that are going through difficulties. Because of apparent wealth, we do not qualify for things such as regional selective assistance. The local business community and the Government have few tools available to protect the existing industries. Let me briefly mention the example of lottery funding, which is now increasingly used to regenerate local communities. Because the indicators fail to identify communities in the north-east that need regenerating, lottery funding is not making its way north of Dundee. I would like the minister to address that point. Regeneration needs to happen in the context of bottom-up strategies. That is especially the case for rural communities, where community planning is so important. Rural communities that need regenerating do not need infrastructure; they need flexibility in the funding that is available to them. Too much funding that comes to rural communities from the Government is overly prescribed. That means that communities cannot use it for their own ends to regenerate their communities locally. My final message to the minister is that by all means let us pull out the stops to regenerate communities in Scotland that need to be regenerated. Let us also use all our powers to ensure that new candidates for regeneration are not created in future.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken in order to support the manufacturing and food processing sectors in the north-east of Scotland. (S1O-4782)

The minister will be aware that the manufacturing and food processing sectors in Tayside and Grampian have taken a hammering in the past year. Does the minister understand the frustration that is felt by many workers when, time and time again, the enterprise department publishes meaningless glossy documents such as the one that I am holding, which cost a lot of money and talk about long-term strategies, when livelihoods are on the line here and now? Will the minister introduce some action points to help the food processing industry and the manufacturing sector, which are up against difficulties in the short term rather than the long term? They need action to be taken now.

I share the minister's delight at having so much time to speak on the bill. However, I welcome the fact that the debate is timetabled for 15 minutes, in contrast to the one and a half hours that we spent on the stage 1 debate. The people of Scotland are not shouting from the rooftops for this bill. That contrasts with the importance and urgency of the Sexual Offences (Procedure and Evidence) (Scotland) Bill, which we have just debated. It does not usually take much to excite MSPs, but no MSP was excited enough by the bill to lodge an amendment or speak to the sections at stage 2. We cannot even congratulate the clerks, as is customary at this stage, as no demands were placed on them in connection with this bill. I therefore take this opportunity to urge the Government to introduce more imaginative and ambitious proposals in future. We could have used this time to discuss a ban on tobacco advertising or to introduce overdue legislation on wildlife crime, which has been promised time and time again. Given that we are debating a bill that has not  changed one iota since stage 1, I have little more to add. The SNP agrees with the principle that we should keep Scotland fur-farm free, given that fur farming is a tasteless and unnecessarily cruel activity. We therefore support the bill.

Is the minister aware that a shortage of dentists is not the only problem for rural communities in Grampian? People who live in those communities must wait for up to four years to see a dental surgeon at the local hospital. Will the minister tell the chamber what she is doing to reduce waiting times for such treatment at the local hospital?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

If the member is so opposed to centralisation, why did he oppose the establishment of the Scottish Parliament?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Ben Wallace says that he does not expect Scotland to be given a right to sit on the convention. Does he not think it strange that small European nations that are not in the EU  have a right to be in the convention, when Scotland, which is part of the EU, does not?

I congratulate the European Committee on what is certainly one of the most important and impressive reports to have come before the Parliament. The SNP agrees with the committee's view on the need to reconnect our citizens to Europe and to address a glaring democratic deficit. As the report says, radical changes are necessary. Our democracy, our culture, our economic and social well-being will be influenced by the outcome of the  convention's debate on the future of Europe. Scotland cannot allow herself to be excluded from decisions on arrangements that may last for decades. There is perhaps no better illustration of the Executive's negligence than its failure to secure places for Scotland on the convention. We are debating this crucial issue here in Edinburgh, but our European neighbours are meeting elsewhere and this Parliament and Government will be posted missing. It was left to the SNP to secure Scotland's only two representatives at the convention: Professor Sir Neil MacCormick MEP and Councillor Keith Brown will be present, ensuring that Scotland is represented. The European Committee will welcome that, because it supported full and active Scottish participation.

I assure the minister that he cannot pull the wool over the people of Scotland's eyes. The people he mentions are representing the Westminster Government but no one is representing the Scottish Government or the Scottish Parliament. That is a fact. I urge the minister to give a commitment today that he will work with Scotland's sole representatives on the convention to ensure that our views are taken on board. Impending enlargement may be the catalyst for the current debate, but change is long overdue. We should never lose sight of the fact that the European Union has been successful in ensuring peace through economic co-operation. Europe has also brought people of different cultures together and has allowed neighbouring states to act together on issues of common interest. Much economic and social progress has been inspired by European co-operation. Indeed, in the dark days of Westminster rule, Europe was often the source of the few progressive social and environmental policies that made their way to Scotland. Too many Scots now view European institutions as remote, power hungry and stuffed with highly paid and overly bureaucratic officials who dream up new regulations to keep themselves busy. If any MSP asks any farmer, fisherman or  businessperson what Europe means to them, the answer will be that it means inflexible and often damaging regulations, and endless paperwork. That situation has arisen for several reasons. One is the lack of influence that Scotland wields over European policy and the failure to use what limited influence is available to us to ensure that Scotland's views are taken into account. We are reminded of that every time ministers get to their feet at question time and explain that it is Europe that takes the decisions on genetically modified crops, export bans on Scottish meat, state subsidies and fishing and farming regulations. What little influence is available, the Scottish Executive fails to use. We need look no further than the coalition's atrocious record of attendance at the Council of Ministers. In a parliamentary answer to a question of mine, the minister said that between March 2000 and December 2001, the Scottish Executive was represented at only 12.8 per cent of meetings of the Council of Ministers. That is an atrocious rate of attendance, which has already been referred to by Labour members. It is no wonder that the European Committee is calling for more involvement in such meetings and, indeed, for an automatic right to attend the Council of Ministers. The Executive has led at only three meetings of the Council of Ministers since devolution—twice on education and once on health. Mr Wallace says that the criterion for leading is common sense; if common sense is the criterion, why on earth are we not leading the United Kingdom delegations on matters to do with agriculture and fisheries?

The member is displaying his ignorance. However, he is right to suggest that much of the work is done before meetings. If the member investigates the Scottish Executive's attendance at the thousands of working groups that take place every year prior to meetings of the Council of Ministers, he will find that its rate of attendance is 10 times worse than its rate of attendance at the Council of Ministers. As the European Committee's report points out, the treaties enable member states to delegate their votes on the Council to sub-member state Governments, yet we have the ludicrous situation in Scotland that, even for a subject as  predominantly Scottish as fisheries, Scottish ministers are so weak that they will not stand up to London and demand the lead role in negotiations. Contrast that with the situation in Belgium, where the Flemish have taken the lead role for that member state as of right since the beginning of this year. Why can the same thing not happen in Scotland? We know that we cannot rely on London ministers—even the National Farmers Union of Scotland now says so. Jim Walker of the NFUS appeared before the Rural Development Committee in September. He said: "There is a fundamental weakness in the political set-up in this country, as we seem unable to influence—we cannot influence—at the highest level the negotiations that take place in Europe".—[ Official Report, Rural Development Committee, 18 September 2001; c 2147.] Even Scottish industries are coming round to the SNP's viewpoint that the current arrangements simply do not work for Scotland.

I inform the member that what is required is for this Government and this Parliament to be represented in the decision-making processes, so that votes are cast on behalf of Scotland. Scottish ministers prefer to rely on secretive and cosy little joint ministerial councils in a vain bid to influence London's European policies. There have been only two JMCs on Europe since devolution, and Labour's internal problems prevented it from attending one of those. Labour has actually attended only one JMC on Europe since devolution. The closer London gets to the negotiating table, the further Scotland is from its mind. Despite the opportunities offered by Scotland's new constitutional status, Scotland continues to be sidelined and silenced in Europe. Ministers are caught in the headlights. They are too timorous to stand up to London, but the people of Scotland rightly expect them to deliver. Another reason for reform is that Europe does too much at the centre. If the Scottish public is to continue to support Europe, we should never take that support for granted. If this Parliament is to retain legitimacy, only decisions that have to be taken at European level should be taken there. Subsidiarity should be Europe's guiding principle rather than some airy-fairy academic concept. We need only look at the common fisheries policy to see what happens when subsidiarity is not put into practice.  The SNP believes that we should support a Europe that allows all its nations, regions and communities to have a say in the decision-making process. The EU exists for its citizens and not for political elites. We need a people's Europe where all communities are listened to and involved. It is therefore essential that the people of Scotland are at the heart of the forthcoming debate on the reform of Europe. Scottish ministers should aim to maximise our influence in Europe. Under devolution, that means securing mechanisms that allow Administrations with considerable legislative powers, such as the Scottish Parliament, a direct role in decision making and, as the committee argued, access to institutions such as the European Court of Justice. If we do not ensure that Scotland's voice is heard, the report that we are debating today will be left to gather dust on the shelf. The SNP's objective is to place Scotland at the heart of decision making through independence in Europe. Real influence will be acquired only by securing a seat at the top table alongside other small independent European nations. Is it any wonder that Scotland is Europe's invisible nation, given the Scottish Executive's current policy? The SNP wants Scots to grow up in a confident and vibrant Scotland that stands alongside our neighbours at the heart of EU decision making. We want to grow up in a Europe that recognises the need not only for co-operation but for diversity and democratic legitimacy at international, national, regional and local levels. Scotland is lumbered with a Government that does not know whether it is coming or going in Europe. Ministers are unclear about their role and unwilling to stand up to London. It is time for the Scottish Government and the Scottish Parliament to seek maximum influence in Brussels to ensure that we help to shape the future of Europe.

I welcome the minister's comments. I am glad that he is taking the debate seriously. Given that the convention on the future of Europe has a key role in reforming Europe, what steps has the Executive taken to secure a  place for the Scottish Parliament or the Scottish Executive on the convention?

rose—

I thank the minister for giving way once again. When there is a matter that is particularly relevant to Scotland, one of the best ways of defending Scottish interests in Europe is to seek to take the lead role for the UK representation in the Council of Ministers. Since devolution, the Scottish Executive has led the UK delegation at three meetings of the Council of Ministers. Will the minister explain the criteria that are used to determine which meetings of the Council of Ministers the Scottish Executive seeks to lead?

I welcome the member's comments on transparency, particularly in relation to the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive. Does she agree that the joint ministerial committees that meet within the UK must be much more transparent? The Scottish Parliament is kept in the dark about what is discussed at those meetings.

Given the importance of sport to the health, fitness and self-fulfilment of young people, will the minister tell the Parliament whether the amount of sport in our schools has increased or decreased since the Labour-Liberal coalition was formed?

Will the member take an intervention?

Amendment 90 is the SNP's second and final attempt to amend the bill in this way. Our case for retaining the on-going commitment to give 80 per cent water rates relief to charities is simple. The whole point of keeping the water industry in public ownership is to help us to deliver social justice in Scotland. That is why we have to include in the bill the commitment to help the voluntary and charitable sector. We are talking not about a new arrangement, but about a continuance of the existing arrangements. We are not talking about new costs. Executive ministers have made a mess of the issue over the past two or three years. A number of players have acted out various shambolic scenes in the comedy of errors that we have witnessed over that period. First there was Sarah Boyack, then Sam Galbraith, then Rhona Brankin, then Allan Wilson, and today Ross Finnie. The SNP's campaign has been vindicated, because we have come quite a long way in two years. When the campaign started more than two years ago, the voluntary sector's pleas to the Executive about the proposed removal of all water rates relief were totally ignored. After that, the Government introduced a delay, but that still did not sort out the problem. The next minister introduced another delay in the phasing of the withdrawals. Then there was a leaked memo from the Executive saying that it would exempt organisations that had an annual income of less than £5,000. Then, on the eve of stage 2, the position changed again so that organisations with an income of less than £10,000 would be exempt. Last night, at the 11 th hour, just before the stage 3 debate, the Executive upped that threshold to £50,000 and offered a hardship fund.

As I said, we welcome all five of the concessions that have been made so far as a result of the outcry from the voluntary sector in Scotland and from the SNP and other parties in this Parliament. I refer the minister to yesterday's press release from the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, which was headed "Executive running in right direction over water". Well, that is quite right. The Executive is running in the right direction. The difficulty is that it has not arrived. If amendment 90 is agreed to today, we will have arrived.  The last thing that our voluntary sector and charitable organisations need is for water rates reliefs to be removed at a time when the basic rate of water charges has increased substantially over recent years. Jackie Baillie told the committee at stage 2 that charities would lose £15 million because of that decision. If we introduced water meters, that would save £6 million, leaving a bill of £9 million. The minister's announcement yesterday offers £500,000 of support. That would leave a bill of £8.5 million for the charitable sector, the bulk of which would be paid for by organisations with an income of more than £50,000, which are not exempt. Those organisations will include hospices, care homes and nursing homes. It is imperative that this Parliament sends out the right message to the voluntary sector in Scotland today. Those organisations devote their time to helping the more vulnerable members of our society. Surely, for the first time in centuries, our new Scottish Parliament should not remove that principle from the bill today, but should continue to give 80 per cent water rates relief to charities. I ask each and every MSP in the chamber to look at their mailbags over recent months and years and to support amendment 90, so that we can continue to support the organisations that support the more vulnerable people in our society.

Will the minister give way?

I congratulate Mike Watson, Tricia Marwick and everyone else who has been involved in bringing this bill to fruition, including the clerks of the Rural Development Committee. As one who sat on that committee for over two years and spent a great deal of time dealing with the bill, I can say that a lot of hard work has gone on behind the scenes. We have travelled a very rocky road to get to this point. Some people have tried to bump us off that road, but we made it. To allude to the words of a song from the 1980s, I am certainly "glad it's all over". There is support for the bill throughout rural Scotland and urban Scotland. There is support for the bill the length and breadth of the country. I represent North-East Scotland, and the majority of people who write to me are in favour of the ban. The Parliament was elected to drag Scotland into the 21 st century. That is what we will be doing by—I hope—passing the bill today. We are taking a lead and setting an example to other countries.

I hope that Ireland will consider the example that this Parliament is setting today. The Parliament has listened to many people in Scotland. The Parliament was always concerned that people who were engaged in genuine pest control would be able to continue to make a living. We have achieved that by listening to their concerns. We have been presented with a good case. When the Rural Development Committee and the Parliament heard a good case, it listened and amended the bill accordingly. I will go through some of the changes to the bill briefly. It now allows the use of dogs to flush out foxes from underground or from cover. The bill as introduced would not have allowed that. The bill now allows someone to send dogs below ground to kill orphaned cubs because we believed that that was the most humane option. The bill as introduced would not have allowed that. Licensing was dumped at the request of the gamekeepers and other groups. If the guns miss and the dog automatically chases the fox and kills it, the gamekeeper will not be breaking the law. That is another change. The bill also allows a dog to be sent after an injured fox because that is a more humane option. That too was not in the bill at the beginning. Many people have hijacked the bill, but I say to members that the real rural rebels in my  constituency are the many people who live in rural communities and opposed 18 years of anti-rural policies. They are the real rural rebels in my eyes. The same people who have hijacked the bill have been remarkably quiet about the real issues that face rural Scotland: the decline in rural transport, jobs and housing. Surely those are the issues that anyone who is genuinely concerned about the future of rural Scotland should be talking about. I urge Parliament to pass the bill so that when people wake up in Scotland tomorrow, the country will be a little bit more civilised.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Why was I not chosen to speak, given that I have been on the committee for two years and that I pressed my button? I had an extremely valuable contribution to make to the debate.

I thank the member for allowing me to speak. I have been a member of Rural Development Committee for two years and  have learned that 70 per cent of foxes are shot when they are flushed from dens. Does the member agree that amendment 42 should be supported? As late as last week, when they visited Parliament, the foot packs posited two scenarios about which they were concerned. The first concern was that, when foxes are shot at and the gunmen miss, there should be protection from the law if a dog gets a fox's scent and naturally chases it and kills it. Indeed, that protection exists elsewhere in the bill and protects the foot packs. The second point is—

Will the minister tell members whether the Aberdeen ambulance control room will play a role in delivering the new system? If not, does that mean he is proceeding with closure against the wishes of 22,000 local people who signed a petition to keep the Aberdeen centre open?

Both of them?

The minister's local council, Aberdeen City Council, wrote to me expressing concern  "about the obvious lack of resources that have been attributed to the trunk road by Bear Scotland. In actual fact, this Council had to divert gritters to assist with the snow clearing operations on the trunk roads throughout the city." Does the minister accept that BEAR Scotland failed his own constituents?

Will the minister give way?

The minister says that it is difficult to recruit new prison officers locally. Does he accept that a reason for that difficulty may be the cloud of uncertainty that hangs over the prison's future?

I congratulate Stewart Stevenson on his first members' business debate and thank everyone else for their speeches on this important subject. I represent Peterhead as part of the parliamentary region of North-East Scotland. I lived there for a number of years during the 1990s, so I know the value of the prison to the local community. Such an institution is an unfortunate necessity in our society, but the people of Peterhead are proud of the work that the local prison carries out, because it is a centre of excellence. The fact that we are having a second members' business debate on this subject testifies to the importance of the prison and its role in our society. However, two years after the first debate on this subject, there remains a cloud of uncertainty over the future of the prison—one of the reasons why I have returned to the subject. This debate is about trying to persuade the Government to remove that cloud of uncertainty. As David Davidson said, the prison has an important economic role in the Buchan area. As has been said, RAF Buchan is losing jobs. Cleveland has closed in the town and Crosse and Blackwell closed a few years ago. The town of Peterhead is just about to feel the impact of fishing boat decommissioning. We have heard time and again from the Government about the importance of dispersing civil service jobs throughout the country. It is important that we protect those public sector jobs that are in our more rural areas, such as Peterhead. However, we are not just talking about the economic value of the prison; we are talking about the fact that it has been awarded beacon status. Scotland has only five locations with such status. The other four in Scotland are reserved to Westminster, so Peterhead prison is the only location with beacon status that is a responsibility of this Parliament. We surely have a duty to protect that location and promote it. We should not be undermining the good work that the staff there are carrying out. The Executive needs to boost their morale by giving the prison a vote of confidence. It would be an act of social vandalism if we were to jeopardise the good work that has been carried out at Peterhead.  All contributors have referred to the STOP programme. It is an innovative programme. It is a process of challenge and confrontation that is presented to the inmates. It calls on the endless reserves of the staff at the prison. They should be rewarded for their patience and persistence by receiving a vote of confidence from the minister. I refer to an article about the prison from The Press and Journal from approximately a year ago. Bill Rattray, the former governor of the prison said: "We need to understand the motivation behind abusers' behaviour, the methods they use, everything. We are doing this by working with sex offenders. We are doing this to protect our children, to prevent crime and to make communities safer." That sums up the importance of the prison. More important, the article contains some quotes from the current chief inspector of prisons in Scotland, Clive Fairweather. He says: "Of all the prisons in Scotland, Peterhead is the one which does more than any other to attempt to change people's behaviour through daily delivery of its programme ... When I first looked at the programme it had been running for a few years ... I soon realised it was a comprehensive and painful confrontation process in which offenders gradually begin to understand the impact their crimes have had. Above all, I have been very impressed by the way staff at Peterhead deliver this programme, day in, day out, to people the rest of society prefers to loathe." Those quotes summarise the importance of ensuring that Peterhead has a future, so that it can help society. I urge the minister to back Stewart Stevenson's motion, to back the town of Peterhead and to back the hard work that the prison staff are doing, so that the prison can continue to make a very important contribution to our society.

In her remarks about Sewel motions, the minister referred to a lack of legislative time in the Parliament. Is she aware that there has just been a one-and-a-half-hour debate on the Fur Farming (Prohibition) (Scotland) Bill—which will ban something that does not even happen in Scotland—during which many speakers admitted that they were padding out their speeches to fill the time?

rose—

The minister misses the point that the SNP wants the Parliament to put at the top of its agenda the priorities of the people of Scotland, not the priorities of the London Parliament, whether through Sewel motions or replicating legislation that is passed down there.

He did that.

I welcome the bill and I support its general principles. Many of us think that we should stop there. The bill has taken up more than its fair share of parliamentary time. The bill deals with a hypothetical situation—

The issue is the use of parliamentary time. We need to ensure that we match parliamentary time with the priorities of the people of Scotland. A question mark hangs over the length of the debate; I will move on to talk about that in a second. This morning, the minister spent two hours giving evidence to the Justice 2 Committee on the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill. I am sure that he would rather concentrate on more important issues in the one and a half hours that are available for the debate which, as I said earlier, is on a hypothetical issue. If that were the case, many members would share his sentiments. The people of Scotland did not wait 300 years for the establishment of the Scottish Parliament in order to pass legislation to ban things that do not exist. If the minister was stuck for ideas, he could have used today's legislative time to introduce a ban on tobacco advertising or, from his own portfolio, he could have introduced legislation to give tenant farmers the right to buy, as was discussed at the Justice 2 Committee meeting this morning. He could also have introduced legislation—for which it appears he does not have time—to do more to tackle wildlife crime in Scotland.

The minister misses the point. The SNP is trying to convey that the people of Scotland have many pressing issues and they want them dealt with by the Scottish Parliament. We do not question the sentiments behind the legislation—as I have indicated, the SNP supports the bill—we question the use of parliamentary resources and the time that has been allocated to the subject.

I will take a last intervention from Mike Rumbles.

Of course the SNP is not saying that. The time that has been allocated to the bill could have been used to debate many other issues. We did not need to have one and a half hours devoted to a bill that the people of Scotland do not think is a priority. Perhaps, for once in his life, Mike Rumbles could pay attention to the priorities of the people of Scotland. As the minister indicated, there were only 22 responses to the 86 letters that were sent out in the consultation period. That indicates a low level of interest in the bill. Few people would argue with the Scottish Executive's stated moral objection, which is, and I quote from the Rural Development Committee's report, "to the breeding of animals solely or primarily for slaughter for the value of their fur." Many decent people share that moral objection. That is why the SNP, when faced with the bill, supports it and its general principles. During the Rural Development Committee's deliberations, I was surprised to discover that the Executive, although it introduced the bill, does not know whether there are any fur farms in Scotland at the moment. That seems a bizarre state of affairs. Surely, good legislation should be based on good, accurate information. Scotland has a widespread and varied agricultural industry. Many farmers rear animals for food. That purpose has a clear public benefit. The SNP shares the opposition to rearing animals simply for their fur to be enjoyed by a few people. That is especially the case when cruelty is involved, and that is the case with the way that mink and other animals are treated. I will quote  again from the Rural Development Committee's stage 1 report: "Respect for Animals, the Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, and others argued that fur farmed animals were essentially wild species, and not subject to the many generations of domestication of other livestock species. " The Rural Development Committee's report goes on to say that those groups presented evidence "to indicate that confining mink and other fur animals in a caged farming regime was cruel by definition, and resulted in distressed and self-injurious behaviour." Fur farming is cruel and the SNP is happy to see that it does not happen in Scotland. Another issue that was brought to the committee's attention was that of escaped fur farm animals. That has caused enormous difficulty in some parts of the country. In its submission to the Rural Development Committee, which is included in the report, Scottish Natural Heritage says that it supports legislation to "prevent the establishment of further mink fur farms in Scotland. Feral mink present a very significant threat to ground nesting birds where the former are present and are also strongly implicated in the severe decline of the native water vole. In addition, introduced species generally are one of the most serious threats to biodiversity and the commercial keeping of any non-native animals for commercial fur production greatly increases the risk of both accidental and deliberate releases into the wild."

No, I would like to finish my speech. The SNP supports this legislation for many reasons but, given the other pressing matters that the Scottish Parliament has to address, we question the Executive's priorities. We do not think that the agenda of this Parliament should be dictated by what happens in London. We question the time and resources that have been devoted to it, but we are happy to agree to the general principles of the bill, given that it has been laid before us.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to remove the 21-day rule relating to the movement of livestock off farms. (S1O-4471)

Given that the purpose of the regulations was to prevent the spread of disease, and given that the international authorities declared the whole of the UK foot-and-mouth free earlier this week, does not the minister accept that the remaining regulations leave Scottish farmers at a competitive disadvantage? Is not there a case for a further immediate relaxation of the rules, and perhaps for the introduction of a 14-day standstill rule for cattle? Will the minister tell the chamber whether he has carried out an economic assessment of the impact on the industry of his latest proposals?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

This is the first debate on the Scottish Parliament on the oil and gas industry and on Aberdeen's potential to evolve into an energy capital for the whole of Europe. Does the minister accept that it is within his power to work to designate the city as a centre of excellence for energy and to establish a Scottish energy institute?

First, I thank the colleagues who supported my motion and the many companies, academics and agencies that sent me their views for this debate. The motion's aim is to secure Government support for the oil industry's long-term future and to help Europe's oil capital, the city of Aberdeen, move with the times, diversify and evolve into Europe's energy capital. Scotland possesses expertise in all aspects of energy and much of the world's leading offshore expertise is based in Aberdeen. The city is already considered to be Europe's oil capital. A number of offshore-related indigenous companies have acquired international reputations and many multinationals have based their European headquarters in the north-east. Aberdeen founded the world energy cities partnership with Houston, Stavanger and Calgary and is the only UK member. Furthermore, the city hosts "Offshore Europe", which is a premier event on the international industry calendar, and was attended last year by 77 countries. Finally, in June, the internationally respected and Aberdeen-based Alex Kemp will host the annual conference of the International Association for Energy Economics. With Government support, the North sea will have a secure future for decades to come. There is no better illustration of that than this week's news that Argyll, the province's oldest field, will again produce oil after local company Tuscan Energy was awarded the licence. The discovery of the magnitude of reserves in the Buzzard field that will come on-stream in 2004 is more good news.  There are 121 fields in production in the North sea with nine under development, and in the next 10 years up to 110 more fields will be developed. The head of an oil major recently told me that the North sea will produce oil and gas for at least another 60 years. Looking to the long term and the impact of the province's maturity and of new technology on job levels in the oil and gas sector, the north-east is rightly looking overseas for new business and is beginning to diversify. Renewable energy is the logical next step for the region. Aberdeen is increasingly being viewed as an energy city and has the critical mass to evolve into Europe's energy capital. "All-Energy Opportunities 2002" is an event being held in Aberdeen to stimulate diversification by the industry into European renewable energy opportunities alongside the continuation of its existing core business. The event's organisers said that Aberdeen is the ideal location, because of "the skills of SMEs developed over many years of service to the offshore industry. Their expertise will be vital in the development of renewable technology and will help to maintain Scotland, and Aberdeen in particular, as the epicentre for the R&D, manufacturing and maintenance requirements of this growing industry." A renewables action plan is now being developed in Aberdeen. Positioning Aberdeen as a vibrant, multi-energy centre is the key to unlocking environmental and economic opportunities for the whole of Scotland, as illustrated by Aberdeen-based AMEC's involvement in the ambitious wind-farm project on the island of Lewis. Renewable energy is a 21 st century opportunity that Scotland must grasp and hold on to. North-east companies have all the skills and experience that are required to build a renewables industry. The universities house some of the finest brains in renewables technology. The Robert Gordon University is recognised as a world leader in marine energy research and is now collaborating with the University of Aberdeen to develop renewables technology. More than 40 years' experience of taming the North sea and extracting oil and gas will be vital in developing offshore wind, wave and tidal energy projects. There are several ways in which the Government can support Aberdeen's bid to become Europe's energy capital. All the correspondence that I have received refers to the desperate need to improve the region's transport infrastructure. There is enormous frustration over the slow progress in the building of a western peripheral route around Aberdeen and in the expansion of the region's rail and air services. Patience is running out, and those issues must be catapulted to the top of the Executive's agenda. Another area where the Parliament has power is in training and skills development. Ensuring that  development is one of the biggest challenges that faces the industry, and many people have suggested that they want more intervention from the Government to complement the work that is being done through industry initiatives such as the Offshore Petroleum Industry Training Organisation, to attract engineering students to the industry. That links in with the demand for more effort to promote research and development in partnership with the industry and with local further and higher education sectors. A campaign throughout the past decade has brought some UK Oil and Gas Directorate jobs north of the border. Now that we have our own Government, it is time for us to step up that campaign to bring the jobs that remain in London to Scotland. The Scottish Government can set an example by transferring its energy section to Aberdeen, in line with its policy to disperse civil service jobs. The Government should explore ways in which locally-owned companies can be given more opportunities to benefit from existing and new offshore opportunities. The minister should throw his weight behind local efforts to officially designate Aberdeen as a centre of excellence for energy. The Executive could illustrate its support by offering to chair a summit in the near future, involving all stakeholders, to drive forward the city's bid. My colleague, Brian Adam, would have been here to develop that case but for a family funeral. The Scottish Government should express support for, and offer assistance towards, the establishment of a Scottish energy institute in Aberdeen, which would bring together all the relevant public sector, academic and private sector players under the same roof. That concept has widespread support and would provide a focal point for international business. It would establish a one-stop shop for overseas businesses and governments that wanted to access the industry's expertise. There would be no better illustration of the Government's commitment to Aberdeen and the north-east. Supporting those initiatives with ministerial backing and investment would bring enormous benefits to the north-east and Scotland for decades to come. We must turn vision into reality so that, in years to come, when people around the world think of energy, they will think of Scotland and Aberdeen. That will benefit the economy and the nation's international standing. Since 1965, the industry has reinvested £200 billion of its surpluses in the sector. In the same period, the Government in Westminster has acquired nearly £170 billion in taxation. Perhaps it is now time to reinvest some of that cash in the economy of the north-east.  The United Kingdom Offshore Operators Association, the industry body, told me that, although 90 per cent of UK oil production is in Scottish waters, as is 52 per cent of gas, the reason why 26 per cent of oil jobs are located in the London area is because the decision makers are down there. If we moved the decision making to Scotland, thousands of jobs would follow. Of course, for that to happen, Scotland needs independence. If we do not have independence, we will not hold the key to the economic benefits of the energy industry. Until that day comes, it falls on the Parliament and the Executive to take every action to make the most of any opportunities. I urge the minister to respond positively to the many ideas that will be raised in today's debate.

Despite someone saying that bigamy is having too many wives and monogamy is the same thing, I will sign away my freedom this July, when I tie the knot. That is why I wished to speak in the debate. I take a keen interest in the bill and say to members that if any of them have tips on how to have a successful marriage, I am all ears. My fiancée and I have decided to go down the traditional route. We have decided to be married in Cluny parish church, a beautiful old church in  deepest Aberdeenshire where previous generations of my fiancée's family were married. Getting married on a big dipper in Kentucky did not occur to us, but perhaps my fiancée will change her mind when I tell her about it. I realise that the route that we are choosing is not the one that other people want to choose. That is fine—society moves on and times change. Our legislation has to reflect that. Neither politicians nor anyone else should moralise on marriage or make life difficult for anyone who wants to get married. There should be no restriction on where people get married, or on who can marry them. While some people will go to any lengths to avoid getting married, others go to great lengths to do so—we know that people go to Florida, Hawaii and Las Vegas. I remember seeing skydivers on television tying the knot mid-flight. The benefit of the bill is that people will be given more choice about by whom and where they get married. It is only right that rather than have to choose between limited options, as is the case at the moment, people who wish a civil ceremony should have a number of locations from which to choose. That option is available to those who choose a religious ceremony. Civil ceremonies could be conducted in hotels, public buildings, historical locations and other venues. That would provide a boost to the economy, particularly in our rural areas, where people often have to travel to get to a register office. I attended a successful wedding exhibition last weekend at the Aberdeen Music Hall. I confess I had to be dragged along to it. I am preparing to invest in the institution of marriage, but it was only when I saw the price of things at the exhibition that I realised how much we are supposed to invest in a marriage. A number of people I met at the exhibition wanted to speak to me about the bill, which made the visit worth while. A local hotelier spoke to me, as did the local registrar. Hoteliers welcome the bill: they see opportunities, as the bill would widen the options that they can offer. They think that it would be good for their businesses and would help them meet the requirements of many of their guests. At the moment, they have to keep lists of ministers and help with arrangements for the visiting parties. The bill would save them that trouble, as it would make things a lot simpler. As has been said, the bill would be good for tourism nationally, as people could stay in this country—they would not have to go abroad. The registrars I spoke to have concerns, many of which have been reflected throughout the debate. Registrars want to retain the dignity of ceremonies and their independence from religious ceremonies. I agree with many of the comments that have been made about that. Registrars take  issue with the view, expressed by the Local Government Committee, that the term "seemly and dignified" is subjective, restrictive and should be left out of the bill. However, I agree with the committee on that issue. We have to listen to the registrars' concerns. In that respect, the legislation should be as lax as possible. We also have to bear in mind that registrars might require time to adapt to the new legislation, as it will put extra pressures on their offices. Once the bill is passed into law, they could be inundated with a flood of applications. I support the bill. It is a modern piece of legislation and the Parliament should support its general principles.

As the minister will be aware, processors face the challenge of coping with the increase in the haddock quota that is available to the industry this year as a result of the massive 1999 year class. Will the minister turn his attention to helping the processing industry to market that product, given that it will take that industry some time to recover from the difficulties of the past few years?

Does the member agree that the exciting developments in his constituency are an excellent example of how Scotland is using the oil and gas expertise in the north-east of Scotland to benefit the rest of the country, by diversifying from oil and gas into renewables? One of the companies that is involved in the developments in the Western Isles is based in Aberdeen.

Will George Lyon give way?

Will George Lyon give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I support Trish Godman's comments. Last year the Grampian health authorities told me that 25 per cent of general medical equipment in the region was beyond its standard life. Along with his colleague Malcolm Chisholm, will the minister carry out an audit of the state of medical equipment not just in Grampian, but throughout Scotland? He needs up-to-date figures so that he can know exactly how much investment is required.

To ask the First Minister what progress the Scottish Executive is making in improving the rural economy. (S1F-1507)

Is the First Minister aware that there are hundreds of thousands of ordinary people in our rural communities who had hoped for more from his Government over the past two and a half years? In many areas of Scotland, affordable housing, tourism and affordable public transport are in decline. Will he be brave enough to publish a report early in the new year, detailing the impact that his policies have had on rural Scotland over the past two and a half years? Does he accept that it is not this Parliament that is letting down our rural communities, but the Westminster Labour Government and the Labour-Liberal coalition that runs the Government here in Edinburgh?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek your guidance on the two-tier system that seems to be operated by ministers in respect of answering written parliamentary questions. I lodged a question to Ross Finnie on 29 November, which was answered on 13 December. The minister referred me to his answer to the same question that had been lodged on 5 December by Tavish Scott and answered the following day. I asked my question a week before Tavish Scott and was referred to an answer that was given a week before I received an answer. Will the Presiding Officer state that that is discourteous, underhand, a waste of resources and shows contempt for parliamentary questions? Will the Presiding Officer state that all members should be treated equally by ministers? Will he investigate the issue and ascertain whether Tavish Scott's question was planted by the Executive?

Does the minister acknowledge that, only two days ago, the European Commission, when announcing its proposals for recovery plans, not only made tie-up schemes an option but actively encouraged the use of such schemes? The Commission is making even more money available for those schemes. Perhaps the minister should use up-to-date information.

The minister will appreciate that the biggest issue facing the industry and next week's negotiations is the proposed cut in the nephrops quota. Will he go on record saying that he will rule out no option to ensure that the proposed cuts are overturned, even if he has to use the courts?

Will the member give way?

The member unreasonably accused the SNP of simply repeating what the minister said in his opening speech. Of course, that is nonsense. Will the member accept that one priority that the minister must have in Brussels next week—which he did not mention but the SNP did—is to tackle industrial fishing?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

On unity in the industry throughout the UK, will Elaine Thomson, who is speaking for the Labour party, take the opportunity to condemn the Labour MEP from south of the border who is protesting against efforts by Shetland fishermen to protect quota for new entrants and for the local community?

In moving the amendment to the Executive's motion, I welcome this crucial debate and wish Ross Finnie well in his new post. However, we are disappointed that we do not seem to have a dedicated fisheries minister any longer. Our fishing communities have had a turbulent 2001. There have been quota cuts and North sea closures, and the industry has conducted a dignified campaign for a compensated tie-up scheme. The industry ends the year by going through the pain of decommissioning. That scheme is over-subscribed, which highlights the industry's low morale. I do not think that any of us can begin to imagine the difficult weeks ahead for those involved with the 108 vessels that might be leaving the industry after a lifetime. There is as much uncertainty at the moment as there was at the beginning of the year. The minister's immediate priority in Brussels next week must therefore be the rejection of the damaging and foolish proposal to slash the nephrops quota. Europe cannot be allowed to pick and choose when it listens to the science. Officials cannot get away with ambushing the industry after conducting months of talks. I do not need to tell the minister about the horrendous impact that the proposal would have on the catching and the processing sectors throughout Scotland. Cutting the quota would also displace the fishing effort from healthy stock to more fragile species. Surely that is the last thing we need. If fishermen are to take the regulations seriously, they must be credible. The minister must refuse to leave Brussels until Europe has accepted the evidence that proves that the bycatch of nephrops, or indeed of monkfish, is negligible. Those two fisheries have sustained the industry throughout 2001 and the proposals would be utterly devastating.  The Commission even has the cheek to use the bycatch argument while it is proposing an increase in the cod quota. To whom are those officials accountable? Should not the minister be calling for their heads to roll, given that they are clearly not up to the job?

I agree, but there are specific individuals who are coming up with ambush tactics year after year. They are the officials to whom the minister must turn his attention. Ports are already worried about the latest threat to scallops, following the absurd proposal for a new testing regime that could destroy the industry. The minister must also turn his attention to that matter when he is in Brussels. It is another example of faceless bureaucrats acting against Scottish interests. The minister should instruct the Commission to attack industrial fishing with the same zeal with which it is attacking Scottish stocks. If the Commission is serious about rescuing stocks and reducing the bycatch, it should be proposing a far bigger reduction in industrial fishing in the North sea. Proposals to increase the quota for Norwegian pout or to implement a minimal cut on sand eels are a slap in the face not only for the industry in Scotland, but for conservation itself. The minister should bring back from Europe a plan to phase out industrial fishing—to ensure that human consumption is given priority. He should help the aquaculture industry in Scotland to prepare for the changes ahead. I would like the minister to comment on that when he sums up. The Commission's apparent lack of understanding of Scotland's need in fisheries reinforces the case for a decentralised common fisheries policy. We could have no better reason than what has happened in recent weeks for decentralising policy and returning more power to the fishermen and the scientists of member states. Fishermen cannot be prevented from catching other stocks, on which their livelihoods depend, in a vain effort to protect cod. As members said to the minister, Europe must listen to fishermen. As the minister knows, some fishermen think that cod stocks have moved north in recent years, perhaps because of climate change. Ross Finnie must raise that with the European Commission next week.  I will now deal with recovery plans. It is essential that we give the industry time to catch its breath— as the minister said—before we proceed further. The measures that have been agreed must be given time to work. The industry led the way on the 90mm square-mesh panel, new mesh sizes and many other technical measures. They came on top of this year's closures and the fact that we are in the middle of decommissioning. Surely it makes sense to wait until we have conducted a full economic and conservation assessment before more pain is inflicted on the Scottish industry. The minister should tell us his plans for Brussels that will give the industry time—I welcome his brief mention of that. It would make better sense to introduce zonal management early and allow that to deal with recovery plans in coming years. The minister must propose that to Europe. I would welcome hearing in his closing remarks a guarantee that he will do that. The SNP welcomes the emphasis of the Commission's proposals on effort limitation rather than relying simply on TACs, which are intended to distribute fishing rights, not to conserve stocks. The Commission has expressed unequivocal support for compensated tie-up schemes. Days-at-sea schemes, or tie-up schemes, will require ministers to untie the purse strings. I ask the minister to make it clear that he does not close his mind to any of the measures that the Commission has laid on the table and that the industry supports. The £25 million that the industry has wrung out of the Government must not be the end of the matter. Investment must continue. As the minister well knows, the support for our fishing industry is pitiful compared with the support for other member states' industries.

The member is well aware that other countries, such as Spain, give their fishing industries far more financial assistance. That is clear. We welcome the cash that the Scottish Executive delivered, but, as Elliot Morley acknowledged, that was the result of a dignified campaign by the fishing industry earlier this year. The industry's pain has been caused by the failed CFP. That is why it is important that we get the best out of the review, as the minister said. Protecting our historic fishing rights and decentralising the CFP must be our top priorities in the negotiations.  To improve Scotland's chances this month, it is imperative that Ross Finnie—a minister of Cabinet rank, with responsibility for more than two thirds of the UK's fishing industry—is designated the UK's lead minister in Europe. There is no point in sending a Cabinet minister to Brussels merely to carry the bags of an under-secretary of state from London. That is ridiculous. Scotland has the predominant interest in the UK fishing industry and Scotland should represent the UK, just as Flanders will represent Belgium. That makes sense for Scotland.

I apologise; I am closing. The SNP urges the minister to pursue a policy that conserves fish stocks and our fishing communities. When necessary, he should refuse to take no for an answer. We look forward to hearing his response to the issues that have been raised and commend the SNP's amendment to Parliament. I move amendment S1M-2546.1, to insert at end: "; further calls on the Executive to seek an increase in nephrops quotas in line with scientific advice and ensure that the outcome of all the negotiations recognises the mixed character of Scotland's fisheries and takes into account the many conservation measures already agreed by the industry; further calls upon Ministers to retain an open mind with regard to fisheries management measures proposed by the industry and financially supported by the EU, and urges the Minister for Environment and Rural Development to seek designation as lead UK Minister on the EU Fisheries Council for the forthcoming negotiations on quotas and the Common Fisheries Policy in order to secure the best possible deal for the catching and processing sectors."

Will the member give way?

What is the minister's response to the proposed reduction in the quota for monkfish, which is also a valuable species?

Recently, I made a couple of visits to Craiginches prison in Aberdeen and met Tony Cameron, the chief executive of the Prison Service—I assure members that that set the alarm bells ringing. Tony Cameron handed me a wee card that outlined the goals of the Scottish Prison Service. One of those goals referred to "delivering effective prisoner opportunities". I tell the minister that at Craiginches such opportunities are few and far between, because of the staff situation. I received some figures this morning from Craiginches prison that show that the prison is 30 per cent overcrowded—perhaps it is the most overcrowded in Scotland—and 10 per cent understaffed. There are two vacancies for staff. Every time new officers are recruited for Craiginches, more resign. There are currently 12 people off sick. That is a terrible combination for staff working in the prison. When I visited the prison, I was told that one hall held 130 prisoners, but that only 40 got to do any work outwith their cells on any one day. The remaining 90 prisoners in their cells are looked after by four staff. I tell the minister that the prisoners are becoming aware of the staff shortages and overcrowding. I do not have to tell him how dangerous that is. It also has implications for rehabilitation work. I remind him that in Aberdeen, 80 per cent of crime in the city is drug related and that 80 per cent of the prisoners test positive for drugs on admission. There is a clear link between drug use and crime in the city. If we  are to break the link, it is imperative that there should be a rehabilitation programme in place at Craiginches prison. In his recent report, to which Roseanna Cunningham and others referred, the chief inspector pointed to the fact that addiction staff at the prison spend a lot of time on escort duty. One of the other goals that the card referred to was that Scottish prison staff are respected by the nation for their professionalism—according to the chief executive of the SPS. Prison officers are respected for the work that they do by the general public. After all, they are being asked to look after the most dangerous people in our society—in many circumstances, for an appalling wage in appalling working conditions. However, they do not get any respect from management. When I met Tony Cameron, he told me that low morale was not a concept that he could recognise. He said that he would recognise the concept of low morale only if every prison officer at Craiginches left their job. He wants all the prison officers to resign before he will recognise any symptoms of low morale. Does the minister think that that is acceptable? There is a new governor at Craiginches. I hope that that moves things forward. The new governor will need the support of management in Edinburgh and of the minister. The SNP is not confident that that support will be forthcoming.

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member accept an intervention?

When the First Minister next meets the Secretary of State for Scotland, will he discuss this month's fisheries negotiations in Brussels? Will he, in his new role, also undertake to visit Scotland's fishing communities in the coming weeks? I draw to his attention the latest threat to hang over a large section of Scotland's fishing industry, which is the European Commission's proposal this week to slash Scotland's quota for prawns—Scotland's most valuable stocks—by 25 per cent, despite scientific advice that there is a case for increasing the quota and despite the fact that stocks are healthy. Will the First Minister give an undertaking that he will communicate to the European Commission that he, the Government, the Parliament and the fishing industry are on the warpath and will not accept a reduction in quotas under any circumstances but will argue for an increase in them, in line with scientific advice?

When will the minister start standing up for Scotland's consumers, instead of defending a decision that was made by the Tory Government several years ago?

The member mentioned that the Government faced several options in the face of competition. One option that he did not mention was exemption from the Competition Act 1998. Why does not his party support that?

Will the member give way?

As the debate is about massive change in the water industry, which we are told will influence the charges that people have to pay, I am surprised that the issue of affordability has not been given a higher profile this morning. Just as the safety of the water service and the security and quality of the supply are guiding principles, so is affordability, which must be at the heart of where we take the water industry. For a Government that says time and again that social justice is a priority, it has a strange way of delivering it. The whole point of retaining public ownership of the water industry is to help the Government and the Parliament to achieve their social objectives. However, over the past couple of years, we have had to drag ministers' attention to the affordability issue. Just after the Parliament was established, I tried to get ministers to consider the impact of high water charges on low-income families. Eventually,  after months of campaigning by anti-poverty groups and MSPs from all parties, we got a consultation paper. Several months later—last year, which was two years into the Parliament—we finally had an announcement that there would be a scheme to help low-income families. The scheme has been attacked because it is simply not good enough. It will provide £24 million over three years but will fail to target the people who are most in need. I make a plea to the minister to introduce a better scheme. Not only MSPs but anti-poverty groups the length and breadth of Scotland are complaining. The Scottish Local Government Forum Against Poverty's most recent annual report states that many of the councils that are run by the coalition parties are saying that "the Executive's proposals have failed to address the problem." The proposals do not benefit those most in need of assistance and fly in the face of the Scottish Executive's much-acclaimed commitment to social justice. We need a "long term scheme of assistance, which targets all low income households where there is a serious problem of affordability".

I am happy to agree with Mr Sheridan on his first point. Many reports highlight the fact that, under the coalition Government, inequality in Scotland has grown thanks to things such as the increase in water charges in recent years. We have heard time and again about the impact that high charges and the removal of the water rates relief will have on the voluntary sector. How can the Government say that it wants to deliver social justice when it is pulling the rug from beneath the feet of the many organisations and volunteers who are trying to deliver social justice?

People—including, I hope, Nora Radcliffe—are calling for the bill to retain the principle that special assistance be given to charities and voluntary organisations the length and breadth of Scotland and that those bodies  continue to have water rates relief. I am sure that the voluntary organisations do not mind whether the money comes from the social justice budget or any other budget; they want the principle to be retained in the bill. There is cross-party support for that. Church halls, village halls and all sorts of charities will be affected. We hear that hospices will have to lay off nurses because they will be unable to pay their bills if the water rates relief is removed. If the relief is removed, Capability Scotland's bills will rise from £14,000 to £90,000, Abbeyfield Scotland, which runs sheltered houses and residential care homes, will lose the equivalent of the wages of 22 people and Voluntary Service Aberdeen's bills will rise from £9,000 to £87,000—a 900 per cent increase. Accountability and democracy in the water industry in Scotland are important. While the Government has made life particularly difficult for the voluntary organisations and low-income households, it has made life particularly cosy for people such as Colin Rennie, the chairman of NOSWA. Colin Rennie was appointed to the water authority in 1998 by virtue of being a Labour councillor. Despite being deselected by the local Labour party in Dundee within weeks of being appointed, he remains in post. By the time his four years' tenure is up, he will have been paid £150,000 in packages, which will all have been funded by the bills that consumers pay. As he works only one and a half days a week, that amounts to £500 a day, which means that it takes two consumers to pay his daily wage. That is not democracy and it has to be stopped. I ask the minister to put the needs of voluntary organisations and low-income households first and the needs of cronyism and people such as Colin Rennie last.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

In light of the minister's comments—which will be extremely unpopular on his benches and throughout Parliament and the country—will he confirm whether he has undertaken an impact study on the effect on the voluntary sector of carrying out the policy?

I point out to Karen Whitefield that independence is about delivering social justice—the two ideas cannot be divorced.  I congratulate Iain Gray on his new role. I know that he cares about tackling poverty, not only in Scotland, but throughout the world. We have a long way to go to tackle social justice in Scotland. That was acknowledged by the First Minister in sacking Iain Gray's predecessor. The SNP believes that it is an absolute scandal that a country such as Scotland has so far to go to deliver social justice for its people. The gap between rich and poor in Scotland has grown for decades. Indeed, under this Labour Administration it continues to grow. Many of us in the SNP are fighting to use the resources in Scotland to deliver social justice for our people. That is what inspired many of us to join the SNP and fight for independence. I turn to the debate between Tony Blair and Gordon Brown about delivering social justice, which is at the heart of new Labour. On the one hand, we have Tony Blair, who wants to go for the headline-grabbing investment announcements, be they in health or education—the populist stuff that gets headlines on the front page of The Sun . On the other hand, we have Gordon Brown, who wants to tackle poverty throughout Britain using the fiscal system. That is a genuine debate, but it is a debate that should take place here, in this Parliament in Edinburgh, not down in London. That is the only way in which the Administration will be able to tackle social justice in Scotland, because the Administration does not have the power under the devolution settlement to use the fiscal regime to tackle poverty. We do not have the cash if we want to have big spending announcements either, because we do not have the powers.

I am coming to that. Scotland is a rich country, but we do not have the control of our resources to allow us to put an adequate level of resources into social policy to deliver social justice. That is the key. That is what I am trying to convey to the minister, as she would know if she would listen. The European Union's first formal assessment of deprivation in the EU found that the UK, Portugal and Greece have the highest concentrations of poorer people in the whole of Europe. The lowest poverty rates are found in Denmark, Finland and Sweden—small independent countries that have even fewer resources than Scotland. Does not that tell the minister something? The assessment concluded  that there is a "clear correlation" between expenditure on social protection and poverty levels. A recent report in the Financial Times with regard to the growth competitive index found that Finland, Norway and Sweden—which are small independent countries with fewer resources than Scotland—have the most competitive economies in Europe, because of their public institutions, macroeconomic stability and technological sophistication.

We do not have the public institutions in Scotland because we only have devolution; we do not have a fully independent Parliament. We do not have the macroeconomic powers, so we cannot deliver on that front either. The gist of the problem is that we do not have enough powers in this Parliament to deliver social justice in Scotland. However, we do have control over approximately £20 billion. Let us turn to the money over which we have control to deliver social justice. We could use that cash more wisely than we do currently. For example, we could give local government a decent cash settlement. Many of the organisations that tackle poverty in Scotland and try to deliver social justice used to be funded by local government, but a lot of that cash has dried up. A lot of the organisations have faced not standstill budgets, but cuts after cuts. We could have joined-up Government in Edinburgh with the Labour-Liberal coalition. Water industry policies hiked up charges but did not give help to low-income households. Eventually, we got a temporary scheme, which does not even help the poorest of the poor, and that was only after two years of campaigning by anti-poverty groups. There is now talk of withdrawing assistance for the voluntary sector and charities that are trying to deliver social justice in Scotland. There is a slow lane to delivering social justice in Scotland and there is a fast lane. The "Social Justice Annual Report 2001" represents some small steps forward, but the Administration seems perfectly happy to take the slow lane to delivering social justice. The only way to be in the fast lane is by completing the powers of this Parliament and making Scotland independent.

Nineteen milestones in the report do not have any breakdown of comparisons between rural and urban data. We have been promised since the Parliament started that that issue would be addressed and we are still waiting.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will introduce proportional representation for the local government elections in 2003. (S1O-4180)

I am delighted to hear that there is lots of progress. If there is an intention to introduce legislation, will it be enacted in time for the 2003 local government elections, or is it Labour party policy to continuing running from local democracy in Scotland for as long as possible?

rose—

Will the minister go on record as saying that it is unacceptable for people in Grampian to wait perhaps two to three months for a check-up at the local dentist, and three or four years for treatment from an orthodontist based at the local hospital? Will she give an undertaking to work with local MSPs to plot a way forward for the service in Grampian and perhaps agree to a meeting with a cross-party group of MSPs to discuss the matter?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has, within its overall enterprise strategy, any plans to publish a strategy for its future role in relation to the oil and gas sector in Scotland. (S1O-4077)

Every oil and gas executive in the north-east of Scotland to whom I speak favours the publication of a specific strategy by the Scottish Government for the oil and gas industry. Despite the tragic announcement from Grangemouth earlier this week, the industry still employs approximately 170,000 people in  Scotland. Although for the time being licensing and taxation may be reserved to Westminster, every other policy area that impacts on the industry is the responsibility of this Parliament. Will the minister introduce a specific strategy for the offshore industry in Scotland?

The only interesting point in Alex Johnstone's speech was his mention of Robert Burns. That brings me to the subject of the humble haggis, which may be part of our natural heritage. Any members who have been following local papers in the north-east will have noticed that professional tourism signs have been put up at Oyne in Aberdeenshire warning of a haggis crossing and a haggis sanctuary. Turning away from haggis, I want to talk about the freshwater and marine environment, which is an important part of our natural heritage. I shall begin with freshwater fisheries in our rivers in Scotland. Members may remember how the Executive was dragged kicking and screaming to introduce the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Act 2001 after international protests against the Government's record and reaction to low catch figures in our salmon rivers. That is symptomatic of the Government's approach. It has to be dragged kicking and screaming to introduce relevant legislation. The debate on the freshwater fisheries sector now continues about the transfer of non-native species between river catchments and about  importing non-native species into Scotland from elsewhere. That debate is currently raging among environmentalists and the angling community. People want it sorted out and they want legislation introduced as soon as possible. I welcome the fact that all those issues are mentioned in the Government's proposals, but there is no timetable. When will we actually see the legislation? Action on those issues is long overdue, but we face the prospect of waiting even more years before any new laws can be put on the statute book. The implications of not protecting our fish stocks from genetic imbalance or diseases are huge. We need that legislation, and we need it soon. On the subject of genetic imbalance in fish stocks and the spread of disease, there is a crying need for an independent inquiry into sea cage fish farming. That concept was supported by a majority of parties in the Parliament, by parliamentary committees, by the salmon farming industry, by the angling community and by environmental organisations. If the Government were taking the matter seriously, surely it would have accepted the strong and unassailable case for that inquiry. But, oh no, the minister chose to be isolated once again, took on the whole united front and would not go down the sensible route of protecting, or at least ascertaining what is behind the decline of, freshwater fish stocks, particularly in north-west Scotland, and what is the right way forward for the relationship between sea cage fish farming and the environment. On the marine environment, new discoveries are being made all the time in Scottish waters. I pay tribute to the University of Aberdeen's Oceanlab, which recently opened in Newburgh, Aberdeenshire. I encourage the minister to visit Oceanlab, which is now investigating the world's ocean floors, as well as those around Scotland, and is discovering new species all the time. That shows just how great Scotland's natural environment is. I also congratulate the oil industry, which has made progress in recent years in protecting the environment. We want a sustainable fishery in our oceans. The minister alluded to that in her opening remarks. We have to tackle industrial fishing as part of the common fisheries policy negotiations if we are to protect our fishing stocks and the marine environment. It is extremely important that we achieve those objectives. When people around the world think of Scotland, they tend to think of our natural environment. We have to protect that environment as a matter of urgency, not just for tourism and for the economy but because we have a responsibility to the environment and to the rest of the world to do so.

I want to clarify where the member is coming from. What does he think should be the highest priority for our higher education sector: generating income or teaching future generations?

This is an important debate, focusing not only on the SHEFC report, but on many of the general issues surrounding it. Our new universities have been making their mark over the past few years and the Scottish economy is at a crossroads. It is very important that we get the funding, role and priorities for our universities right. Higher education has three roles. First, it must equip Scotland for the 21 st century. Secondly, it  has to maintain Scotland's reputation in those areas in which we excel. Thirdly, it has to provide all people with the opportunity for self-development. We cannot consider higher education in isolation; we must also consider further education and the role of our schools. We must ensure that they all have a clear role and that there is a link between all the institutions, taking a holistic view of education at this important time. I am concerned by the blurring at the edges that has been taking place in recent years. Schools are competing with colleges for the same students; colleges are competing with universities for the same students; and universities are now offering access courses, which it has traditionally been the role of colleges to do. Universities sometimes seem to offer those courses as an incentive to get people in to fill the seats. There is a sense that it is dog eat dog out there and that too many of our institutions have adopted a bums-on-seats strategy. I am concerned that many of our young people do not find themselves in the right lecture theatres. We must ensure that what is done is done for the benefit of the young people in Scotland, not for the institutions. There has been an upward trend in the presence of accountants and financial executives in the higher education sector over the past few years. Many of our higher education institutions are now indulging in a lot of advertising. Bernard King, the principal of the University of Abertay Dundee, who is sitting in the public gallery, has received a lot of praise today, and I join in that praise. I visited the university recently and was highly impressed by initiatives such as the international centre for computer games and virtual entertainment. It is an outstanding university. Nevertheless, when I was watching television last night, I saw an advert for the university on the ITV network that said simply: "University of Abertay Dundee: It's a real education!" and gave a telephone number. Why are universities spending so much money on advertising and public relations? Why is that money not being put to better use? Is it because something somewhere is out of sync and the universities have too many places to fill? That problem must be addressed by the minister. I hope that all higher and further education institutions find their own niche and role in Scottish education, and I would like there to be more collaboration. At the moment, an initiative is being undertaken by the University of Aberdeen and the Robert Gordon University to ensure that they do not compete for the same students. They are speaking to each other to ensure that they have individual and distinctive roles.  I shall address a couple of the recommendations in the report. The first concerns the role of the new universities. Many members have referred to the need for level 3 research funding. That funding is extremely important. There is no point in creating new universities and then discriminating against them; they must receive their fair share of research funding. The philosophy and theology department of the University of Edinburgh receives the same amount of research funding through the funding councils as most of Scotland's new universities receive in total. For example, that department receives the same amount of research funding as the whole of RGU. Is that right at this crossroads for the Scottish economy? We must address that. Level 3 research bids must be addressed, as we must give the new universities seedcorn funding. Europe's oil and gas industry is based in the north-east of Scotland, yet BP is spending tens of millions of pounds on research and development in universities south of the border. Surely, we should encourage the funding for such research to be allocated to areas of expertise, where it makes sense, such as the north-east of Scotland. Our universities want to bid for that research funding but have not received the seedcorn funding that would enable them to build up a track record and attract private sector funding.

The member has hit the nail on the head. The key is to encourage our institutions to become the best in the world, so that the academic research for the oil and gas industry will also be based in Scotland. That is what the universities in the north-east want to achieve, but they need support from the Government to get there. My final point concerns commercialisation. Scotland has the second-highest rate of publication of research papers in the world—only Israel beats Scotland—yet Scotland's economy is lagging behind while the Irish and Finnish economies are racing ahead. Surely, there should be a link between our academic expertise and the Scottish economy, to allow it to make inroads. Only half of the 14 per cent of UK graduates who are educated in Scotland stay here. I hope that commercialisation can play a role in providing jobs for our people. There are many issues to consider. I hope that  the minister, the committee and the Parliament treat them with a great deal of urgency.

Does Alex Neil agree that it is unacceptable that all the tens of millions of pounds that are spent on research by a company such as BP are spent south of the border, because our universities cannot get the seedcorn funding that they need to build up a track record that will attract private sector research and development?

Will the minister explain how he intends to ensure such access to services in the Grampian Health Board area? As has been said, only 4 per cent of suitable patients there get new treatments. Even when the specialists to whom Richard Simpson referred have recommended that the drugs be prescribed, the GPs cannot do so because of the £25,000 limit on their budget.

Will Cathie Craigie join me in questioning the attitude of Grampian Health Board? It has instructed GPs in Grampian not to prescribe the new drugs that are available, which would delay the onset of Alzheimer's.

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

I welcome the opportunity to make a few comments. I congratulate Tavish Scott on lodging the motion and the WWF on its campaign. However, I will not thank the three members who have stolen most of my speech. The issue is important because it concentrates the minds of people and, more important, the decision makers, on how important the oceans are to Scotland. We know that that is the case partly because of the many high-profile fishing issues. If we cast our minds back a few years, we also recall how consumer power and the Brent Spar issue activated people power. People used their consumer power to take on a multinational and the United Kingdom Government because they did not want to see their oceans used as a dustbin. The WWF strategy is good and a huge step forward. It recognises the environmental and social role of the oceans. Time and again, it has been said that the fishing industry and the environmental lobby now share common objectives and that they are singing from the same hymn sheet. In common with Tavish Scott, I am heartened how, each year at my party conference, the WWF and the Scottish Fishermen's Federation share the same platform. A massive step forward has been taken. Both organisations share the same agenda. The fishermen need healthy seas because healthy seas mean healthy fish stocks, which allow them to sustain their livelihoods. The environmental lobby now recognises that it has to work closely with the fishing industry and other sectors that make their livelihoods from the oceans. The social role of fishing is important. In Stewart Stevenson's constituency of Banff and Buchan, it is reckoned that 33 per cent of jobs are dependent on the sea. In other constituencies across the country, in particular the Shetland islands—represented by Tavish Scott—a fifth of jobs may be dependent on the oceans.

Yes. I can certainly identify with those comments. We can do much to help our oceans. Our fishermen need to get on board alongside the  environmentalists by adopting sustainable fishing methods. That is one area where they have led throughout Europe. The Scottish fishing industry has adopted more sustainable fishing methods. There are indirect measures that we should take. Let us remember the overall impact of climate change on the oceans. The fuel that we fill our car with might have an impact on the oceans; that in turn has an impact on fish stocks. Cod stocks, for example, are moving further north because of the change in temperature. That has implications for our white fish fleet. We cannot leave everything to Westminster. The Scottish Executive has to take the lead. Westminster too often sees the ocean as something from which we can extract a valuable resource: oil. We do not really put anything back into the ocean—we must change that attitude. The oceans are much more important to Scotland than they are to the UK. The Scottish Executive must take a lead and adopt sensible policies. The tie-up scheme is one area where the environmental movement and the fishing industry were singing from the same hymn sheet. They saw a compensated tie-up scheme as an important tool to help the oceans to recover, yet we found out a couple of days ago that the Executive was running a £25 million underspend at the time when it was rejecting the fishermen's plea for £5 million for a tie-up scheme. We need the Scottish Executive to get on board now.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether discussions have taken place with the United Kingdom Government on the impact in Scotland of the forthcoming UK legislation on broadcasting. (S1O-3921)

Is the minister aware that there are potential threats to regional broadcasting and jobs in Scotland from the forthcoming UK legislation, which might open the door for one company to take over the whole ITV network? A threat is also posed by comments such as those from the MP for Falkirk West, who says that there is too much Scottish news in Scotland—which, of course, fails to mention him. Will the minister undertake to fight Scotland's corner on the matter? Does he agree that the best way of protecting Scottish broadcasting is to put Scotland's Parliament in charge of it?

Will Alex Johnstone tell the chamber whether he believes that Scotland is a nation or a region?

Will the member acknowledge that he does not live on the same planet as schools in many areas of Scotland, which, as a result of local government cuts  imposed by the Government, have been unable to develop sport?

In the SNP!

As Ian Jenkins said, today's debate is about not only sport in our schools, but the self-fulfilment of our children. It is about building their self-confidence, self-development, personal development, health and fitness. As far as society is concerned, the debate is also about how to save the national health service a fortune. All our children, especially those in primary schools, would, if I had my way, get a taste of all sports so that we could try to get them hooked at an early age. Without a doubt, the minister and coalition members will give us lots of warm words, but the reality in the country is very different. For many sports facilities in many schools in parts of Scotland, there has been no capital expenditure by local government over the past four years. In many rural communities, in particular, there are no community facilities for kids or the rest of the community to turn to. That issue has to be addressed.

That is a fair point. I turn to my area of north-east Scotland. In Ellon Academy, one of the biggest schools in Scotland, there is a severe shortage of PE changing facilities. That situation has not been addressed for years. There might be 70 girls changing in a tiny space at the same time. The assembly hall has to be used for PE, so when exams take place, PE is simply curtailed. In Aberdeenshire, the situation in the primary sector is deplorable. The minister will be aware that the five-to-14 guidelines recommend that 20 per cent of the working week should be spent on expressive arts—PE, art, drama and music. That works out at five hours per week in the upper stages of school, which means an hour and 25 minutes for PE. The situation on the ground is that, because of the time that it takes to get changed, the pupils are lucky if they get 40  minutes a week. Time is tight and there is a great deal of demand. Often in primary schools, particularly in Aberdeenshire, the gym hall doubles up as the dining hall. That means that PE has to be curtailed before lunch time. That situation is serious and has to be addressed. Local government cuts have, for example, decimated the number of specialist teachers in schools in Aberdeenshire. That has had a knock-on effect on the ability to deliver sport in our schools. The children in our primary schools often encounter the expertise of specialist PE teachers for only one term per year. At a rate of 40 minutes a week, that does not amount to a lot of time. Class teachers do not feel confident taking the kids for difficult PE lessons, which has implications for the range and quality of those lessons. I say to the minister—if he would like to listen—that putting money into sport in schools is an investment in our children that will save cash in the national health service. Sport in schools makes our children happier, fitter and healthier. We must put more cash into employing specialist teachers. If we invest now, Scotland will reap major economic and social benefits and might also do better on the sports field.

To ask the Scottish Executive what action it plans to take to reduce the number of missed NHS appointments. (S1O-3866)

The minister will be aware that missed appointments at out-patient clinics and general practitioners' surgeries are a drain on the valuable resources of the NHS and cost society tens of millions of pounds. Will the minister give an undertaking to commission a public information campaign, involving television and newspaper adverts, to urge the public to play their part in helping the NHS to use its resources more productively?

Any new resources for tackling drug misuse in Scotland are welcome, although we all agree that much more needs to be done. Is the First Minister aware that, in the north-east of Scotland, there has been a particularly dramatic increase in drug misuse in recent years, which is reflected in a record level of drug deaths and drug-related crime? Will he ask his officials to investigate the situation in the north-east of Scotland to ascertain whether the increase in the resources that are applied to the issue matches the increase in the problem?

The debate has been useful and sometimes entertaining. The Conservatives started by attacking the Scottish National Party for attacking the Executive and then went on to attack the Executive, which was interesting. Mike Rumbles, not content with putting out a press release attacking the SNP before the debate—before even hearing what we have to say—spent two thirds of his speech attacking the SNP as well. That is rather regrettable for a chap who represents a farming constituency. He should represent those interests first. Enormous challenges face the farming industry today. It is at a crossroads, and the Parliament has a crucial role to play in ensuring that the industry survives and prospers. The challenges are considerable but not insurmountable. The strategy that we are debating addresses some of those challenges, but pays little more than lip service to many of the real issues that face the farming industry, as was highlighted eloquently by my colleague Stewart Stevenson. All parties have highlighted a number of areas that the Scottish Government must take more seriously and that should have commanded much greater prominence in the strategy documents. Profitability was often a theme in today's deliberations. If we are to increase profitability, we must address the fact that between the plough and  the plate too many margins are taken by people other than in the farming industry. That is hardly addressed in the document. According to Donald MacRae, an economist for Lloyds TSB, agricultural share from plough to plate is only 15p in the pound. Surely, if we are talking about increasing the profitability of the industry, that should be at the heart of the strategy document. That problem has always faced primary producers, but we must reverse that trend. That should have been a priority in the document.

The point that we are trying to make to the minister is that those references are far too shallow. We have been banging on for two years trying, for instance, to get the minister to meet the supermarkets more often. He refuses to do that.

The minister has met the supermarkets, but only after being pressed time and again by the Opposition. I can remember saying to the minister in the first few weeks of the Parliament that he should meet the supermarkets and ensure that the farmers get more of a margin. Only after a long time did he get round to doing that.

No, I will not.

Okay.

I said to the minister that I was talking about the two and half years since the Parliament was established. The fact is that five or six major retailers in Scotland command the bulk of food outlets—that is not acceptable. Only 100 farm co-operatives in Scotland command 30 per cent of farm output. We must reverse that. That could increase the profitability of so many farm businesses, yet it is deemed to be barely worth a mention in the document. The issue of co-operatives demands more attention. Co-operatives  are a way in which we can help small farms and increase the profitability of the sector. There has been much talk about gearing farming activity toward the market. We must gear farmers toward the market, rather than to the rules and incentives that are laid down by the common agricultural policy. However, our farming industry needs a lot of support to do that. We must ensure that our farms are producing for the marketplace and not just for the common agricultural policy. However, we welcome some moves toward that objective, which are mentioned in the document. Robin Harper referred in particular to reacting to the demand for organic products. No promise has been made on that in terms of trying to get farmers to react to the marketplace. The subject receives scant attention in the strategy document. Action point 18 is completely shallow and promises no firm action to address the matter. We must accept the point that public support will always be required in some form, especially in remote areas of Scotland. We must ensure that the whole industry, not just part of it, survives. That is why we welcome the move toward paying our farmers for environmental stewardship; we all support more subsidy going to that. We do not want everything to be geared toward production so the industry must be geared toward guarding the environment. As has been referred to in the debate, the WTO allows for more subsidy for such projects. Guarding the environment is perhaps the biggest challenge that faces agriculture in Scotland today, yet it receives scant attention in the strategy document. The rural stewardship scheme has been referred to time and again in the chamber—for example, by Bruce Crawford, John Farquhar Munro and Sylvia Jackson. There is much unhappiness in all the parties with agri-environment schemes that demand more resources and attention. Once again, that is paid no attention in the document. The spirit of the rural development regulations is that subsidies should be spread more evenly for the benefit of smaller farms. That theme has been returned to time and again in the debate, but it does not receive enough attention from the strategy document. Members from all parties have raised the issue of the less favoured area scheme and the Minister for Rural Development must respond to those concerns. The SNP welcomes the move toward land management contracts, but such a sea change requires enormous preparation. We must not get bogged down by bureaucracy. Integration has not been addressed by the strategy. Agriculture cannot be considered in  isolation in the rural economy; there is a range of issues that must be addressed if we are to boost agriculture in Scotland. Those include transport, the processing sector, forestry and tourism, which are barely mentioned in the strategy document. I want to turn to the Scottish Executive's role in moving forward the agriculture industry in Scotland. It is worth having a long-term strategy only if we tackle the short-term crisis in farming. The livestock industry in north-east Scotland is being strangled as a result of the regulations that were introduced to deal with foot-and-mouth disease. Not content with the 21-day standstill on the movement of livestock, which brought many problems to the industry in the north-east, and despite the fact that there have been no cases of foot-and-mouth disease in Scotland for four months, the Executive brought in new regulations this month. The industry is grinding to a halt because of the introduction of inappropriate regulations.

Can I recommend that the minister speak to the industry in north-east Scotland and the Highlands and Islands, which is grinding to a halt because of the regulations. Even the sheep-tagging regulations are causing severe problems. I spoke to the industry this morning and was told that it has conducted a trial in which it took two men two hours to check the tags of 140 sheep in a lorry that might have contained as many as 600 sheep. The industry simply cannot deal with that increased burden, and the minister has to accept that. I turn to the minister's promise that he can influence the CAP. In fact, the whole strategy is in danger of being undermined because the minister does not have much influence over the CAP. Jim Walker, the president of the National Farmers Union of Scotland, spoke to the Rural Development Committee last week. He said: "There is a fundamental weakness in the political set-up in this country, as we seem unable to influence—we cannot influence—at the highest level the negotiations that take place in Europe". The Executive's strategy will be undermined by the lack of a voice for our industry in the places that matter, where the decisions are taken—London, Europe and even at the WTO. It will not  be our minister who will be taking the decisions; it will be the minister from London. Jim Walker also said: "The fact that Margaret Beckett is the minister who will negotiate on our behalf in Brussels fills me with terror." —[ Official Report , Rural Development Committee , 18 September 2001; c 2147-48.] Scotland needs its farmers. We should aim to become a leading farming nation; we should not downsize the industry. We cannot reconcile the notion of survival of the fittest with the special role that the industry plays in rural Scotland. If the Scottish Government is serious about developing its strategy and taking the industry forward, the Deputy Minister for Rural Development, in her reply, must give the Parliament answers to the many questions that have been asked this afternoon.

Mr Mike Rumbles has a terrible habit of spending the first half of every  speech attacking the SNP. Will he tell us why he does not think that a better strategy could have been presented to us?

Will the member explain why he will vote for a strategy that he labels as insulting to the farmers?

Am I right in saying that a 3 per cent limit also applies to the fire service, which has a different financial structure from the police service? There is perhaps a case for the Government, which funds the police service, putting a limit on the carry-forward of underspends, but why is that the case with the fire service, which is not keen on that 3 per cent limit? Why is the same limit applied to both services?

There will be outrage throughout Scotland's fishing communities that Scotland is not making its own submission to that very important consultation. The minister will be aware that up to 40,000 Scottish jobs depend on a new CFP that is good for Scotland. Despite the fact that the Scottish Parliament legislates for two thirds of the UK fishing industry, the London minister will call the shots for Scotland's fishing industry. I ask the minister—

Given that Brittany—

Will the minister lead from the front in Europe and submit the Scottish Government's own response to the CFP consultation in the next few days to reflect Scotland's priorities?

Does the Scottish Executive intend to submit a response to the European Commission's green paper on the future of the common fisheries policy? The closing date is this weekend.

I will speak only for a couple of minutes, because much of what I was going to say has been said by others.  I recommend that the Minister for Education, Europe and External Affairs read "Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance", by an author and thinker called Robert Pirsig. I read it as a teenager and believe that it is a great book. It is about a chap who takes his son across America on a motorcycle and philosophises about all things in life, including education and the role of exams and assessment. His conclusion is that exams are not particularly good for education because pupils take their eye off the ball and do not spend enough time trying to acquire an all-round education. I am not suggesting for a second that we should scrap tests and assessment, but the philosophy is interesting. I will send the minister a copy of the book. The SNP takes the right approach by giving the motion a cautious welcome. However, I must point out that, because my partner who is a teacher brings home marking every night from school, I am aware that there is already continuous assessment in our schools, to an extent. We must not become obsessed with tests because, at the end of the day, the quality of education is what is important. At the moment, some teachers are working with rationed jotters and pens in schools that are falling apart. In such circumstances, it can be difficult to deliver quality education. That must be our No 1 priority; we should not become diverted by assessments and exams. In our education system, the lack of specialist teachers as a result of cuts is causing a tremendous problem. Art, music, drama and other such subjects that allow pupils to develop their confidence and express themselves have been cut. Quality of education should be a priority for the minister, but that is being hampered by some of the policies that are being pursued. Primary education is the most important stage in a child's development. We must ensure that children do not find themselves getting put down again and again if they get bad results during continuous assessment. I ask members to remember that assessments and tests are part of an overall package and should not be considered to be the top priority.

How can the minister reconcile his pledge to open the water industry to the private sector with his and the Government's commitment to prevent water privatisation?

Does the member accept that if, for some obscure reason, certain amendments were not accepted, the Parliament would retain the option of chucking out the bill at stage 3?

I hope that the bill will allow the Scottish Parliament to help to drag Scotland into the 21 st  century by outlawing a number of cruel and barbaric activities. Speaking as one of the bedraggled members of the Rural Development Committee, I am delighted that we have finally reached this stage today. I have been on the Rural Affairs Committee—later the Rural Development Committee—since day one. However, I will vote against my committee's recommendation and against its amendment. I will also vote against Elaine Murray's amendment. The bill has been a nightmare for our committee. It has been a highly controversial and emotive issue. As the committee's report indicates, members took a moral stance. As I am sure that we are all aware, it has been difficult for some members to change any of their views, despite hearing two years-worth of evidence. A lot of the committee's deliberations were trench warfare—in some cases, we fought over every letter of every word of every sentence of every paragraph. We fought ourselves to a standstill on some issues, which can be seen from some of the conclusions and recommendations in the report. In the end, we made a recommendation only on a casting vote of the convener and we lodged an amendment today only on the casting vote of the convener. All we have is a snapshot of the views of some of the 20 members of the Rural Affairs Committee and Rural Development Committee over the past two years. It is important that the Parliament and its committees learn the hard lessons from our committee's experience. For example, we did not have an independent inquiry in Scotland as there was south of the border. Under such circumstances, when the committee is split right down the middle, we should not be making any recommendations at all. Today's debate is about whether we will allow the bill—which is a vehicle for change—to go ahead. If people are against hunting with dogs in any shape or form, they should vote for the bill; if they are not, they should vote against it. It is as simple as that—members should ignore the amendments. The whole purpose of stages 2 and 3 is to allow amendments to be introduced. There have been volleys of amendments in connection with the many bills that have come before the Parliament. I will support some significant amendments. Gamekeepers persuaded the Rural Development Committee and members of all parties that they should be allowed to use dogs to hunt foxes in certain conditions, such as rocky terrain, where it is impossible to use shooting alone, and underground to kill cubs that have been orphaned and that would otherwise starve.

I suspect that Murray Tosh's version of the principles and my version will be completely different. As far as many people are concerned, the general principle of the bill is to ban hunting with dogs. We can make amendments to the final design of the bill. Although pest control is important, mounted fox hunting—as the committee identified—is sport, as is hare coursing. I have always been against hunting with dogs as a sport and the evidence that the committee heard reinforced my views. One of the representatives of the mounted hunts tried to persuade the committee that foxes do not suffer stress during hunts by saying: "I have seen foxes stop, sit down, scratch their ears and watch what is going on while they are being hunted."—[ Official Report , Rural Development Committee , 21 November 2000; c 1416.] I was waiting for him to say that the fox had sat on a bench to smoke a Hamlet cigar while it waited for the hounds to catch up with it. Very few foxes are killed by mounted hunts. It is a sport—it is not pest control. I urge members to reject both amendments and support the motion to help to drag Scotland into the 21 st century.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to ensure that patient care does not suffer as a result of any cuts to be made by Grampian University Hospitals NHS Trust. (S1O-3636)

Is the minister aware that it is feared in Grampian that local health services are about to implode as NHS bosses prepare to inflict a further £9 million of cuts on an already overstretched budget? The public are concerned that that will lead to greater postcode prescribing, a cut in general services and longer waiting times. Will the minister reassure residents of Grampian that she will consider allocating some of the  unallocated £86 million of her budget announced by the Minister for Finance and Local Government to ensure that people's worst fears in Grampian are not realised?

Following on from Hugh Henry's question, I return to the theme of acquiring direct feedback from Scotland's teachers. They can write to the letters pages of The Herald  or to their local MSPs, but is it possible for the minister to set up a channel of communication to get direct feedback from all of Scotland's teachers on the past changes and the way forward?

Is the minister aware how rare it is in the salmon farming debate in Scotland to have all sides singing from the same hymn sheet? However, on the need for an independent inquiry into salmon farming in Scotland, the industry, the anglers, the environmentalists and two cross-party parliamentary committees are all agreed that it is the best and only way forward. Will the minister confirm to the chamber that his mind is not completely closed on the matter? Will he confirm that he will listen to what the members of the Transport and the Environment Committee say when he or his deputy appears before it next week?

Who? Name them.

I received a letter from Aberdeen City Council a few weeks ago that stated: "It would appear ... the Council's housing stock would not qualify for the Scottish Executive funding, reported to be £350 million." It will not receive that funding despite the fact that, in the city of Aberdeen, between 200 and 300 council houses have no heating whatever. Will the minister explain how many households in Aberdeen City and in Aberdeenshire will qualify for that £350 million scheme, given that our understanding is that the answer is zero?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. The minister refused to give way during much of the latter part of her speech. You then intervened and said that she did not have to give way because she was in the last minute of her speech. However, that was four minutes ago.

The member mentions the cost of tie-up schemes. The SNP accepts that decommissioning is an unfortunate necessity, but we make the point that if the Executive continues to decommission the fleet, the long-term cost will be the loss of the fishing industry—catching and processing. Surely economic criteria should not be the only criteria.

As the member is aware, difficult negotiations will continue over the next few months to draw up the cod recovery plans. Does the member think that we should set up the zonal management committees early—that is, in the next few months—rather than wait for the five-year recovery plans to be put in place first?

I congratulate the committee on its excellent, first-class report. I hope that the Scottish Government recognises the role that the committees are playing in the Parliament by taking on board many of the recommendations that I am about to discuss. The SNP believes that this year and next year present a long-overdue opportunity radically to overhaul the common fisheries policy and to renew and embed the provisions that are crucial for the protection of fish stocks. The coming years will be a make-or-break time for many of Scotland's fishermen and processors, and the success of the Parliament in influencing the CFP will determine which road the industry will take. Thankfully, the report that we are debating points the way. This cross-party report and the green paper from the European Commission highlight the fact that, for the first time in the past 20 years, the fishermen, the politicians and even the European bureaucrats are all singing from a similar—if not the same—hymn sheet. We all agree that, over the past 20 years, the CFP has largely failed Scotland, which is the home of Europe's richest fisheries. To many fishermen, the CFP is simply a crazy fisheries policy. Change is inevitable, as EU enlargement calls for a radical re-think of the way we operate European fisheries policy. We cannot have landlocked states or new EU entrants dictating to Scottish fishermen what they can catch off their own shores.

I could not agree more with Tavish Scott. I shall touch on the subject of protecting our historic fishing rights. The continuous expansion of the EU makes a centralised, inflexible fisheries policy unworkable. It is not only about EU enlargement, however; the fact is that we cannot continue with a policy that forces fishermen to throw two thirds of their catch  overboard. Only one in three fish that is caught at sea ends up on the table. We cannot continue with a policy that allows industrial fishing to proceed unabated and destroy juvenile fish stocks and the livelihoods of our people. Nor can we continue with a policy in which the rules are applied forcefully in some countries but not in others, thereby creating an unlevel playing field. Fisheries-related employment in Scotland has declined and fish stocks are at dangerously low levels. Fishing ports such as Lossiemouth, Pittenweem, Whitehills and many others around Scotland's east and west coasts and in the islands are shadows of their former selves. The key—as is highlighted in the report—is to protect Scotland's historic fishing rights in our own waters. Many people agree that the common management of fish stocks is sensible, but we must guarantee that Scotland will get its fair share. That is why it is essential that, in the CFP review—as the committee highlighted—we retain relative stability as a founding principle of the CFP. That must be cast in stone. The Hague preference must be retained. The six and 12-mile limits, which help us to protect our inshore sector, must also be retained as a founding principle. The existing restrictions on access to the North sea must be retained—we cannot allow the North sea to become a free-for-all—and we must retain the Shetland box. We do not want more derogations: as long as we have the CFP, we should have a lifetime guarantee that those principles will be at the policy's heart. The SNP is at one with the committee on those points, and we join the committee in demanding that the EU remove any ambiguity or question marks over the principles that are in the green paper before it reaches its conclusions. Also, the introduction of individual transferable quotas must not be allowed. Unfortunately, the report highlights that spectre as well. If ITQs were introduced, they would allow relative stability to be undermined by the back door. The only way in which the common fisheries policy can move forward in the 21 st century is through the introduction of subsidiarity and the establishment of meaningful zonal management committees. Fishermen should be at the heart of the policy-making and decision-making process, along with the scientists, fisheries managers and environmentalists. Conservation has to be the No 1 priority for the CFP. Total allowable catches are a useful tool in maintaining relative stability but they are not effective in protecting stocks as they control only the amount of fish landed rather than the stocks. We have to get away from the annual TAC bunfight, which is why we welcome, as does the committee, the promotion of multi-annual, multi- species TACs that are far more suited to Scotland's mixed fisheries and help us move away from constant crisis management. We have to put more emphasis on technical measures at sea, as well as on the amount of fish landed. Like the committee, the SNP wants seasonal closures, no-take zones and real-time closures higher up Europe's agenda. We have to cut fishing effort as well as capacity. If the Government cannot see beyond decommissioning over the next few years, we will have no fleet left in 10, 15 or 20 years' time and all our processors, which employ tens of thousands of people, will close—as is highlighted by the report, 40,000 jobs are at stake. That is why tie-up schemes are essential. If the minister paints herself into a corner every time there is a closure in Scotland's mixed fishery, the boats will either go bankrupt or they will divert their attention to other areas of the sea, thereby increasing pressure on them. It may be cheaper in the short term to decommission boats, but in the long term it is the most expensive policy possible, as it will result in the disappearance of the industry. Ministers have to acknowledge the social role of fisheries in Scotland. Conservation measures such as tie-up schemes are an investment in rural and remote communities. This country invests £500 million a year in our farming communities because they supply food to the country and offer employment in areas in which there is no alternative. We have to adopt a similar approach to fisheries-dependent communities in Scotland. The report concludes by calling on the minister to show political will. The SNP echoes that call. The minister has to lead from the front. Scotland is a fisheries-dependent nation and the Scottish Parliament is the custodian of Europe's richest fishing grounds. The minister has to lead for the UK in the CFP negotiations. We have 70 per cent of the UK's landings. Fishing is 15 times more important to Scotland than it is to the UK, as is highlighted by the report. If the Scottish Government fails to rise to the challenge, there will be the gravest imaginable consequences for the economic situation of our fishing communities and this Administration will be forever associated with the demise of one of Scotland's most traditional industries. On behalf of the SNP, I commend this report to the Parliament.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps are being taken to improve the pay and conditions of medical secretaries. (S1O-3581)

A couple of days ago, I spoke to a medical secretary who, after 221/2 years of service in the NHS, is paid £12,500 a year. This week, the Prime Minister, Tony Blair, gave himself a 41 per cent pay increase, taking his wage to £163,000. He has made himself the highest-paid Prime Minister in Europe. Will the minister say on the record today that a salary of £12,500 a year for a medical secretary is unacceptable?

Does the minister appreciate that visible policing is an alien concept to people in Grampian, given that the area gets the second-lowest level of police funding in the country, despite the fact that it has the highest rate of recorded crime in the country? Will the minister update the chamber and Grampian on what progress has been made on reviewing the funding formula for the police force in Grampian, so that we can have a better deal for Grampian and more visible policing?

Page 5 of "The Water Services Bill - The Executive's Proposals" explains that four types of licence will be available to the private sector in Scotland and the rest of the world to take over Scotland's water industry. How can the minister reconcile that with his statement that he is going to keep the water industry in public ownership? Why does he not come clean to this chamber and the people of Scotland and admit that those proposals will privatise Scotland's water industry?

I thank the minister for an advance copy of the statement, albeit it changed at the last moment due to unfortunate developments in Jedburgh. I join the minister in paying tribute to everyone in Scotland who has helped our agriculture community to cope with the crisis and pay tribute to everyone who been directly affected by the crisis, especially the farmers and businesses that have suffered such great loss. The very unfortunate developments this week confirm that foot-and-mouth remains a crisis that is very much to the fore in Scotland's rural communities, especially in Dumfries and Galloway and the Borders. The recent outbreak serves as a painful reminder that this Parliament cannot allow foot-and-mouth to become the country's forgotten crisis because Tony Blair—or anyone else for that matter—wants a smooth election campaign. I would be grateful for responses from the minister on two or three points. In light of the fresh outbreaks, can he tell us what resources are being directly applied to the identification of their sources and what level of resources are being made available to prevent any more sporadic outbreaks of this nature? Secondly, given the debate that is now under way on how we move forward, can the minister tell us how he feels we can best learn from the crisis to avoid further outbreaks? Does he accept the case for an independent public inquiry once the crisis is behind us? As we await such an inquiry to learn the lessons, does he agree that we must avoid proposals for new, permanent measures such as the 20-day standstill on the movement of livestock, which has caused uproar in the Scottish industry as it is a proposal tabled by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food that ignores Scottish circumstances? What progress has been made on the blood testing of livestock, which would allow areas to be deemed foot-and-mouth free and the resumption of regional exports. Are samples still being sent  south of the border for testing? Is a centre being set up in Scotland? Does the minister support the resumption of regional exports? Is Europe indicating that it will support that?

Given that, under the Executive's proposals, up to five authorities will be involved in the supply of sewerage and water services to domestic households, is not the Liberal-Labour coalition sending the industry headlong into privatisation and into a state of affairs that will be every bit as bad as that of Scotland's railways?

To ask the First Minister what progress is being made with the feasibility study into the possible staging of the 2008 European nations football championship in Scotland. (S1F-1093)

Securing the championships would be an enormous economic boost for Scotland and a great boost to the Scottish game. Moreover, it would save us all the hassle of nail-biting qualifiers, as we would automatically qualify. Given that many political parties have petitioned the Scottish Executive to support any bid that might be made, what plans does the First Minister have to involve representatives from around the chamber in the launch of a formal bid, to avoid any electioneering in the coming weeks?

In Aberdeen, house break-ins have gone through the roof—the statistics are by far the highest in the whole of Scotland. The chances are that someone who breaks into a house in Aberdeen will not be put behind bars. Is that or is that not a crisis?

I welcome the debate. One of the reasons why the SNP chose to debate justice is that it is of enormous concern the length and breadth of Scotland. There is no escaping the fact that, during the current general election campaign, justice has been one of the biggest issues on the doorsteps, despite the fact that the election is for the United Kingdom Parliament and that justice is devolved to this Parliament. That is why we should speak about it this morning. At door after door in Aberdeen, where I am campaigning in the general election, people raise the issue of crime in the city, which has the highest rate of recorded crime in Scotland. Two days ago, I spoke to a woman whose home had been broken into five times—three times in the past few months alone. Her neighbour's house had also been broken into three times in the past few months. Yet the culprits are still out there. Those neighbours have given up completely on Scotland's justice system because it is not delivering for them and they do not feel safe in their homes any more. I challenge Jim Wallace, the Minister for Justice, to go to Aberdeen and have a public meeting. Justice is one of the biggest issues in the city. He should hear directly from people what their concerns are. Perhaps then he will do something about them. People in Aberdeen are not just saying that we need more police on the streets; they are turning their attention to the justice system. They are not blaming the police anymore; they are blaming the procurator fiscal's office and the courts for letting them down. No wonder people are concerned when they read headlines such as: "Fiscal claims stress caused by cutbacks made him quit". That headline, to which Roseanna Cunningham referred, appeared in The Press and Journal a few days ago in relation to the resignation of David Hingston from the fiscal office in the north of Scotland. He is quoted as saying: "The fiscal service is under immense stress, largely because of Labour and Tory governments' insistence on cutting costs. It hasn't the resources to do the job." That is the reality throughout the country and the reason why we are debating justice today. I have previously raised in the Parliament the 110-day rule, which puts a lot of pressure on fiscal offices throughout the country. They find it almost impossible to meet and are having to drop other cases so that they can divert their resources to dealing with the serious cases that come under the rule. We have almost the strictest timetable in  the world for dealing with serious cases. No wonder people are losing faith if they look at some of the information that comes out of the Parliament. I refer to an answer I received to a parliamentary question on cases marked "No proceedings" over the past few years. Between 1997-98 and 1999-2000, there was a 56 per cent increase in the number of cases marked "No proceedings" in the city of Aberdeen. That was the fifth worst figure in the country. The national figure was 20 per cent. In other words, over a couple of years, there was a 20 per cent increase in the number of cases marked "No proceedings". There are 49 fiscal offices. Of all the increases, three out of the top five were in fiscal office areas in the north-east of Scotland. That is hard evidence of a serious problem with resources in the fiscal service in that part of the country. Not only the public are tearing their hair out with the justice system; the police are, too. Several times in past debates I have referred to a letter that I received from the chief constable of Tayside police on 26 March. The one section that I have not yet read out in the chamber is the one that relates to young offenders. The police are demoralised because they feel that the justice system is not delivering for the police. In the letter, the chief constable says: "young offenders potentially present the police service with the biggest problems. The majority of crime committed by juveniles tends to be by a minority of recidivist offenders. When a repeat offender is identified there would appear to be an inability within the current system for them to be dealt with at an early stage and thereby balance the provision of support for the individual and reassurance for the public." The chief constable gives one example of a 15-year-old in the city of Dundee who is now in a secure establishment. During his three-month placement, the individual failed to return after his first unescorted home visit. During the two-week period during which he was untraced, crime in the area rose considerably. The individual currently has 24 pending cases involving 40 charges. He has been involved in 32 previous cases. The chief constable gives some examples of what has happened in some of those cases: three times there was a disposal of supervision; 16 times no action was taken; twice there were no proceedings; seven times the referral was discharged; and four times the case was abandoned. The chief constable concludes: "I have no need to outline the hours spent in investigation of the crimes, and the effect on the victims and impact on the morale of the investigating officers." We have not begun even to touch on the impact of human rights legislation on the justice system. The Executive must address now many issues that are of huge concern the length and breadth of Scotland. I look for a positive response in the minister's summing-up.

On the point about helping drug addicts to cure their addiction, will the member join me in lamenting the fact that the Government chose not to set up a drug court in the north-east of Scotland, which has the fastest-growing drugs problem in Scotland?

I have two questions that relate to the provisionally free area. When can the collection centres be used for store cattle? Can we expect a resumption of exports before the autumn lamb sales and, if not, what plans does the minister have for those sales?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

I am stunned, as the minister does not usually give way to me. I thank her for doing so. She says that no local data are available. How, then, did the Executive reach its decision that the rural picture is fairly positive overall? Exactly what criteria is she using to reach that conclusion? When she talks about low rates of unemployment, is not she, rather than the committee, guilty of generalising, given the fact that what employment there is in those areas is low-paid, seasonal and part-time work?

The Executive response uses the word "overall".

The SNP welcomes the opportunity to debate the Rural Development Committee's report. We add our congratulations to everyone involved—my colleagues in the committee, the clerks, the adviser Mark Shucksmith, everyone at the Scottish Parliament information centre who helped, everyone who sent submissions to the committee and, especially, everyone who turned out at the seven public meetings that we held around the country. Those meetings were very successful. A couple of factors stood out in our inquiry. One was the high turnout at the public meetings. People were extremely enthusiastic about coming along to speak to parliamentarians about the rural economy. That was invaluable. I attended successful and worthwhile meetings in Dingwall and Stornoway. Another factor was the unanimity of the committee on many of the recommendations and findings. There was huge agreement on the report, which includes many unique recommendations. I hope that the minister will respond positively. Against that positive backdrop, the SNP was absolutely astonished by the Government's 13-page response, which sought to parry the committee's recommendations by simply listing what the ministers think they have achieved. They seemed to be in a huff because we did not spend several pages of our report paying tribute to the  wonderful work of the ministers to date. We wanted to engage in a constructive debate with the Executive. The committee's purpose was to go out, speak to people around the country and find out the real picture. We then came back and reported to Parliament and to ministers in the hope that the committee could influence the decision-making process in Scotland's new Government. In its response to our report, the Government talks about the positive picture from rural Scotland. That was the first defensive remark. In recent weeks, discussions in Parliament have been dominated by the foot-and-mouth crisis, the fishing crisis, the decline in the textile industry and the tourism crisis. I want to turn to the scores of written submissions that the committee received and to consider four or so of them that were at the top of the pile. The Rowett Research Institute said that because of the severe downturn in traditional agriculture, rural employment has moved from very low paid, but reasonably secure employment in agriculture, to a situation of wholesale redundancies and very short-term rural employment that is part-time, seasonal and poorly paid—for example, in tourism. It goes on to say that many rural residents have two or three part-time jobs just to maintain basic family budgets. The ministers talk about everything being rosy in rural Scotland because there are areas of low unemployment. I ask them to bear in mind the nature of the employment that there is. Peebles Hotel Hydro told the committee that it was having to hire staff from overseas because of a feeling here that wages in the industry are poor and a difficulty to do with split shifts. It said that there was a lack of accommodation in villages around Scotland for incoming workers and a lack of skills among the work force in rural Scotland for certain positions—for chefs in particular. The Scottish Wildlife Trust pointed out that it is extremely concerned about the current economic plight of our primary industries. Perth and Kinross Council, on the subject of social services, said that rural areas had fared worse than urban areas because of the difficulties in recruiting care workers in rural communities. Shelter Scotland spoke of the appalling housing problems in our rural communities. The picture is not as rosy as ministers would have us believe. An extremely worrying remark by the Executive was that it was not surprising that "Rural Scotland has not benefited from the key growth areas in the economy." That somehow suggests that rural Scotland is not suitable for the key growth areas in the economy. Our report highlighted the fact that we must address that. We believe that rural Scotland could  be appropriate for the growth economy. The minister is telling us that, although traditional industries are declining, the new industries belong to the urban communities. Where does that leave rural Scotland in the 21 st century? It is a pity that Wendy Alexander is not here. The minister who will respond to the debate has very few powers over many of the issues referred to in the report. It would have helped if ministers from across the Executive had come here today to speak about the report.

The minister mentions cross-cutting. The cross-cutting Cabinet is very enigmatic. No one knows when it meets or what it does. In the chamber, we have never heard about how it is working to help rural Scotland. In last week's debate on skills in Scotland, Wendy Alexander did not mention rural Scotland once in her opening speech. Back in February, we had a debate on "A Smart Successful Scotland". Again, the minister did not address any of the concerns of rural Scotland, as if it was not supposed to be part of smart, successful Scotland. We must start talking about information and communications technology inclusion, and not just social inclusion. We must ensure that rural Scotland benefits from new technologies and is as digitally switched on as urban Scotland. Broadband and telecommunications are two issues raised in the report that the Government must address in relation to rural Scotland. If it does not address those issues, our rural communities will be uncompetitive in the 21 st century economy. I will turn briefly to the soft measures promoted in the report. We must build up confidence in rural communities. It is not enough to supply premises and grants to help get companies off the ground—we must tackle social exclusion and build confidence. I also want to raise the issue of the social remit for Scottish Enterprise, which was rejected by the Government. Why can the Executive not accept that recommendation? The report made it clear that Scottish Enterprise does not take on board rural concerns as much as Highlands and Islands Enterprise does. The Executive must not alienate our rural communities. It has already alienated the fishing  community. Only this week it has become clear that the Executive has refused to hold an independent inquiry into the salmon farming industry. I urge ministers to take a leaf out of the committee's book: hold public meetings around the country and speak directly to our communities. If ministers take that approach, they might be able to take off their rose-tinted glasses, see what is really happening in rural Scotland and do something about it.

I welcome the member's comments about bail breakers, which is an issue that I have pursued since the Parliament was established. I am sure that, like me, Hugh Henry welcomes the Minister for Justice's commitment to review the position of bail breakers. Does the member agree that a reason why there are now so many bail breakers is the presumption in human rights legislation that the courts will release accused persons on bail? We must keep close watch on the impact of human rights legislation on the Scottish justice system.

I welcome the debate, because we are discussing one of the most important issues for our constituents. Making our streets safer is perhaps one of the biggest challenges that is faced by the Parliament. During the two and a half hours of the debate, someone, somewhere in Scotland, will have had their house broken into and some lady somewhere will have had her handbag snatched, yet here we are, a few weeks before the general election, with the coalition lodging a self-congratulatory motion. I can tell the ministers that the motion will not go down very well in Aberdeen, where the number of crimes per capita has been the highest in the country for the second year running. Crime is an enormous issue in Aberdeen. The latest statistics show that the index for recorded crime in Aberdeen was 175, compared to the Scottish average of 100—Aberdeen is 75 per cent above the average. Every year, 1,447 crimes are committed for every 10,000 people who live in the city. Housebreaking, personal assault and serious  crimes are the main problems in Aberdeen—the level of housebreaking is three times the Scottish average. In last night's Evening Express , the headline was: "Cruel daylight attack on frail city pensioner." A couple of days before that, it was: "Thieves target three homes in one day." That article went on to state: "Three homes in a block of flats were raided on the same day by thieves who kicked down the doors. The block of eight flats ... was struck just days after new statistics unveiled Aberdeen as the housebreaking capital of Scotland." The minister's warm words will not go down too well in Aberdeen. Some elderly people are afraid to leave their homes. I know a man whose home was broken into so many times that he refused to leave his home until he sold it. It took years to sell his house because of the reputation of the area. We must discuss funding today, especially in the case of Grampian police. It is no coincidence that Grampian has had the highest rate of recorded crime twice in a row, and the second lowest level of funding per capita in the country. We have brought that to ministers' attention time and again, but they refuse to recognise it. I was interested to hear that Lothian police get extra assistance because they police the Scottish Parliament. Grampian police do not receive any extra assistance for policing the North sea oil and gas installations and the royal family at Balmoral. It is not merely a question of employing more police officers; more hardware is also needed. Tayside police, in conjunction with Fife constabulary, put in a submission to get cash from the Government for a helicopter, which would help greatly in fighting crime, but their submission was knocked back. Police time must be used more effectively when it comes to citations. Police are often used as postmen. We could employ other people to deliver citations, which would allow police to do front-line duties. A case in which police time was wasted in court was brought to my attention by a Tayside police constable. He said that in a recent trial in Tayside, officers from the force spent 29 hours giving evidence in court, but an incredible 604 hours waiting to give evidence. Only 5 per cent of the time that was spent in court was spent giving evidence. That must be addressed. The same force experienced another example in which officers spent 14,025 hours over a three-week period delivering court correspondence and citations. That issue must also be addressed. The Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service must get more resources. I am told that the 110-day rule for bringing serious crimes to trial is a  particular problem at the moment. As law becomes more complex, the procurators fiscal must divert all the resources to dealing with serious crimes, which means that other crimes, such as housebreaking and drug offences, have to go by the wayside. We have to address the root problem. Of course, we must educate our young people to have more respect for property and people and we must reduce the gap between the rich and the poor in society. However, facilities such as drug rehabilitation services must be provided. The police tell me that 80 per cent of crime in Aberdeen and Grampian is drug related, but that people who want drug rehabilitation must go down south to get it. There is a real gap in the provision of drug rehabilitation services. I am delighted that the Government now supports drug courts. That is a step forward, but we have to tackle the root cause of crime. The one thing that must mark out the first session of our first Scottish Parliament in 300 years is a huge step forward in tackling crime, because it is one of the most important issues, if not the most important issue, in our constituencies.

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to deter offenders from committing further crimes while on bail. (S1O-3291)

I thank the minister for his answer. Does he agree that it is very demoralising for the police force and for the victims of crime when the police catch criminals only for the courts to release them time and again? I wrote to Tayside's chief constable—John Vine, who happens to be in the gallery today—for an example of what is happening in Dundee. He told me that one individual on bail in Dundee recently was "subject to four separate bail orders for various crimes ... :   Vandalism,      Breach of Bail Conditions,      Breach of Bail Conditions,      Assaulting a Police Officer & Breach of the Peace (both committed whilst on bail)".    Does the minister agree that that is unacceptable and that he must introduce plans to address this serious failing in the justice system in Scotland?

The minister represents the Aberdeen Central constituency. Will he tell the chamber why motorists living in Aberdeen, which is the heart of Europe's oil and gas industry, have to pay the highest price for fuel in Europe?

I hope that the minister, who is having a conversation with a colleague, will listen to what the Opposition parties have to say in this debate on a very important subject. The challenge that faces the Parliament is to develop our economy and work force to equip Scotland for the new century and to provide long-term, secure employment. Judging from the terrible events of this week, it is clear that we have a long way to go. We are now in what many people term a post-industrial, knowledge economy and the business community is crying out for the skills to survive in that economy. I read a report by Alan Wilson, the chief executive of the Scottish Council for Development and Industry, which referred to the survey that it conducted recently of companies in Scotland. The results showed that the "top priority by far was skills development, addressing such areas as skills shortages, life-long learning and issues around the knowledge economy." The SCDI then published a report called "Skills Shortages in Manufacturing", which addressed issues such as "the widening deficit between technical subjects taught in education and the needs of industry and commerce." It is clear that we must concentrate on skilling Scotland for the 21 st century, to ensure that we do not find our economy at the mercy of overseas-based companies that will leave Scotland at the  drop of a hat when a better offer is made— perhaps by the Governments of the Indian subcontinent or Asia. We must concentrate on attracting companies to Scotland because this is where they want to be and because there is nowhere else for them to go if they want the best work force. We must create a skills base that is so valuable that, when inward investors have to cut costs or restructure, Scotland is the place that they can least afford to leave because they will not be able to find a work force of equivalent quality elsewhere in the world. At the moment, there is a danger that companies are happy to leave, as it makes no difference where they are based as long as they can keep their wage bills down. In the eyes of too many countries, Scotland is just another location that can be sacrificed in the interests of cost cutting. We must aim for better quality jobs, for instance in companies that are interested in pursuing research and development, as we are unable to compete in the international market for low-skilled jobs. We should give support to companies to invest in research and development, so that they have a stake in the country and are less likely to leave. We must also support research in our higher education sector. Two years ago, I was stunned to learn that Robert Gordon University got less Government research money than did the philosophy department at the University of Edinburgh. That situation must change and is doing so, slowly.

The recent investment of Government research money is simply making up for the deficit from past years. The new Scottish universities that were referred to by Brian Monteith have had a huge gap in Government research funding in relation to the preparation of graduates for industry. We must address that essential issue. Companies have to tell Government the skills that they need and many, particularly in the oil and gas industry through its training organisation, are doing that. There is a massive skills shortage in the north-east of Scotland and the minister must do more to address that. The average age of engineers in the North sea oil industry is 50 and a huge number of vacancies has to be filled. I have only a couple of minutes left—

We are talking not only about high-technology skills, but about skills  across all industries, including those in rural Scotland. Today, we are concentrating on high-technology skills, but we should develop skills that will ensure that Scotland can be best at what it does best, including the production of meat products and fish products and other areas of the rural economy. Those areas benefit the whole economy. We must also consider the training budgets. Millions of pounds go into those black holes, yet no one is examining how successful the budgets are and whether they are delivering the appropriate skill developments. Westminster rule in Scotland, particularly during Thatcher's years, has been associated with massive redundancies as a result of short-term policies and a lack of vision. The sad reality is that as long as Scotland is locked into a Westminster mentality, that situation is likely to continue. The Scottish Parliament has a duty to learn from past mistakes and I urge Parliament to support the SNP's amendment today to allow us to get on the right track.

I welcome the minister's statement and commend him and his officials on their efforts. My first question concerns the partial lifting of the export ban. Can the minister confirm whether there is any legal barrier to that ban being lifted, and has he had any discussions on that with the European Union? Some areas in the north and north-east of Scotland are further away from the outbreak than other European countries. Secondly, further to Alex Johnstone's question about testing animals that are being culled, is not it possible to take samples to be tested retrospectively to ascertain the success of the policy?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way on that point?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

I will tell Murray Tosh the rationale behind the timing. Water relief began to be removed two days ago. Today is the earliest and best opportunity for a debate.

I thank the 46 members from across all parties, and Dennis Canavan, who signed my motion and made this debate possible. I do not know whether you Presiding Officer, read The Press and Journal , but there is a report in today's paper: "A granny is the first to sign up for a charity challenge in Inverness—to climb a hospital chimney. Mary Walker, 63, has agreed to climb Raigmore Hospital's chimney and abseil down its side on May 12 to raise money for the Anthony Nolan Bone Marrow Trust." She said: "I've met some people who suffer from bone marrow problems and I want to do something for them." That lady is braver than I am, and no doubt she is braver than many in this chamber. Her efforts illustrate the lengths to which people will go to help others. Society owes an enormous debt to the country's army of volunteers, who each and every day take time to offer others a helping hand. Each person who is involved in a voluntary organisation and who helps their community, the less fortunate and the more vulnerable members in our society, or elsewhere in the world, makes a personal sacrifice for which they do not expect any special thanks or treatment. However, the voluntary sector quite rightly seeks recognition from public bodies, the Government and this Parliament of its financial situation and its contribution to society. Forty-eight hours ago, Scotland's charities became liable for water rates, because the reliefs that they have enjoyed for centuries are being phased out. The news from the water authorities in February could not have come at a worse time, because it came after most organisations had concluded their discussions with their main funders for the following year. The bills could not be arriving at a worse time, as charity events continue to be cancelled throughout Scotland due to foot-and-mouth disease. The history of this issue is confusing and complex, which says a lot about the way in which the water industry in Scotland has been run through the decades. Unless action is taken immediately, Scottish charities will become the latest victims of the chaos that has reigned. Colleagues may recall that Sarah Boyack, who was the minister at the time, announced in 1999 that the proposed withdrawal of reliefs would be postponed until the following year. That concession followed a vigorous campaign by the voluntary sector, and because the minister accepted that the consultation process was flawed. The water authorities made a concession, in that they distinguished between sensitive and  non-sensitive premises, with reliefs for the latter being phased out by 20 per cent a year. Negotiations continued, but the voluntary sector had the rug pulled from beneath its feet when the small print at the end of the water authorities' press release in February delivered a body blow. All that came on top of massive rises—in some cases several hundred per cent—in general water charges in recent years. Perhaps it was an oversight that the continuation of the reliefs was not built into the new legislation following the reorganisation of the water industry in 1996, but that is not the fault of the many organisations that now face closure. Most charities rely on grants from cash-strapped local authorities, but the grants have remained static or have been reduced in recent years. Another source of income is the generosity of the public. How many more raffle tickets will have to be sold by charities for them to remain viable? How many more sponsored walks or activities will have to be arranged to avoid bankruptcy? I tell the minister that the report by the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations on the voluntary sector in Moray last year found that 46 per cent of organisations had incomes of less than £1,000. When one realises that water bills for village halls are set to multiply, perhaps the minister will appreciate the damage that will be inflicted. If the Government's proposals close village halls, it will not stop there: luncheon clubs will have to close, badminton clubs will have to close, and the numerous other clubs and societies that use the halls will be left homeless. I will refer to messages that I have received in relation to this debate. I am sure that other members have also received messages. I have had e-mails and letters from many organisations throughout Scotland, detailing extreme concern at the proposals. The Scottish churches committee, which has campaigned vigorously on this issue for years, is up in arms at what is happening. Capability Scotland, which had water bills of £14,000 last year, will have bills of £18,000 this year and of £90,000 by the time the reliefs are phased out. That organisation, which does so much for the disabled, will be hit extremely hard by the proposals. Abbeyfield Scotland, which runs 100 very sheltered houses and residential care homes throughout the country, will see its bills go up by the equivalent of 22 people's wages. Largo Bay Sailing Club, MoBus in Fife and Voluntary Service Aberdeen also got in touch. The latter's bills are going to go up from £9,000 to £87,000, which is an increase of more than 900 per cent. The service runs facilities such as Linn Moor Residential School, which provides for children with special needs, and homes for the elderly. The  archdiocese of St Andrews and Edinburgh pointed out that we will be the only European country that does not give concessions to charities. Perth and Kinross Association of Voluntary Service, an umbrella organisation that represents 160 organisations in Perth and Kinross, got in touch. It says that in the next few years, the Gateway centre alone will face water rates and sewerage charges of almost £10,000, for which the centre, like many other organisations, has no budget. That is a just a tiny sample of the organisations that have contacted MSPs on the issue. Surely the minister accepts that as tackling social inclusion is one of the Executive's avowed priorities, it is a retrograde step to pull the rug from beneath the feet of the many charities that play a crucial role in helping ministers to achieve their aims. If those charities go under, who will step into the breach? Consultation with the voluntary sector has been shambolic and inconsistent. Some might suggest that it has been a sham. Every organisation that has contacted members has complained about the consultation or lack of it. The sector rightly says that the compact between it and the Executive has been breached. The consultation is a sham. The North of Scotland Water Authority told me in a letter that I received this morning that 90 per cent of respondents to its questionnaire said that reliefs should continue, yet the authority stormed ahead and removed them. The Government's response has only been to highlight the fact that water authorities can install free water meters. That solution may assist some village halls, but it has two problems. Installing water meters will not prevent sky-high bills that may break the bank, because water charges have gone through the roof in recent years. Meters also offer no help to residential homes, whose water usage is enormous, or to charities that wash clothes that may have been donated to be sent abroad. Water meters or not, an important principle is at stake when it comes to village halls, residential homes or any charitable bodies. The principle is that society is willing to recognise the special role that charities the length and breadth of Scotland play in the community. The needs of many people in society who rely on charitable works will not go away, and the last thing that we need is for charities to go away. There are many reasons why the removal of reliefs should be cancelled. The Scottish Charity Law Review Commission is due to report. Why on earth can we not wait to find out what it says, rather than jump the gun? The Transport and the Environment Committee is conducting an inquiry into the water industry. Why can we not wait for its report? The creation of a unified water authority  has been proposed. Why can we not revisit the reliefs issue when the Parliament debates the bill on water services? All that the motion asks is that the minister gives an undertaking to revisit the issue. No one is arguing against changes to the system. All that is asked is that the minister accepts that the principle of giving special help to the sector is retained, as befits a civilised society such as Scotland. We also seek immediate action to help those organisations that help our fellow citizens in their time of need or provide services that would not otherwise be provided. I urge the minister to give Parliament and Scotland's charities some good news by accepting that the issue needs to be revisited as a matter of priority.

On a point of order.

On a point of order. Would it be possible to ask the guidance of the Presiding Officer as to how MSPs can raise the subject of civil servants' behaviour in the chamber following allegations against Dr Paul Brady—

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

I knew that the minister would give way if I persisted. Recruiting new police officers is one way of combating a rise in crime. Another way is to use the police officers that we have more effectively. For example, the amount of time that they spend logging citations or that they waste hanging about in courtrooms, not giving evidence, could be reduced. Can the minister tell us what is being done about that?

I welcome the opportunity to make a brief speech. Justice must be seen to be done if people are to have faith in the justice system in Scotland. I will raise a couple of issues. The first is bail breakers, or aggravated bail in the official language. That is when someone goes to court, is accused of a crime, gets bail, goes out and commits another crime, goes back to court, gets bail again, goes out and commits another crime and so on. It is incredibly demoralising for police officers, who feel that they are banging their heads against a brick wall. They go to extreme lengths to catch criminals, only for them to be released by the courts. It is also demoralising for the victims of crime, who know that the police have caught someone who has committed a crime against them but that the courts have released the person back on to the streets, perhaps to commit the same crime and harm someone else. That has been a massive issue in the north-east of Scotland, which I represent. I should like the minister to take note of it. In recent years, there has been a series of muggings and house-breakings in Aberdeen. As the minister well knows, Aberdeen has the highest per capita crime rate in Scotland. Those crimes are committed by the same people, who get out on bail and commit crime time and again. I met representatives of Tayside police a few weeks ago and followed up the meeting with several questions to the chief constable. I received his reply in the post today. I will read out the example of one case in Dundee, which the chief constable gave. I received the letter only today,  but I want to make the minister aware of it. The chief constable states: "One individual currently on bail in Dundee is subject to four separate bail orders for various crimes". Those include crimes of vandalism; breach of bail conditions—not once, but twice; and assaulting a police officer and breach of the peace, both of which were committed while the person was on bail. "This same individual has a long list of previous convictions and pending cases and is still at liberty with the associated possibility that he will re-offend." If people are to have faith in the system of justice, they must see that justice is being done. Something is wrong with the system. I have taken the issue up with the minister before. I hope that, when he winds up, he will say that there is a problem that must be investigated by him and the Lord Advocate. Something is wrong when people are released time and again to commit more crimes, despite the fact that the police caught them to try to put them behind bars. I also want to touch briefly on the fact that Aberdeen has the highest rate of recorded crime in the country. It is no coincidence that it has the second lowest level of per capita police funding. When I previously raised the issue with the Minister for Justice, he said that although the situation was disappointing, he was not convinced that there was a link. There must be a link, and I hope that the minister will address that point when he winds up.

The First Minister may have seen in the press this week that Nick Brown wrote to the Treasury asking for cash for a decommissioning scheme. He justified his request by saying: "We now face a development in Scotland, where the executive has responded to mass demonstrations by fishermen by offering a decommissioning scheme".  Would not a better outcome have been the First Minister sticking to his guns and his instincts and delivering a tie-up scheme, rather than the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food delivering a decommissioning scheme in England?

Will the minister give way?

I take the minister back to his comments on the restrictions on the movement of livestock. My reason for mentioning those restrictions related to the need for collection centres to be established to help smaller farms. What is the minister's policy on the establishment of such collection centres?

Few of us in the chamber can grasp what our farming communities are going through. The challenge is not only to control and eliminate the disease but to minimise the impact, and especially the long-term damage, on the wider economy.  I want to touch on a few issues, beginning with the plight of Scotland's auction marts, which ground to a halt four weeks ago. I understand that the ban on the auction marts is to be revised on 27 March. Aberdeen & Northern Marts' auction marts employ 50 full-time staff and 100 casual staff. Those staff are idle because the auction mart cannot operate, and £40,000 a week is being lost. We recognise the economic role that the marts play in the rural economy. The mart at Maud, in Alex Salmond's constituency, was closed recently. The smaller marts around Scotland cannot be subsidised by other businesses and face especially difficult times. That takes me to Alex Salmond's suggestion about using the marts as collection centres. Is the minister working with Europe so that, if the ban continues in the auction marts, they can be used as collection centres? The current restrictions on the movement of livestock discriminate against the smaller producers who have a couple of beasts to get to market. A lorry used to go round the farms, picking up all the beasts and taking them to the abattoir. That is not the case now. It is uneconomical to get a lorry just for a couple of beasts. We could help people who are accumulating livestock on their farms by establishing collection points as soon as possible. In addition, what is the minister doing for the auction marts? We must remember that the auction marts have a social function, acting as gathering points for the farming community. The auction marts were never busier than in the BSE crisis. Farmers would come together and discuss the crisis and their common problems. They cannot do that this time, because of the restrictions. Indeed, farmers throughout Scotland are becoming increasingly isolated. That highlights the need for the minister to give support to the groups that are trying to help farmers cope with stress and other problems.

I am happy to pay tribute to that effort—I hope that it is being replicated throughout Scotland. However, many organisations need more assistance from the Government. We must not forget that the crisis has an emotional toll on the farming community. On tourism, the crisis is a double whammy for farmers. Many farmers have had enormous financial difficulties in recent years; they have not had their problems to seek. Some have tried to diversify, and opened up bed and breakfasts and  chalets. However, the nature of the crisis means that they cannot take advantage of the income from that source. Tourism in the north-east of Scotland, which is a low-risk area, has been affected. Many trips from overseas, particularly to Deeside, have been cancelled because of the crisis. I ask the minister to intervene, because the tourist office in Aberdeen, the gateway to the north-east of Scotland, is about to close. The staff will be halved and the remaining employees will have to relocate. Now, more than ever, we need a good tourism effort to make up for the damage. The Aberdeen tourism office will suffer, lose staff and close temporarily, so I hope that the minister will intervene by providing a financial injection. Finally, I stress that this is a debate about rural Scotland. It is not just about the farming communities, but about the impact on the wider economy. Surely this, of all times, is when we need the economic contribution that is made by our fishing communities. Why should we undermine a strategy that tries to protect the wider rural economy by putting 25,000 jobs at risk because of the way in which we are handling the current fishing crisis? The fishing communities have an enormous contribution to make to the rural economy in the coming years, but they need to have the right policies in place now. I ask the minister once more to revisit that issue.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will review the decision to remove water rates relief for voluntary and charitable organisations. (S1O-3151)

Is the minister aware that the decision will cost Scotland's voluntary and charitable organisations tens of millions of pounds? Those organisations are campaigning to persuade the Scottish Executive to have a change of heart. Voluntary Service Aberdeen wrote to me last week saying that its bill will increase from £9,462 to £87,243 if the relief is removed, which is a 900 per cent increase.

That body runs schools for children who have special educational needs, residential homes and carer centres.

Now that we seem to have a new minister for the water industry, will he adopt a new approach to the issue and revisit it as a matter of priority?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. May I have your guidance on how we may obtain an emergency statement from the Deputy Minister for Rural Development, given that the fishing crisis has worsened in recent days? Last week, the Government turned down the request from the Parliament and the industry for a compensated tie-up scheme and offered an alternative short-term aid package, which it quite clearly cannot deliver. Over and above that, it has implemented technical measures that—

I, too, attended the meeting of 100 processors at Newburgh in Aberdeenshire. Lewis Macdonald and his Westminster counterpart, Frank Doran, spent the whole meeting trying to turn the processing sector against the—

Their action was despicable. I draw the minister's attention to yesterday's The Press and Journal , in which one fish processor, Rob Burnett, who is the managing director of Fisher-foods—which processes 40 per cent of North sea haddock, is the biggest fish processor in Scotland and employs 1,000 people—says: "We would like to see consideration given to a scheme similar to the temporary lay-up scheme currently in operation in Belgium." That is what the processors are saying. Will the minister start listening to the fishing industry and stop defying the industry and Parliament?

Will the minister give way?

I thank the minister for giving way. The number of excuses that are coming from the minister for not delivering the will of Parliament is embarrassing and absolutely pathetic. The First Minister is on record in January as saying that the Government would abide by the  will of Parliament. He said that as First Minister he would do that. Will the Minister for Rural Development tell us his position? Does he believe that Government should abide by the will of Parliament, which is the voice of the people of Scotland?

Is the member—

The fishermen—

To help the—

Is the member going on record as supporting tie-up schemes for Scotland's fishing industry?

Will the tie-up scheme save boats whose owners are on the edge of bankruptcy?

The minister talks about the best and most effective use of money. Will she confirm whether her decision not to deliver a tie-up scheme—for which the Parliament voted—was an economic one, or a matter of conservation?

Will the minister give way?

To ask the First Minister what measures the Scottish Executive intends to introduce to safeguard juvenile haddock stocks in the North sea and to address any wider concerns in the fishing industry. (S1F-903)

Is the First Minister aware that the Government's decision this morning to kick the fishing industry when it is down has effectively issued redundancy notices to hundreds of fishermen in the short term and perhaps thousands in the long term? Does he accept that, as John Swinney explained, a tie-up scheme is perfectly possible, as has been shown in Belgium? Will he confirm—this is an important point—whether he will allow the renegotiation of the financial package to allow a compensated tie-up scheme to be incorporated into the package, if that is what the industry wishes, to allow the Government to deliver for our fishing communities in their hour of need and to protect one of Scotland's most valuable and oldest industries?

Give way.

Will the minister give way?

The minister did not give way earlier.

rose—

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I thank the member for giving way. Ronnie Hughes—a distinguished fisherman whose vessel is based in Iain Smith's constituency and who is in the public gallery today—has spoken from the heart and has called, time and again, for a tie-up scheme to save his livelihood. Does Iain Smith support his cause? Yes or no?

rose—

Will Jamie Stone give way?

Will Jamie Stone give way?

I thank Jamie Stone, who is the Liberals' fisheries spokesperson, for giving way. Does not he appreciate that this is not the time for inquiries? The fishing industry is meeting today. Fishermen face a choice of staying at home and becoming bankrupt or going to sea to try to make a living, which will threaten their future. Jamie Stone is a fisheries spokesperson who is on record as supporting a tie-up scheme for the industry. He is a member of the same party as Tavish Scott, who joined the Shetland fleet—he was in the leading vessel—to support the calls for a tie-up scheme. Does not Jamie Stone agree that Parliament should vote today to save Scotland's fishing industry and that the Liberals should vote with the other parties to do just that at 5 pm?

I welcome this debate, which is very timely as Scotland's fishing industry is in the middle of a crisis. Although we welcome the long-term measures that the minister has announced to help the industry, the crux of the debate and what the industry is looking for from the debate are the short-term measures that will allow the industry in Scotland to be around to take advantage of long-term measures. I express the enormous disappointment of SNP members that the Scottish Government has failed to deliver for the industry in its hour of need. In recent days, Government ministers have not hesitated to build up expectations among our fishing communities. Ministers should hang their heads in shame for failing our fishermen at this crucial time. They have failed in their duty to defend our fishing communities and they are failing to save Scottish jobs. I refer the chamber to last week's First Minister's questions, when the First Minister gave the impression that he would stand up for Scotland's fishing communities.

I will certainly not take an intervention from Duncan McNeil. The First Minister told the chamber that he accepted that urgency was required. In response to Alex Salmond, he said: "I understand the serious consequences that lie ahead for the industry."— [ Official Report , 1 March 2001; Vol 11, c 164.]  Now we know that the First Minister and his sidekick, the Deputy Minister for Rural Development, have betrayed Scotland's fishing industry. Today will be seen as a black day for Scotland's fishing communities. The minister laughs, but the reality is that her speech did not announce the short-term aid that is desperately required by the industry. Instead, in effect, she has announced redundancy notices for hundreds of people in our fishing communities in the short term. In the long term, thousands of jobs are on the line due to the Government's failure to stand up for our fishermen at this most crucial time. Time and again, the Government was warned that the cod recovery plan must not be allowed to become a haddock destruction plan. Our fishermen have faced a heart-breaking dilemma in recent weeks. They can go to sea and destroy their futures by catching billions of juvenile haddock in the only fishing grounds to which they are allowed to go. They have had to discard 90 per cent of those fish dead over the side of the boat, because they cannot bring them to shore. Will the minister listen to what the SNP is saying? The fishermen face the choice of going to sea and wiping out their future or staying at home and letting the bills pile up and bankruptcy creep closer each day. The Government had the power to announce today a compensatory tie-up scheme to remove that dilemma, but it has not taken that route. Our fishermen now face the straight choice of staying at home and going bankrupt in the coming weeks or going to sea and wiping out their future. Is the minister unaware of all the dangers that the industry faces or of what the whole idea of displacement means? I will read from the letter that we have all received from the Macduff branch of the Scottish White Fish Producers Association. It says: "If Fishermen adapt from one type of fishing to another (eg. move from haddock, cod, etc to prawns) or move to other areas for which they have quota then other species and other areas will come under undue and in all probability unsustainable pressure." The minister is putting many smaller fishing communities around Scotland's coasts at particular risk from displacement of effort and the knock-on effect of her policy.  I remind the minister of the safety implications for the industry. Earlier this week, there was a tragic reminder of the dangers that are inherent in the fishing industry when Spanish fishermen were lost off our shores. Our fishermen are under economic pressure to go to sea to find fish to make a living. They will have to seek out deeper waters, go to places to which they would rather not go, and go out in conditions in which they would rather not sail, because they have to make a living and the minister has not answered their call for help. The Government is completely isolated. All our fishing communities were looking to the Government for a tie-up scheme, and so too were the environmental organisations. Scotland's members of the European Parliament support the case for a tie-up scheme, as do three out of the four main political parties in the Scottish Parliament, including, apparently, the Liberals. The cross-party Rural Development Committee wrote to the First Minister urging that a tie-up scheme be considered as a matter of priority. However, one of Europe's most ancient fishing nations has to fight tooth and nail to get its Government to help its industry in its hour of need.

In conclusion, the fishing industry and our fishing communities, which in recent weeks have led dignified, responsible and well-conducted campaigns to highlight the threat to their livelihoods, have been betrayed by the Labour Government today. My message to the Parliament is that if the Government will not stand up for Scotland's fishing communities, it is down to the Parliament to do so, to save 25,000 livelihoods in fragile coastal communities. Parliament can do that if it puts the Scottish Government in its place, stands up for fishing communities and supports the SNP amendment and the Tory motion at 5 pm. I move amendment S1M-1725.1, to leave out from "Financial Instrument" to "period" and insert: "funding from the Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance or other appropriate financial resources to provide financial support to our fishermen during the twelve week closure period in the form of an immediate compensated tie-up scheme and other suitable measures".

When the First Minister next meets his Cabinet, will he ensure that fisheries is at the top of the agenda, along with the farming crisis? On Monday, I met 300 skippers in the north-east of  Scotland and, on Tuesday, I met 70 owners of processing companies in the north and north-east of Scotland. Yesterday, I joined John Buchan of the Fishermen's Action Committee on his vessel the Fairline, at the head of a flotilla of 40 vessels. Today, 500 fishermen from all over Scotland have come to the Scottish Parliament to present their case. Many of them are present in the public galleries. Those fishermen represent 25,000 jobs in Scotland's coastal communities.

Will the First Minister give a commitment today that he will give the short-term aid that will ensure the viability of our fishing fleet and coastal communities? We are talking about less than £10 million that is needed—not next week, not next month, but in the next few days.

The Government's water policy has left many victims in its wake in recent years. Is the minister happy that among its more recent victims are Scotland's voluntary organisations and charities, which are to lose £25 millions worth of water relief over the next five years? Is he satisfied that there was adequate consultation on that decision and will he rescind that decision?

I, too, congratulate Fiona Hyslop on securing a timely and important debate. The purpose of the debate is to highlight the problems that debt causes for society and to pay tribute to citizens advice bureaux the length and breadth of Scotland. In particular, I want to pay tribute to the citizens advice bureau in Aberdeen and the Banff and Buchan bureau, which is based in Peterhead. Both bureaux are both extremely busy and I have had a working relationship with each in recent years. Two weeks ago, I met representatives of the Aberdeen citizens advice bureau. They told me that the number of clients that they had met in connection with debt in the past two years had doubled. The trend is very much upwards. Fifteen per cent of all their new inquiries related to consumer debt and 60 per cent of all repeat inquiries related to consumer debt. The manager of the Aberdeen bureau tells me that consumer debt is now a major social problem in Aberdeen. Many people think of Aberdeen and the surrounding area as affluent. However, statistics highlight the fact that debt can affect people from all social backgrounds and of all incomes. The region has areas of social deprivation and people on low incomes. Those people are hit especially hard by the problem. The cost of living in Aberdeen is particularly high and property costs are high. Most people who work in the city travel to work from outwith the city. There is no public transport so they must use their cars. People must sometimes put fuel on their credit cards, because the alternative is not to get to work. Many people also think that there is lots of cash around the area because of the oil industry. However, because that industry offers fixed-term or short-term contracts, people often get into debt over five years, only to find that they are out of a job in a matter of months, but still have bills to pay. In the Aberdeen bureau, the staff of 60 are rushed off their feet. They are trying to get more volunteers—which speaks volumes about the situation in the area. The bureau deals with virtually all the north-east, apart from Banff and Buchan. There is no bureau between Montrose and Aberdeen. The whole of south Aberdeenshire  and parts of Angus have no access to a bureau. As Duncan Hamilton said, that highlights the difficulties that face rural communities. People either have to spend money to get to a bureau for a face-to-face meeting, or the bureaux themselves have to find the money. Because of local government cuts, it is often difficult to have outreach clinics in rural communities. The Scottish Executive must address that. If a debt line is set up, more work will be created for the bureaux. They want to help people who live in outlying areas, but if more phone calls come in, they will need more resources. I want to touch briefly on three areas in which we can help. First, we must get into communities and give resources to the bureaux and other agencies so that they can give advice in rural communities and urban areas. Let us help community organisations such as credit unions to get off the ground. Secondly, the Parliament must use its powers to change the laws in relation to rogue moneylenders and consumer credit. We must remember what happened with Landmark Home Furnishing Ltd and the number of people who had to save up cash for deposits, but then lost it with no comeback. Thirdly, we must get rid of some daft policies. Water charges are a prime example. Low-income families have been hit especially hard by increased water charges—up to 300 per cent in some cases—in the past few years. The Press and Journal today mentions that many families are being hit hard and suffering from increased debt because of high water charges in the north and north-east of Scotland.

I should begin by congratulating the Scottish Executive and Wendy Alexander—who, it would appear, has just joined the Tories—on her contribution to encouraging enterprise in Scotland. The printing sector must be experiencing boom times, given the number of glossy documents that the Government produces. We must remember that the Scottish economy is diverse and that different companies in different areas have different needs. My understanding is that the priorities in the document are supposed to be the priorities of the enterprise networks, but those will not always be in tune with what other people believe should be the priorities of the networks. It is important that we do not take our eye off the ball; we must not become obsessed with the priorities in this document. After all, the LECs' purpose is to create jobs. Too often, especially in rural Scotland—which I will talk about for a few moments—enterprise companies spend their time retraining people who have been made redundant by other companies. That highlights a significant problem. The Minister for Rural Development has no cash to play about with in this Government. He is responsible for 0.65 per cent of the total Scottish budget and he has discretion over only 20 per cent of that 0.65 per cent, so our rural communities are dependent on the Minister for Enterprise and Lifelong Learning making the right decisions to help generate jobs in rural communities. We must not take our eye off the ball as far as our traditional industries are concerned: agriculture; fisheries; our food industries; and the many smaller businesses in rural Scotland have other priorities. The digital agenda is important and will help those industries to export goods and become globalised. Another priority is to address European regulations that are being introduced, such as the urban waste water directive, the climate change levy—coming from Westminster—and the integrated pollution, prevention and control regulations. They pose a risk to many jobs in fragile communities. Those matters all place our rural industries at a competitive disadvantage. What is the document going to do to address those priorities, which are shared by many of our rural companies? The paper industry is going through enormous  difficulties; what will the strategy do to help it? Even as we speak, thousands of jobs are on the line, many of which are in rural areas. For example, the Donside Paper Co in Aberdeen recently shed more than 100 jobs. Inveresk expects to make a £10 million loss this year, which puts more jobs on the line. Since Labour was elected in 1997, only £4 million has been invested in that industry. How will the strategy help such industries? I will turn briefly to infrastructure. In the north-east of Scotland, Grampian Enterprise spends all its time talking about the lack of a decent transport infrastructure in the area. Of course, such issues are outlined in the strategy document; however, Grampian Enterprise's No 1 priority is to sort out that infrastructure so that existing companies in the area can survive and prosper. For example, the big issue at the moment is the gridlock in the city of Aberdeen, which is causing enormous problems; that is the current priority for those companies. Although the Government has come up with cash to improve the M74, not one penny has been spent on the western peripheral route or other transport improvements in the north-east. The Scottish Government should take a lead in Scotland's massive offshore industry, which is also important to the north-east. The Government is responsible for improving the skills base and education in the north-east—those are not reserved matters. The Government in Scotland should lead on initiatives such as LOGIC and PILOT, which help the offshore industry, because it has its hands on the levers of the issues that matter. The document is entitled "A Smart, Successful Scotland: Ambitions for the Enterprise Networks". If the minister wants us to be smart, successful and ambitious, she should be fighting for Scottish independence to give us the power to create a real enterprise culture in this country.

The report that was published by the Rural Development Committee earlier this week—"Report on the Impact of Changing Employment Patterns in Rural Scotland"—recommends that Scottish Enterprise be given a social remit, as was Highlands and Islands Enterprise. Given the minister's comments, does she support that recommendation?

To ask the Scottish Executive how it will ensure that there are adequate systems in place so that there is an effective response to any emergencies that arise at new waste water treatment plants once they are operational. (S1O-2886)

Is the minister aware that the new waste water plants in the north-east of Scotland are being built and will be operated by Yorkshire Water under the guise of Aberdeen Environmental Services? Safety at those plants will therefore be in the hands of private water companies based in the south of England. Will he now confirm that, contrary to his comments this afternoon, Scotland's water industry is being privatised by the new Labour Government?

I am tempted to repeat the previous question. To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it is taking to alleviate recent transport difficulties in the city of Aberdeen. (S1O-2822)

I appeal to the minister to stop passing the buck. Will she explain why she was able last week to announce a £245 million package for the northern extension of the M74 but unable to offer anything to address the current transport difficulties in Aberdeen? I suggest that the minister joins the First Minister on his visit to Aberdeen a week tomorrow to experience at first hand the gridlock, which causes so much misery for so many families and people who are just trying to drop the kids off at school or to get to work each day. Will the minister undertake to  participate in the near future in a public meeting with the council to discuss her transport policies? Given that 2,500 people turned out at the public meeting two weeks ago, I can guarantee her a huge audience.

Is it not the case that NOSWA and the other water authorities cannot meet ambitious efficiency targets and compete with multimillion pound investment programmes without jeopardising quality of service and safety? Does not that strengthen the case for a temporary exemption from the Competition Act 1998 for Scotland's water industry, before the minister sends it further down the road to privatisation?

The minister cannot stop privatisation; whether there are three authorities or one, they will be dwarfed by private companies.

There are fishing representatives in the gallery today. Every time they come to fishing debates in the Parliament, ministers say that they cannot make commitments because there is a further set of talks round the corner. Whatever the outcome of this week's talks, action by the Executive will be needed in response. Will the minister take the opportunity today once and for all to give a fresh commitment that new money will be made available to help implement whatever measures come out of this week's talks?

Will the member give way?

Will the member confirm—

Will the member confirm whether she has read the minutes of the meeting on 19 December—yes or no?

Will the member give way?

As Jamie McGrigor indicated in his opening remarks, this is an important debate. Indeed, the fact that we are having another fisheries debate so soon after the debate in December, and so early in the new year, highlights just how crucial this period is for Scotland's fishing communities.  It was completely outrageous that within days of the quota deal in December, which short-changed Scotland, European Union officials and civil servants from Scotland and the rest of the UK agreed behind closed doors in Brussels to a plan that would be utterly devastating for Scotland's fishing industry, delivering a second enormous blow to Scotland's fishing communities in as many weeks.

I refer the minister to the minutes of that meeting, which perhaps she has not read. Her colleague, the Minister for Rural Development, can refer to this matter when he sums up. The minutes say: "Member States could accept conditions indicated in (i)." Paragraph (i)(b) refers to "using towed gear of a high mesh size (140 mm)". That is in black and white in the official minutes of the meeting. The proposed plan would not have safeguarded Scotland's fishing communities or fishing stocks. It would have had an enormously disproportionate impact on Scotland's fishing communities while other nations went virtually unscathed. The Shetland and north-east of Scotland fleets in particular would have been hit hard. It was appalling, but perhaps not surprising, that the UK-led civil service team gave consent to that anti-Scottish plan. As a result, the industry has had to go into overdrive, as it is doing this week in Brussels, to change those plans, and it has been on the back foot since the talks began. No other independent member state of the EU would have given consent to a plan that would be so devastating to its industry. If the officials in the Commission had listened to the industry, they would have learned that the proposal for 140mm square mesh was counterproductive and would lead to nothing more than a directed cod fishery. It would achieve none of the objectives and it would restrict our fleet's access to other important white fish stocks. All our fishermen and all members of Parliament accept the need for tough measures, but those measures must be effective and must keep our industry viable. That means targeting spawning grounds and seasonal closures, which are being discussed this week in Brussels. We have to close the key spawning grounds for cod in the 10 to 12-week period to April. The grounds will have to be closed as soon as possible. That will maximise egg production and reduce mortality. Various maps show the spawning grounds, but we have to work with the industry to identify where the  spawning grounds are so that what we do is effective. We have to close spawning grounds no matter where they are, be they in Scottish waters, Norwegian waters, English waters or wherever. We also have to close them at the right times. We must close the spawning grounds to all fishing vessels, including the industrial fishery. A credible conservation policy cannot live alongside the industrial fishery. We cannot allow the valuable food supply that is so important to the regeneration of white fish stocks to be hoovered up by the industrial fishery. December's decision at the quota talks to transfer thousands of tonnes of whiting to the Danish fishery at the expense of Scotland was an enormous blow, but it rubs salt into the wound to think that our officials agreed to a plan on 19 December that again gave an exemption to the Danish industrial fishery, which runs against the interests of conservation.

No, I will not. We have to increase the chances of survival for juvenile fish, which means spreading the use of the 90mm square-mesh panel. However, our fishermen cannot be the lone champions of conservation. Westminster has not even found 10 minutes to implement its side of the bargain. Only one part of the UK is showing a commitment to conservation. Our fishermen feel that their reward for adopting these innovative conservation methods is to have a threat hanging over their livelihoods. All fleets must adopt the square-mesh panel and other measures. Scotland cannot bear the pain alone; it cannot be solely responsible for the regeneration of Europe's fish stocks. All fishermen and, importantly, all environmentalists agree with the measures that have been outlined. The challenge in the short term must be to avoid the displacement of the pressure from the cod spawning grounds to other fisheries, which could have a bad knock-on impact on the prawn fishery in particular in many of our smaller fishing communities on the west coast and elsewhere. Yes, technical measures to avoid that displacement must be implemented as soon as possible, but we also have to consider suggestions such as the funding of temporary tie-ups, which would compensate those skippers who choose to remain in port, to reduce the fishing effort in the short term. In the longer term, we need to fund a decommissioning scheme. There is no way around that. If we have to reduce fishing effort in the longer term, we must introduce a decommissioning scheme that will allow some fishermen to leave the industry with dignity. Today, we need the Government to deliver a  vote of confidence in the industry. That means new investment. We have to deliver a vote of confidence to maintain crews in the industry, so that they do not look elsewhere for employment. We have to keep the banks on board; if they get nervous, many of our skippers will face bankruptcy. We have to announce new investment for the processing industry, which is responsible for 5,000 jobs in Grampian alone. We have to announce new investment to develop new technical measures and to fund decommissioning. In its hour of need, the industry requires an injection of support from the Government. Other countries give their fleets generous support. In Scotland, the position is absolutely pathetic. At the moment, the Government's fisheries budget accounts for 0.035 per cent of the total budget. Fisheries account for less than 1 per cent of Ross Finnie's rural development budget. Of the £5 billion that came to Scotland as part of the comprehensive spending review for the next three years, fisheries benefited from an extra £11 million, half of which, as it turned out, was from Europe. The new Labour Government is prepared to write a blank cheque to protect the jobs of car workers in Sunderland or Longbridge: BMW was offered £127 million to protect jobs at Longbridge and, as we speak, there is an offer on the table to give £40 million to protect jobs at the Nissan plant in Sunderland. However, fishermen who are willing to risk their lives to bring fish to the table, and who sustain an industry that employs 20,000 people in some of Scotland's more fragile communities, do not count. That must change and it must change today. If we do not deliver for our industry in its hour of need, the people of Scotland will not forgive this Labour-Liberal Scottish Executive. The SNP asks for a commitment today that the Scottish Government will deliver for our fishing industry, invest in it and save it. I move amendment S1M-1548.1, to insert at end: "; notes that, while other European Member States provide generous financial support for their fishing industries, Scotland's industry receives minimal support, and therefore calls on the Scottish Executive to announce an appropriate level of new investment in the industry given that such additional support for our fishing communities in their hour of need will ensure that they continue to make an enormous contribution to Scotland."

The minister says that the meetings in December are irrelevant. Can she tell us when she found out about the discussion that took place on 19 December and what involvement the industry had in that discussion?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many pensioners in the city of Aberdeen are expected to benefit from the implementation of the central heating initiative. (S1O-2745)

If the minister cannot give us figures, can she tell us the time scale for delivering the Government's commitment to installing central heating in pensioner households and confirm whether it is dependent on the ballot on stock transfer? If so, why on earth is that the case?

Will the First Minister confirm to his Cabinet and to the chamber whether the European Commission minutes from last week's fishery talks in Brussels are accurate? They suggest that the London-led team agreed to a cod recovery plan that will devastate the Scots fishing industry. Will the First Minister give a commitment to the chamber and to the Scottish fishing industry that his Government will support our own industry's proposals at next week's talks? In return for the sacrifice that will be made by our fleet to regenerate fish stocks and to save the industry, will he give an undertaking that he will match in this country the support that other states give to their fleets?

Given that the member has only a few seconds left, will he discuss the Liberals' approach to the bill and their policy?

I would like to begin by congratulating Rhona Brankin on steering through her first bill in her new ministerial role. I suspect that it was not her easiest journey. I would like to thank the clerks  of the Rural Affairs Committee and the legislation team who have guided us all through the maze that is the Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill. I thank all the anglers, scientists and fishery boards for the advice that they gave to the committee and to the SNP. I commend all those members who have contributed to a tricky, yet worthwhile, debate. The fact that Parliament has considered and debated salmon fisheries so early in its life is welcome, given the sector's importance to the nation. The SNP will be voting for the bill. The fact that catch figures for salmon are at their lowest since records began in 1952 and have been in constant decline since 1973 means that we have to take action urgently. However, it is a great pity that Labour did not act sooner. After all, the party was elected in 1997 with an angler's charter that promised the world. We know that the Nickson report has been left on a shelf in St Andrew's House to gather dust for the past three years. It took international pressure to embarrass the Government into introducing even the modest bill that we are debating today. The SNP will vote in favour of the bill, but with a great deal of reservation because the only other option is to do nothing about the crisis that is facing salmon. Anglers, environmentalists and fishery managers throughout Scotland share our reservations. The bill represents a missed opportunity to do more about marine mortality. Ministers cannot simply bury their heads in the sand for ever. The minister need look only at the debate that is raging in relation to salmon farming and the environment to see what happens when serious issues are swept under the carpet. In the interests of salmon conservation, the minister should turn her attention to that controversial debate, which would benefit both the salmon farming industry and the freshwater fisheries sector. The Scottish Government must face up to the many other threats to Atlantic salmon that fall outwith the scope of the bill, which, as we know, addresses only part of the problem. More proposals have to be agreed with the sector and discussed in this chamber as soon as possible, which is why amendment S1M-1502.1 makes that plea. We have to address predation of our young salmon at sea and the impact of environmental change, industrial fisheries at sea and the drift net fishery off the north of England, albeit that particular issue has at long last been tackled. Of course, we also have to examine disease among salmon at sea, for example sea lice, which have been mentioned. Those are just some of the issues that require ministers' urgent attention. We have to democratise Scotland's salmon  fisheries. We have Victorian structures that have been subjected to nothing more than cosmetic changes over the years. However, I welcome the Deputy Minister for Rural Development's significant concession that a green paper addressing those issues will be published. We must address the complexity of salmon legislation in Scotland. It is a dog's breakfast. I am delighted that, during the debate in the past few months, the Deputy Minister for Rural Development has acknowledged that fact. Let us tidy it up as soon as possible. Despite our reservations, the bill has benefits. Despite its narrow scope, it is a tiny step forward. More significant, the bill has, for the first time, sown the seeds of a national policy on salmon and sea trout. It also acknowledges for the first time that the Atlantic salmon is a national asset and is part of Scotland's national heritage. It is a duty of Scotland's Government to protect the national interest and conserve our freshwater fisheries to secure the benefits for the environment and our rural economy. This must not be the end of the process, but simply the beginning. The minister said in the stage 1 debate: "The bill will secure the long-term future of wild salmon fisheries."— [ Official Report , 23 November 2000; Vol 9, c 337.]  I suspect that even the minister's most enthusiastic supporters agree that those words may come back to haunt the coalition some day soon. Having expressed what SNP members think are the benefits of the bill, as well as our reservations, we ask the Parliament to support the bill, taking into account the SNP's amendment, which we also ask the Parliament to support. I move amendment S1M-1502.1, to insert at end: "and notes that the measures for the conservation of salmon which the Bill will allow are limited in nature; urges the Scottish Executive to bring forward an action plan designed to conserve salmon in all phases of their life cycle, and recommends that, as the existing corpus of statute law relating to salmon fishing and conservation is both complex and fragmented, a Consolidation Bill be brought forward as soon as practicable."

Members will be delighted to learn that I take a similar view of my amendment, given that its subject matter will also be covered by the green paper that the minister announced today.  Amendment 16 not moved.

Further to the point of order, Presiding Officer. Would not it have been in order for the minister to make his point when he saw the business bulletin this morning, before the debate began?

The minister has covered many of the arguments that I intended to make in opposing amendments 7 and 10. Time limitation has been a difficult issue for the Parliament, but the minister has pointed out that the bill allows a time limit to be put on regulations. In most cases, that ability should perhaps be used.

Mr Fergusson accepts that the current minister will keep to the intention; I can assure him that that will also be the case when there is an SNP minister. Some regulations should not be time limited. We do not want to be in a position where, for example, regulations on information that has to be collected annually have to come to the Parliament annually and we have to have an annual consultation process. That would not be practicable. The first half of Alex Fergusson's amendment 7 is fine, but the second half gives the SNP a problem. Jamie McGrigor talked about a three-year period during the stage 1 debate on the bill, but his amendment 10 refers to a five-year period. There is no consistency. Both amendments are flawed, and we will oppose them.

I welcome the minister's response to my amendment. The publication of a green paper is a major new development, and it is a significant concession from the Executive that we welcome. The purpose of the new Scottish Parliament is to democratise and modernise Scotland. The district salmon fishery boards are ideal candidates for reform, which is why the SNP welcomes the proposed green paper. I ask the minister to incorporate the points that are made in my amendment into the green paper. I am delighted that the debate on my amendment has spurred the development announced by the minister. For that reason I am happy to withdraw the amendments.  Amendment 1A, by agreement, withdrawn.  Amendment 1, by agreement, withdrawn.

Amendment 1 is the amendment that nearly got away. I am not simply amending my own amendments for the sake of it. Amendment 1 was originally lodged in the name of John Home Robertson, who will be familiar with its wording, because he wrote it. However, John Home Robertson withdrew his support for the amendment, which is why it now carries my name. The crux of amendment 1 is that it will ask ministers to report on "whether, in the opinion of the Scottish Ministers, the constitution or composition of district salmon fishery boards should be altered in order to contribute towards the conservation and management of salmon." Amendment 1A would require that to happen within one year of the bill being passed, which we expect to happen later today. We cannot divorce conservation from management issues. The better the management structures, the more likely it is that conservation measures can be implemented in an efficient manner. For historical reasons, the management structure of salmon fisheries is largely dominated  by landowners, albeit angling and other interests play a greater role than ever before. The Salmon Conservation (Scotland) Bill will increase the powers of fishery boards, making it more important than ever that we get things right. As most members will know, fishery boards come in all shapes and forms. Some boards have local authority representatives co-opted on to them, whereas others do not. Some boards have co-opted representatives of environmental interests, whereas others have not. In some districts, the netsmen feel under threat from upper and lower proprietors on the boards. In others, lower proprietors feel under threat from upper proprietors. As they currently stand, the district salmon fishery boards belong to the Victorian era. We must drag them into the 21 st century. A proper review of their role and effectiveness is long overdue. During the stage 1 debate, the Minister for Rural Affairs, Ross Finnie, said: "The issue is under review and we concede that it requires further consideration."— [ Official Report , 23 November 2000; Vol 9, c 370.]  In the stage 2 debate, when speaking to his amendment, the former Deputy Minister for Rural Affairs, John Home Robertson, said: "Many boards work conscientiously in the public interest. However, their constitution is still fundamentally flawed and unrepresentative." He went on to say: "I hope that the requirement to make such a report"— as is outlined in the SNP amendment— "will help to keep the momentum for progressive and constructive reform of the management of Scotland's freshwater fisheries."—[ Official Report , Rural Affairs Committee , 12 December 2000; c 1531.] The SNP proposes that we embed the amendment and seeks a commitment from the Executive to bring back a report within one year so that we can ensure that ministers have addressed those important issues and continue to do so. Amendment 1A would allow us to democratise our salmon fisheries sooner rather than later.  Amendment 1B is about openness and transparency. In the land debates in the Scottish Parliament, we have talked about who owns Scotland. Everyone agrees, except perhaps the Tories, who roll over to be tickled every time they see a landowner, that Scotland should know who owns our land. The SNP believes that that principle should be extended to privately owned fisheries in Scotland. We should be able to ascertain to what extent our regulations have been successful.  I hope that the Scottish Executive will give the Parliament a commitment to bring forward a report along those lines on a regular basis—not just one year from the passing of the bill, but annually or biannually thereafter. That would give us a picture of the state of Scotland's salmon fisheries, let us know what regulations are in force, what the latest catch figures are, the number of boards in existence throughout Scotland and the membership of those boards. In recent months, I have lodged several parliamentary questions, the answers to which demonstrated that the Executive does not know who owns Scotland's private fisheries, and does not have details of the people who sit on Scotland's salmon fishery boards and who take so many important decisions about Scotland's natural heritage. The SNP is asking that we remove the mystery from Scotland's salmon fisheries. If property companies in London are buying up Scotland's national heritage, let us ensure that such information is in the public domain. We want to know about it. Let us ensure that the public can access that information and that it is transparent. Such a report would bring all that information into the public domain and would place the onus on the Government to make it public, rather than rely on the good will of salmon fishery boards. Such a report would act as a point of reference and could only make future conservation measures easier to formulate and more effective in practice. I seek Parliament's support for all my amendments. I move amendments 1 and 1A.

I thank the minister for giving the Scottish National Party a copy of her statement in advance. The fishing industry expected a tough year ahead, but not one quite as tough as is now anticipated, following the Government's failure last week to stand up for our fishermen in Europe. The minister's statement proves that new Labour members are masters of spin. I lost count of the number of times that she used the words success, progress and gains. The reality is that the industry will lose anything between £60 million and £100 million of income as a result of the cuts that were agreed by Rhona Brankin last week. Hundreds, if not thousands, of jobs are now on the line in Scotland's fishing communities. Our fishing communities have been left to pick up the pieces following the minister's complete failure to win a good deal for Scotland last week. However, I remind members that that is not entirely Rhona Brankin's fault; the First Minister is also responsible. He sacked the former Deputy Minister for Rural Affairs with responsibility for fisheries only weeks before the most important negotiations in decades. At the time, the industry warned the First Minister that that was a foolish action, and that view has been vindicated.

Rubbing salt into the wound is the minister's monumental Brussels blunder that will allow 6,000 tonnes of whiting that should be caught and processed by the Scottish industry to be transferred to the Danish industrial fishery. That is a slap in the face for our fishermen, who have adopted conservation measures only to see those young fish hoovered up by the Danish industry.  Why is the Danish industrial fishery being spared the pain that is being inflicted on the Scottish industry, and why did the minister allow Denmark to gain at Scotland's expense? Will the minister speak to the Commission and demand the decommissioning of the Danish industrial fishery or a ban in the interests of conservation? In the past few days, we have heard enough warm words from the minister. This morning, we are looking for commitments, not just another fudge in the form of another task force that will take months to report. Can the minister give us a commitment that new money will be made available for decommissioning, a temporary tie-up of the fleet and other conservation measures to ensure that the industry is able to cope with the difficulties that lie ahead? Can she tell us whether she has requested more financial aid for the industry from Europe and the UK Treasury? The industry is asking not for ifs, buts or maybes, but for a clear-cut commitment that the Government will deliver new funding to rescue it from the deal that the minister secured last week.

The level of rural deprivation clearly relates to the extent to which people can afford to live in our rural communities. Can the minister tell the chamber whether the cost of living in rural Scotland has increased or decreased in real terms since he took office?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has any plans to measure stress-related absence among teachers. (S1O-2697)

Aberdeenshire Council recently informed me that 11 per cent of primary school teachers in that area are off work through illness. The teachers tell me that that illness is stress related. Should not the minister investigate stress-related absence among teachers throughout Scotland, to find out the impact that his policies are having in our schools so that he can change his policies to give teachers less misery?

I welcome the document and hope that it makes a difference to Scotland's health. In his foreword to the health plan, Henry McLeish says that he wants to build a 21 st century health service in Scotland. Many medical staff tell me that they must deliver the service using antiquated medical equipment. In Grampian, 25 per cent of general medical equipment is beyond its standard life. Will the minister outline what action the health plan will take to address that worrying situation? Will she instigate an investigation into the age profile and condition of medical equipment in Scotland's hospitals?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has made any representations to the Independent Television Commission in connection with the planned schedule for Scottish regional news bulletins. (S1O-2648)

That is absolutely shameful. Is the minister aware that what was formerly the "News at Ten"—which was shifted to 11 pm—will once more be scheduled at 10 pm after January, but that the regional news, which was also shifted, will stay at 11.20 pm? Does the minister accept that that represents a downgrading  of Scotland's national news? In a letter to me, Sir Robin Biggam, the chairman of the Independent Television Commission says: "I hope that ITV might reconsider what I believe would be the more natural and preferable place for the regional news headlines." Does the minister agree with the chairman of the ITC—

Does he agree—

Will Mr Davidson give way?

I never said that.

Will the member give way?

The member talks of reforming the CFP. Will he clarify what the Conservative policy is, given that some elected parliamentarians in his party think that we should withdraw from the CFP?

I congratulate the Deputy Minister for Rural Development on her first speech on sea fisheries, and I pay tribute to her predecessor, John Home  Robertson, for his contribution to the fishery sector in Scotland over the past year and a half. Next week's fisheries council will be the most important for many years. Thousands of Scottish jobs depend on its outcome. To say that the European Commission's proposals make grim reading would be an understatement. We are used to the worst-case scenario being painted by the Commission officials, but we know that major cuts are on their way, and that the Norwegian agreement will impose cuts of 40 per cent on cod and 16 per cent on haddock in the North sea. So far this year, 80 per cent of the cod landed in the UK has been landed in Scotland, as has 96 per cent of the haddock and 92 per cent of the whiting. That highlights just how important those white fish stocks are to the Scottish economy and to the Scottish fishing industry. Next week's European fisheries council will be more important for Scotland than for just about any other country. This morning, the SNP intends to convey to ministers what we think their priorities for next week's council and for their return to Scotland ought to be, to ensure that the industry can cope with the challenges ahead. We all recognise the urgent requirement to regenerate the stocks, especially those of cod, that are important to the Scottish fishing fleet. However, we have to get the catching levels right for the other vital stocks, as well as seeking the best deal for cod at next week's fisheries council. It will be a key priority for our minister to minimise the link between cod conservation measures and the TACs that will be set for other stocks. The Norwegians managed that last week, as the minister indicated. The Norwegians managed to set TACs without using the crude approach that was adopted by the Commission. They linked the need to conserve cod with the catch figures set for the stocks of other white fish. The Norwegians also took into account the enormous strides that have been made with the 90 mm square-mesh panel, which has been adopted by the Scottish industry—again, as mentioned by the minister. The Commission appears to have overlooked that when making its calculations. The Commission also appears to have exceeded some of the scientific advice with regard to certain stocks. I will turn to a number of the Commission's proposals that caused particular concern. First, there is the proposal for a 20 per cent cut in west coast and North sea stocks of nephrops. The minister must argue for that link with cod to be broken. There is no science to back up a 20 per cent cut in that valuable stock for the Scottish fishery, as the nephrops fishery sustains many of Scotland's smaller ports, as well as some of the bigger ports, such as Fraserburgh in Alex  Salmond's constituency. Cod is rarely caught as a bycatch in the prawn fishery; indeed creels, which are often used, do not catch any white fish. That cut therefore has to be taken out of the equation at next week's council. Monkfish is another valuable fish under threat. The Commission proposes a 25 per cent reduction. The industry tells me that that is worth £2.5 million to Scotland. Again, there is little science to justify that cut, and the minister must commit to ensuring that that matter is revisited at next week's council. A 25 per cent cut is proposed for west coast herring, despite the rollover in the North sea. That is the subject of much confusion and debate, and must also be revisited and eliminated at next week's council. One fish stock that does not appear to be under threat with regard to the allowable limits for catches is sand eels. The Danish and Norwegian fisheries are hoovering up much of the juvenile fish in our seas, and have a legal bycatch of 50,000 tonnes of fish stock, including a lot of the white fish that are currently under threat. It is not just the bycatch that threatens Scottish stocks: that fishery also removes much of the food supply for young haddock and other white fish that are so important to Scotland. We must pursue either a ban on such industrial fishing at next week's council or the decommissioning of the boats. We cannot seriously talk about conservation measures and sustainability and allow that rapacious fishery to continue. I come now to technical conservation measures. Closing down the industrial fishery is one such measure, but we must embark on a major recovery plan. Quotas are a blunt instrument. They are there for sharing out fishing rights among member states. They control the fish landed, not the fish caught. That is why technical conservation measures are so important. However, the EU and our own Government here in this country, and previous Governments in Westminster, have completely failed to implement many conservation measures in recent years. As a result, stocks are now under threat. I welcome the fact that the European Council will consider that point following the fisheries council next week. We must build on the adoption of the 90 mm square-mesh panel by the industry, and we should congratulate the industry on its initiative. Selective fishing gear is one of the crucial ways forward, but the amount of work done in recent years by Fisheries Research Services on selective gear is quite pathetic. Of the 240 members of staff who work at the marine laboratory at Torry in Aberdeen, there are eight who sometimes work on developing selective gear to conserve fish stocks, and 40 who work on stock assessment. That  means that there are 40 people who tell us how low stocks are, but only eight who are trying to do something about it. We need to re-examine the research that the Executive is conducting and set up a stock regeneration unit with adequate resources and personnel in the Fisheries Research Services. We have to consider other technical measures. The closure of spawning and nursery areas, particularly for cod, should be top of the agenda at the fisheries council meeting next week. We should be closing for the spawning season between January and March to give our juvenile fish the chance of survival. We have to consider introducing a days-at-sea scheme. That idea is controversial in the industry, but it must be examined if we are seriously to restrict fishing efforts. We do not want a scheme that is not sensible and will not work. The commissioner is suggesting that under such a scheme our fishermen would not be allowed at sea for more than 130 days a year. That is unacceptable, as it would not leave many boats viable. We cannot have other boats fishing in our waters while our boats are tied up. Other countries have to impose similar conservation measures. I would be grateful if, in closing, the minister would confirm that compensation will be payable to Scottish boats, should they have to tie up temporarily. We have to consider restructuring the Scottish fleet, which will involve decommissioning some of our boats. We need new cash for a scheme to do that, which should be introduced as a matter of priority. Indeed, we need new cash for all the measures that I have outlined, and we need all countries on board as soon as possible. On her return from Europe, the minister should introduce general economic and social measures to help the Scottish fishing industry. We all realise that there will be short-term pain for long-term gain. We need help for fish processors. When we remember that 33 per cent of employment in Alex Salmond's constituency, Banff and Buchan, and 20 per cent of employment in places such as Berwickshire, the Western Isles and Shetland is dependent on fisheries, we realise how important the sector is. We cannot afford a decline in fisheries in those areas. If the minister really wants to deliver a good deal for Scotland at the fisheries council next week, she has to request that Scotland take the lead in negotiations for the whole of the UK. Labour and Liberal ministers have been thoroughly disappointing since the Parliament was established, with their couldn't-care-less attitude to Scotland's fishing communities. It is time that they got the bit between their teeth and started fighting for our fishermen both in Europe and in Scotland. Given that two thirds of the UK industry is based in  Scotland, it is absurd that the Scottish minister does not lead for the UK. Our minister is semi-detached from all the major decisions that are taken on fish stocks in Europe—that is absurd and has to change.

I understand that the UK fisheries minister was in Dublin yesterday to discuss with the Irish fisheries minister the strategy for the meeting of the fisheries council next week, at which the future of Scotland's fishing industry will be decided, but our ministers were absent. Scotland has to take the lead because we cannot trust Westminster. Westminster is the Parliament that took 6,000 square miles of Scottish waters and that transferred the Rockall waters from EU to international jurisdiction and told us that that transfer would have no detrimental impact on Scottish stocks. Westminster cannot find 10 minutes to put through the statutory instrument to apply the 90 mm square-mesh panel to the English fleet, despite the fact that the UK promised the Norwegians last year that we could get our act together in introducing conservation measures. Only one part of the UK—Scotland—is fulfilling its side of the bargain. Westminster pulled the plug on UK fish media advertising earlier this year, without even telling the Scottish Parliament. Indeed, in fishing debates at Westminster, Scottish MPs quite often outnumber English MPs. The Government in London has never treated our fishing industry as a priority and never will do. Scotland can no longer afford to have the Government turn a blind eye to the challenges facing our fishing industry.

I accept that. It is just a pity that our minister did not go over to Brussels to meet Franz Fischler. Why did he have to come to Scotland to speak to our ministers? Surely our minister should be in Brussels to fight and put the case for Scotland's fishing industry.  Fishermen are used to being ignored by ministers. They could be forgiven for thinking that devolution never happened. On the fuel issue, the Government turned a blind eye to everything that happened and was no help at all. Our scallop fishermen are still waiting for help from the Government. We have to move away from a situation in which the Government just responds to events, leaving our industry to deal with constant crisis management. We have to change the concept of fisheries management in Scotland. We have to introduce zonal management soon, so that our fishermen are at the heart of negotiations from day one, and are not brought in late in the day. In conclusion, 20,000 jobs in the industry depend on the outcome of the fisheries council meeting next week. Our industry will have a bright future, if the right decisions are taken and the Government starts fighting tooth and nail for our fishing communities. The world authorities tell us that there will be a 40 per cent increase in demand for fish products in the next 10 years. We must ensure that our industry is fit, and is still around, to meet that demand. Down the centuries, the industry has made an enormous contribution to Scotland. Indeed, some fishermen have made the ultimate contribution to bring fish to our tables. Now it is time for the Government to give something back. I move amendment S1M-1433.1, to insert at end: ", and to negotiate the transfer of lead responsibility for European Union fisheries negotiations from Her Majesty's Government to the Scottish Executive in recognition of Scotland's dominant position within the UK industry; questions the basis on which many of the proposals tabled by the EU Commission for the December Fisheries Council were formulated; calls for the urgent implementation of a recovery plan for fish stocks comprising a range of technical measures to achieve the aim of sustainability; further recognises that adequately funded economic and social measures will also be required to ensure the viability of our fishing communities and achieve a restructuring of the fishing fleet; calls for an early introduction of zonal management to ensure that the unacceptable decision-making process that prevents stability in the fishing industry is not repeated, and notes that the Labour-Liberal coalition's policies have left the Scottish fishing industry at a competitive disadvantage."

Will the minister give way?

On the subject of being part of a larger member state, will the minister confirm whether there have been any meetings between the UK Minister for Fisheries and the Countryside and fisheries ministers of other member states in the past couple of days to discuss the strategy for next week's EU fisheries council? If so, was the minister party to those discussions?

rose—

I welcome the minister's comments on the need for more consultants which has been recognised in Grampian. Does the minister also accept that for every new consultant we need new support services, such as nurses, and that that has to be addressed also?

I congratulate Mike Rumbles on securing this evening's debate and on sporting a Highland outfit. I think it is fair to say that the subject of the debate was generated by a meeting of the Grampian dental committee that many of us recently attended. We were stunned by what we heard because none of us had appreciated how serious the situation in Grampian was becoming. Many of the concerns expressed then have been covered by Mike Rumbles and Lewis Macdonald; I share those concerns. Cost is a barrier to people going to the dentist. One of the fuel protestors who came to the Parliament a few weeks ago said that it cost him £5 for petrol to get to his local dentist. The dentists we spoke to in Aberdeen said that they would get a better financial award as a vet taking out a dog's teeth. One dentist told us that he saw a 76-year-old man who had to pay 80 per cent of his own  costs, which meant a £100 bill. As Mike Rumbles said, we also have to address the very serious situation that is developing in hospital dental services. There are incredible pressures on that service in Grampian, and waiting list problems for all three hospital specialties have gone on for four years. Decades of funding neglect of hospital dental services in the north-east of Scotland is the reason for that. The few consultants who are delivering those services are run ragged; they are covering the jobs of a number of consultants. They say that local dental hospitals are around 40 per cent below the correct staffing level. As a result, patients are being passed from pillar to post. It is not just a problem of overworked consultants: ultimately it is patients who suffer. Mike Rumbles referred to waiting lists. For restorative treatments, people have to wait 66 weeks for their first consultation and four years for treatment. He raised my next point as well. The British Dental Association and British Medical Association recommend that there should be one consultant for every 300,000 people. Despite that, the same surgeon currently serves the Grampian and Highland areas. That combined area should have three consultants; it has only one. For orthodontic services, the recommendation is one consultant for every 200,000 people; Grampian has only two instead of the recommended three. For oral and maxillofacial surgery, the recommendation is for one consultant for every 150,000 people; Grampian has only two instead of the recommended four. The conditions that require such treatment are debilitating and people need treatment quickly. It is important to remember that children receive orthodontic treatment at a certain stage in their development and that dentists play an important role in identifying mouth and throat cancers. As Mike Rumbles suggested, the solution is a dental training facility. We have to build more training posts into the Grampian area and to provide incentives for people to move there to live. At the moment, it is very expensive and that is apparently putting people off. I ask the minister to support a general review of dental services at general dental practitioner and hospital levels in Grampian. Please do not think that this is just Grampian MSPs coming along and asking for more funding for their area. Ours is a genuine case.

Is the minister aware that many organisations in rural areas of north-east Scotland are looking forward to the establishment of drugs courts, which will help tackle drug misuse in rural areas? When will the first drugs court in Scotland be established? Will the north-east be one of the first areas to enjoy the benefits of these new courts?

I will begin by paying tribute to the European Union, given that no one has mentioned that one of the founding motives for setting up the European Economic Community, as it was at the time, was to avoid war in Europe. Here we are, many generations later, and no generations since  1945 have had to participate in the carnage of war. That is a tribute to the success of the European Union. Today, we have to make the most of Scotland's new devolved status in the interests of our people. Devolution offers an opportunity not only to raise our profile in Europe, but to try our utmost to influence European events and policy, which have a huge impact in so many areas of this country. We must not remain cocooned in our offices in the Parliament in Edinburgh, simply responding to decisions that are taken elsewhere in Europe in our absence, with no one to speak up for Scotland's interests. The fate of many communities in this country depends upon the outcome of deliberations in the European Union. Consider rural affairs. Of the Scottish Executive rural affairs department's budget, three quarters comes from Europe. Our Minister for Rural Development is nothing more than a postman for the European Union, so it is imperative that we have the utmost say over decisions that are taken and the rules that are laid down on the spending of rural affairs budgets. Time and again, Opposition members in the chamber have asked the Minister for Rural Development at question time about a scheme to help the pig industry. We have said to the minister, "Why can't you do something about this? The decision is taken in Europe. Why can't you go to Europe and speak to the agriculture and fisheries commissioner or whoever?" The fishing industry is a prime example of how no one is speaking up for our interests in the European Union. Surely, when 70 per cent of the UK's fishing industry and 90 per cent of its aquaculture industry are based in Scotland, as of right the UK's representative at European negotiations on fisheries matters should be a Scottish minister. That makes absolute sense. In that way, this Parliament would have real clout in Europe.

I have a feeling that the minister wants to intervene.

The minister simply refuses to accept the fact that the official representative of  the UK at fisheries negotiations is the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, who is responsible for the English and Welsh fishing industry. That is unacceptable post-devolution. Members should consider the example of how we are trying to get tier-testing for the scallop industry. We are told by Europe that it will be well into next year before we get a new scheme to help our scallop industry to get its markets back, and we are told, "Sorry. That's the way things are. We can't do anything about it." If Scotland had its own representatives in Europe and the clout of an independent member state, Europe would sit up and listen to us. We should not just sit here in Edinburgh and say, "That's the way things are. We can't change them." We should not be saying that to our fishermen. There is a tendency for the Government to blame all the unpopular regulations on Europe, and take all the credit for the good regulations that come out of Europe. That is unacceptable. I could list such regulations endlessly, but I see that I am running out of time. We need our own representation in the formal and informal structures of the European Union. We know that many decisions are taken behind the scenes, and that the fine details are worked out before we get to the Council of Ministers, yet Scotland has no formal representation in any of the structures behind the Council of Ministers. We have to stop playing catch-up. Let us consider the situation when crops in Scotland were contaminated with genetically modified seeds. The UK minister in London did not tell the Scottish minister that that had happened. GM technology is a very important issue. Had we had our own representation in Europe, we would have found out immediately about the contamination. We should not have to rely on UK ministers remembering to tell the Scottish Government. Indeed, decisions on GM crop trials are taken in Europe. Despite the fact that there are protests in Scotland about proceeding with GM crop trials, the Minister for Rural Development can turn round and say, "Sorry. That is a regulation decided in Europe." Of course, that was a regulation into which Scotland had no input, although it is a massive issue. Finally, there is a poster all over Parliament today announcing that there will be a presentation by the Swedish ambassador to the UK, called "Sweden's Presidency of the European Union: Proposals and Priorities". Surely whatever is good enough for Sweden is good enough for Scotland. Would not it make sense for the Swedish Parliament to have a poster saying that the Scottish ambassador to Sweden will discuss the Scottish presidency of the European Union? Surely we have as much status in Europe as other  small countries such as Sweden, and we should have equal rights.

Will the minister give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to ensure an adequate supply of qualified medical staff for Scotland's hospitals. (S1O-2559)

I thank the minister for her answer. I trust that she is aware of the great concerns, especially in Grampian, that exist about the lack of qualified medical staff, particularly consultants, who are available for recruitment. Will the minister confirm how many vacancies exist for consultant posts in Scotland? Will she also confirm that the ratio of consultants per 1,000 of population in Scotland is 1:6 and that that ratio does not compare well with other European countries?

Salmon are fish.

In relation to salmon management, many members—including John Home Robertson—have made the point that district salmon fishery boards are not fit for the 21 st century, as they tend to be dominated by the aristocracy and retired senior military figures who own fishing rights to Scotland's national heritage by virtue of their birth. Should the membership of those boards be widened to make them more representative?

I agree whole-heartedly with many of John Home Robertson's comments. Does he agree that it would be worth considering bringing pre-emption rights into play—we have a community right to buy for land—for fishing rights? We would then be able to shift some fishing rights into community and angling association ownership.

Will Mr Rumbles give way?

I congratulate the minister on her first speech to Parliament in her new role as Deputy  Minister for Rural Development. I am sure that she will find the freshwater fisheries portfolio almost as challenging as the sea fisheries portfolio. After one and a half years of our new Parliament, I welcome the fact that we have finally got round to debating freshwater fisheries, and particularly the fate of the Atlantic salmon. The Atlantic salmon is part of Scotland. When people around the world think of the Atlantic salmon, they think of Scotland. Our rivers and lochs have for centuries provided some of the finest salmon, sea trout and brown trout fishing in Europe, if not the world. The importance of salmon to Scotland has long been recognised. A few weeks ago, I went to Pictavia, the visitor attraction in Angus. I discovered that the Picts had carved salmon on 18 of their most important stones. The salmon also features on Glasgow's ancient coat of arms. The protection of salmon was probably the subject of legislation before the 11 th century, and was first recorded by the Scottish Parliament in 1318. Here we are in 2000, at it again in the reconvened Scottish Parliament. Once again, we are considering legislation to protect salmon, to ensure that it continues to have an association with Scotland. Our motivation for being here today is to recognise not only the historic role of salmon, but its economic and environmental role in modern Scotland. Angling tourism is a multi-million pound business. Given that in recent years our rural communities have not had their problems to seek, the last thing they need is for the salmon to disappear from the rivers and to lose all the benefits that angling brings. It would be a financial and a national loss if the salmon were to decline in the rivers to which they have returned since time immemorial. The Scottish National Party supports the general principles of the bill because of the urgent need to adopt new conservation measures. We welcome the constructive stage 1 report from the Rural Affairs Committee and congratulate the committee and the clerks on that useful report—I do not say that just because I am a member of the Rural Affairs Committee. The Scottish National Party expresses severe disappointment, however, at the complete disinterest shown by Westminster and, so far, by the Scottish Executive in Scotland's rich freshwater fisheries and in the fate of the Atlantic salmon in particular. The bill is a flimsy, reactionary response that will merely scratch the surface of the problem. It is reactionary because it reacts to the catch figures, which, as outlined by the minister, are the lowest since records began in 1952 and which have been  in constant decline since 1973. The bill is also a reaction to international pressure. David Dunkley, who gave evidence to the Rural Affairs Committee, said: "The scientific advice that we have received from the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea has related to reducing the exploitation of multi-sea winter fish. In the past, the view has been that, compared even with our colleagues south of the border, we have been rather short on regulations addressing that issue."—[ Official Report , Rural Affairs Committee , 19 September 2000; c 1142.] That quotation speaks for itself.

Mike Rumbles should read the Official Report of the Rural Affairs Committee's meetings. He would see that I am reiterating some of the concerns that I expressed in the committee. The SNP does not oppose the principles of the bill, which is what we are debating today. To be frank, the bill is also a reaction to the Government's embarrassment at the fact that, for three years, the Nickson report has been sitting on the shelf at St Andrews House, gathering dust. The Nickson report was produced in 1997, yet the bill to implement its proposals will not be on the statute book until 2001. The bill scratches at the surface, because, while it will give powers to fishery boards and ministers to conserve salmon and sea trout stocks in our rivers, for example to encourage spawning, it does not address many of the wider issues. I appreciate that some of those issues were addressed by the minister in her opening speech. The bill must be the beginning, not the end, of the Government's response to the decline of the salmon. It will have a limited impact only on salmon stocks, and unless the bill is accompanied by action, it will not be effective. A number of other issues must be addressed, which the minister touched on and which the Rural Affairs Committee's stage 1 report covered. For example, we need more research into what is happening to the salmon's food supply at sea, the impact of industrial fishing, the role of climate change and the predation at sea of young salmon. We also need research into the impact of fish farming, about which many people have expressed concern. Thankfully, the Scottish Parliament's Rural Affairs Committee and the Transport and the Environment Committee, using their initiative, are setting up an inquiry into some of those issues. The minister must give us an assurance today that the freshwater fisheries  laboratory will burn the midnight oil until we have answers to some of those problems. Drift netting was banned in Scotland in 1962, yet it continues in England. London has international commitments, just like the rest of us, and it has a moral responsibility to address that issue. I ask the minister to take the matter seriously and to go down to speak to the minister in London to try to get some results. All we get from the Executive is vague statements about what has happened so far, but we do not know whether Scottish Executive ministers have met the ministers in London to discuss that matter. The minister must give us a commitment to do more. What can be done in the international community? Given that we have our own Government in Scotland, the home of the Atlantic salmon, now is the time to lead. We must not become passengers in the conservation of salmon. The Rural Affairs Committee's report refers to the need to gather information, and we welcome the fact that the bill will give powers to do so. However, in order for the Government to have a proper policy, we need not only catch figures and scientific figures for the rivers, but basic information, such as the economic value of the fishery to Scotland. The most recent study on that was conducted in 1991 and was based on 1988 figures. We also need basic information on who owns fishing rights in Scotland. Earlier this year, I asked a number of written questions. I asked the Executive to tell me "how many (a) public and (b) private owners of fishing rights derive income from angling." The response from the Executive was: "This information is not held centrally." I also asked "how many (a) public and (b) private owners of fishing rights there are and where this information is publicly available". Again, the response was: "This information is not publicly available."— [ Official Report, Written Answers , 2 August 2000; Vol 7, p 503-4.]  That that information is not publicly available and that it is not possible to find out who owns fishing rights in Scotland is despicable. Last month, I asked the Executive whether it would "list the membership of each District Salmon Fishery Board." The response from the Government was: "This information is not yet held centrally."—[ Official Report, Written Answers, 18 October 2000, Vol 8, p 295.]  Surely those answers speak for themselves—the Government is completely disinterested in Scotland's salmon fisheries.

That is an interesting response from the minister, but I think that perhaps he should speak to his civil servants, because the last sentence of one of the responses that I received from the former Deputy Minister for Rural Affairs, Mr John Home Robertson, said that the department intends to compile a database of that information now. Clearly, the Executive feels that that information can be gathered and made available. I am trying to highlight the fact that the Executive has not done that until now.

The Executive is going to create a database—

In answer to parliamentary question S1W-10237, the minister said—

I apologise, Presiding Officer, but it is not often that members catch ministers out and it can be enjoyable. I should mention the need for the decentralisation of fisheries policy in the freshwater sector and the role of district salmon fishery boards. The SNP welcomes the fact that the Executive adheres to the principle of devolved management. Ministers need powers to act in the national interest, but the SNP fully supports the principle of decentralised fisheries management, as does the Rural Affairs Committee, which acknowledges that support in its report. Parliament must not shy away from developing or reviewing the role of the district salmon fishery boards. We know that they come in all shapes and sizes and that there are tensions within the boards—between upper and lower proprietors, for instance. We must seek best practice and widen representation on the fishery boards. Some have taken positive steps by inviting local authority  representatives and angling interests on to their membership, which is welcome. When making policy decisions, ministers must use the experience and knowledge that currently exist on fishery boards. It is one thing to have active and interested proprietors playing a constructive role, but I have heard of London-based property developers buying up fishing rights to help them sell riverside developments. Should not we now be considering incorporating fishing rights into the right-to-buy legislation as part of the Government's plans for land reform? Surely it would be better to have community trusts or non-profit-making organisations, such as angling associations, running our fisheries, rather than London-based property speculators who are out to make a quick profit. Salmon legislation in Scotland is massively complex. It is mind-boggling, and the Rural Affairs Committee report highlights that aspect of the problem. Things could get even worse and it could become even more complicated to run our freshwater fisheries. The 1997 Nickson report mooted the idea of area fishery boards. The Angling for Change consortium submitted to the freshwater fisheries review the idea of area fisheries councils. The EU water framework directive wants river basin management plans for Scotland. Everyone accepts that we must move towards a more holistic approach to the management of whole river systems, given that we have multi-species rivers and given the link between fish stocks, habitat and the general environment. However, the minister must address the many layers of management that are in the pipeline. We must simplify salmon legislation and freshwater fisheries management. The SNP supports the bill. Although the bill amounts to little more than a panic measure, it does, for the first time, sow the seeds of a national policy on salmon and sea trout. It also acknowledges for the first time that the Atlantic salmon is a national asset and part of Scotland's national heritage. It is the duty of Scotland's Government to protect the national interest and to conserve our freshwater fisheries to secure benefit for our rural economy and environment. The Scottish Executive must deliver more than just panic measures, however. It must deliver a package of proposals that take into account the whole life cycle of the salmon. In short, we require some political determination and vision to ensure the long-term survival of the Atlantic salmon, which will bring economic and environmental benefits to Scotland. While asking Parliament to note our concerns, the SNP is happy to support the general principles of the bill.

On the subject of self-regulation, does Janis Hughes agree that, in the interests of transparency, it might be useful for the Executive to indicate which parliamentary questions have been planted? Perhaps those answers could be segregated in a separate part of the business bulletin or, in the same way that questions that relate to a member's registered interest have an " R " at the end of them, planted questions could have " SE ".

I welcome this debate. A desire to tackle poverty in Scotland, which the Westminster Parliament had failed to do in decades and centuries, was one of the reasons why people supported the establishment of the Scottish Parliament. When we think of Scotland's social problems, we tend to think of rundown housing estates in urban areas or the appalling health statistics in our cities. For that reason, I was delighted that a section of the report dealt with the situation in rural Scotland, which has been referred to by many other members. Poverty is as bad in many rural areas as it is in urban areas, albeit on a smaller scale. Poverty relates to economic status, not the size of the community in which someone lives. As Mike Rumbles said, poverty in rural areas is often hidden. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation published a report earlier this year called "Exclusive countryside? Social inclusion and regeneration in rural areas". The title gives the gist of the report, which says that "Those experiencing social exclusion in rural areas are dispersed amongst apparent affluence . . . factors which are more important in rural than urban areas include low pay, inadequate pensions, poverty in self-employment, lower levels of benefit uptake, and fear of stigma in small communities." It is all very well for an oil worker earning £100,000 a year who moves up from London to Aberdeenshire and for whom local services are not a problem, but people from Aberdeenshire or the Highlands generally face two choices. One is  to leave their community and go elsewhere to make their living and have a decent standard of life. The other is to stay in their local community and experience poverty. Social justice in rural communities means access to public services of a standard similar to that which exists elsewhere in the country. Good health services are necessary. In some parts of Grampian, it is difficult to see a dentist. It is hard to get a proper health service in many rural communities. Similarly, many are experiencing cuts in education provision due to local government cuts caused by decisions taken by the Scottish Executive. Housing in rural areas is of a relatively low standard and there is a shortage of low-cost housing in many communities, yet it took a lot of campaigning against Wendy Alexander's right-to- buy proposals on rural housing association properties to get her to change her mind. If social justice is important, why do we have to go to such lengths to try to persuade ministers to give people in rural communities decent public services and social housing? We should not have to go to that trouble. Young people in our rural communities deserve social justice as well. In the vast majority of rural communities, it is impossible to get access to decent youth facilities—they do not exist. Rural communities deserve decent social services, yet community agencies that tackle drugs, such as Grampian Addiction Problem Services, are losing all their cash because of cuts in local government funding. We are losing social services—the situation is going backwards, not forwards, in rural Scotland. We need to bring many more modern industries into our rural communities as well as sustain our traditional industries. The cost of living is a problem: fuel has already been mentioned, as have water charges, which were the subject of a statement this afternoon. Until Scotland gets its independence in two or three years' time, this Parliament is going to have to punch above its weight to deliver social justice in our rural communities and elsewhere. When the next progress report is published next year, I ask the Executive to publish a section that details milestones of progress in our rural communities.

I warmly welcome today's statement, which was long overdue, from the new Minister for the Environment, Sport and Culture. I am delighted that the Executive has adopted yet another SNP policy. The statement was not so much a ministerial statement as a confession of guilt that the Government has failed low-income households in the past few years, given that water bills in Scotland have risen by more than 200 per cent since Labour came to power. However, better extremely late than never. The scheme that was outlined in the statement is welcome. It will help the North of Scotland Water Authority, which has been hit particularly badly by rising water bills. However, it appears to members of the SNP that the scheme offers little to water customers in the east and west of Scotland. Will the minister confirm that householders who live in a band A or band B property in Glasgow and who receive council tax benefit will not benefit from the scheme? Is not it the case that the scheme will treat the symptoms rather than the root of the problem, given that the Government's policy has forced water authorities to raise their income through water charges so that vital investment can be made? Will there be a long-term change to that policy? Will the Labour Government continue to force a tap tax on low-income households in Scotland?

At the next meeting of the Cabinet, will the First Minister raise the issue of the potential crisis that faces Scotland's fishing industry, given that cod stocks—which are vital for the Scottish fleet—may be at dangerously low levels? The European Union fisheries commissioner, Franz Fischler, visited Parliament today and spoke to MSPs. He indicated that the European funding programmes could be amended to allow compensation to be paid to the Scottish fishing fleet, should fishermen have to cease fishing for cod. Will the First Minister support that amendment? Will he make the necessary matching funding available to protect the viability of Scotland's coastal communities?

The member may be aware of the organisation with a memory project in England, which tries to move away from the blame culture and to get at the root of problems in cases of compensation claims, such as stressed workers or the lack of good equipment. Does the member agree that we need such a study in Scotland?

I would like to continue the theme of transparency and accountability in the NHS in Scotland that many members have talked about today. In particular, I want to talk about the need to let people know what is happening on the ground in the NHS. I will concentrate on the condition of medical equipment in our hospitals, consider the implications for patient care and seek a response from the minister, who, unfortunately, is not in the chamber to hear my speech. A few months ago, there was an enormous furore in the Scottish Parliament when it was revealed that there was a lack of investment in equipment in our hospitals. We also dealt with the issue of the underfunding of radiology equipment, which was brought to the fore by Professor Jamie Weir of Grampian University Hospitals NHS Trust. The minister must understand that the radiology issue is only the tip of the iceberg with regard to the condition of medical equipment in our hospitals. It is extremely difficult to get national information on the state of medical equipment in our hospitals, yet that is essential to the delivery of proper patient care. I had to conduct my own investigation in Grampian. Correspondence from management in the NHS trust told me that 25 per cent of general medical equipment in that area's hospitals is beyond what is referred to as its standard life. In other words, a quarter of general medical equipment in the area should have been replaced long before now. I recently lodged a parliamentary question about cancer treatment waiting times in Tayside and discovered that that area has the longest waiting  times for cancer treatment in the country. One of the reasons given by the health authorities in the area is that the equipment is old and has broken down. What are the causes of that? There is a general lack of investment. In its letter to me, the medical management of Grampian told me that matters are "less than satisfactory". On general medical equipment, the letter says: "There has often been a gap of over £500,000 between what is requested each year and the funds that the Trust were able to make available under this heading." There is also the issue of how funds are allocated. Often, it is a case of use it or lose it. A radiology department might want to buy a machine that costs £1 million, but is unable to save money from the £500,000 it gets each year—it all has to be spent. The minister has to sort that problem out immediately. There are implications for the reliability of Scotland's medical equipment. As happened in Tayside, equipment breaks down if it is old. If equipment is not modern, we cannot maintain a proper standard of health care in Scotland. In the Royal Aberdeen children's hospital, one piece of equipment gives one tenth of the dose of radiation treatment that the older equipment gave last year. It will bring enormous benefits for the health of patients. Generally, however, the standards are falling behind. A new computed tomography scanner in Aberdeen hospitals is able to examine 40 patients a day, but the infrastructure in the hospital makes it possible to examine only 20 patients a day: the same as was possible with the old machine. The state of our medical equipment and the lack of infrastructure mean that we cannot keep up with modern standards in the health service. If we ask our medical staff to use older medical equipment, there will be implications for patient care. We know that claims for compensation worth many millions of pounds are made against hospitals every year. What is causing those adverse events, as they are called, in the health service? Perhaps it is the fact that our medical staff are being forced to use out-of-date equipment that is not appropriate to the job in hand. Let us try to find out what lies behind those claims, as is happening in England. I call on the minister to ensure that there is an immediate audit of medical equipment in all Scotland's hospitals. We must find out what should have been replaced before now, so we can address that problem. The national health service needs a national policy and national statistics. I agree with the modernisation of the health service that the minister talked about, but I do want the medical equipment to be modernised as well as the bureaucracy.

I thank the minister for giving way. The Scottish Parliament information centre's briefing on groundwater charges states: "SEPA anticipated receiving some 10,000 applications for Authorisation to discharge listed chemicals . . . To date SEPA has received 2,600 applications." That is clearly a major shortfall. I have two questions for the minister. Did SEPA budget for 10,000 applications and, if so, who will make up the financial shortfall? Does not that highlight the fact that the minister will have to go back to the drawing board in any event?

Congratulations to Alex Fergusson on securing the debate and congratulations to the Deputy Minister for Sport and Culture on his new post. I have a lot of sympathy for Alex Fergusson's motion. We are not talking about a lot of money, but the charge has the effect of kicking farmers when they are down. Farmers do not have troubles to seek just now. They face poor prices at the markets; the cost of fuel, which is crippling the industry financially, is another disadvantage they have compared to farmers in other countries and the recent poor harvests with terrible weather meant high drying costs. To put the £123 into perspective, we have to remember that the average income of farmers is only £4,600. It is projected that that will fall by another 22 per cent to £3,600. They do not have a huge income in the first place from which to pay the charges. I therefore have a lot of sympathy with the motion. The standard reply that we have all had from the former Minister for Transport and the Environment is about consultation. I cannot reconcile that with the fact that farmers are saying that they oppose the charge, and the fact that the National Farmers Union of Scotland has written to all MSPs to say that it is campaigning against the charge. I would like to hear the minister's comments on the nature of the consultation. Who was consulted, and what were their views? Did some farmers contact the Executive to say that they were in favour of the charge? If Mr Wilson is listening, I would like to know where Mr Finnie, the Minister for Rural Development, stands on all this. Can Mr Wilson confirm whether Mr Finnie has been in touch with the environment department about the charge? If so, what were his views? That is important, because we are always hearing about joined-up government from this Executive. I tend to think that SEPA has been denied cash from the Government. Some figures that I received from SEPA today show that its grant from the Government last year was £18.6 million, but that the figure for 2000-01 fell to £17.3 million. It seems that the Executive is denying SEPA the cash, and that SEPA is then turning to the farmers to fill the gap. That is unacceptable—which brings me to the  spending review. The Executive has just been given an extra £5 billion over three years. It could surely have found a couple of hundred thousand pounds from the spending review to pass to SEPA to cover the cost of the groundwater charge, which does not sound like a lot of money to me. I appeal to the minister to revisit the issue, to consider the various options and to go back and speak to the industry. We could delay the charge for a couple of years and hope that there is an upturn in the industry. We could consider offsetting the charge by removing other regulations and charges. We should also consider the farmers' income. I ask the minister for a positive response. Please do not simply reiterate the standard reply that we have all heard from the environment minister.

I, too, welcome this important debate. My speech will focus on the extremely worrying situation in the city of Aberdeen and in the rest of the north-east of Scotland. When we think of Aberdeen, we think of the city that is home to the offshore oil industry and granite buildings, but how many people know that Aberdeen is also home to 2,000 to 2,500 heroin users? Last year, 25 mainly young lives were lost as a result of the use of illegal drugs. All that in a city with a population of just over 200,000 people. Examining the situation in Aberdeen and the north-east of Scotland will allow the Parliament to grasp the enormity of the drugs problem. Tackling drugs and their debilitating effect on society is the biggest challenge facing the Parliament. We need to explore new avenues and innovative solutions, and learn from other countries' success in tackling the problem. That is why I welcome today's debate on drugs courts. Aberdeen is just a small city, yet tens of thousands of people there are victims of the drug culture: the addicts, whose lives follow a  downward spiral and who cannot see life beyond the next syringe or the next pill; the many families who find changed personalities in their households—Hugh Henry referred to the tragedies that many families experience; and the 25 families who lost loved ones last year. However, in the city of Aberdeen alone, there are also thousands upon thousands of victims of crime, not to mention the number in the rest of Grampian. It is no coincidence that Grampian police have to deal with record levels of crime—the highest level of crime in the whole country. The number of house break-ins is double the national average. We must remember that someone has to steal roughly £100,000 worth of goods to feed a £30,000 a year habit. According to Grampian police estimates, 70 to 80 per cent of the crime committed in Aberdeen is drug-related. Lots of people in Aberdeen live in fear; they will not leave their home because they are convinced that if they leave, it will be broken into for the fourth, fifth, or—in some parts of the city—even the 10 th time. There are old people who are afraid to walk the streets because of a recent spate of assaults on older people by folk looking for cash to feed their drug habit. There are newsagents who have given up their businesses because they are fed up of being held up by syringe-wielding people who are trying to get cash to feed their habit. They have gone out of business out of fear for their safety. We need drugs courts to break the link between drugs and crime. The cost of crime in every city and community in Scotland is enormous. We must get away from the revolving door syndrome, which has been mentioned by other members. Most of all, we must help the people who want help, who know that they will go to prison and still have their drug addiction when they come out. Those people are crying out for help to solve their drug addiction. We should lock up people who have a history of violence and the drug pushers, but we should help those who can be helped. The justice system must deliver better solutions. I am absolutely convinced that, in many cases, if we take the addiction out of the person, we will take the criminality out of them as well. That is the key. In a city such as Aberdeen, removing one addict from the scene will remove around 360 to 400 crimes a year, which is what we want to do. I appeal to the minister to state unequivocally that pilot drugs courts will be implemented, and to ensure that Aberdeen and the north-east of Scotland are top of his agenda.

I am sure that the Lord Advocate will be aware not only of the victims' outrage but of the fact that the police feel that they are fighting crime with one hand tied behind their back when they catch criminals only for the courts to release them to reoffend while awaiting trial. The Minister for Justice recently told me that, in 1997 and 1998, that occurred 1,300 times in north-east Scotland alone in cases involving robbery, house-breaking and drug offences.

What is even worse is when a criminal caught committing a crime when on bail is then given bail again, which undermines the delivery of justice. Will the Lord Advocate tell us how often that happens and what he is going to do about it?

Will the minister give way?

rose—

rose—

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister clarify whether his party attaches any time scale to the delivery of proportional representation for local government, and whether the continuance of the coalition depends on it?

Will Robert Brown give way?

Will Robert Brown give way?

My first question was stolen by Alex Johnstone and my replacement question by Elaine Murray but thankfully I have a couple of questions in reserve.

I welcome the minister's statement. Many aspects of IACS have been running sores for many years. I trust that speed and simplicity will be the guiding principles from now on. As other members have said, the current system is a bureaucratic nightmare. I visited some farmers in Maud, in Banff and Buchan, recently and I could not believe the expense and the amount of paperwork involved. That is why I welcome the  comment at the end of the minister's statement about the planned development of electronic systems. I ask for assurance that there will be no costs to the industry when we come to implement those systems. Will the minister elaborate on what stage the development is at? Secondly, many people want next year's IACS payments brought forward, as has happened in previous years. That is especially the case in the north-east of Scotland, where the arable sector is suffering from poor harvests and high drying costs. I appeal on behalf of the industry for the minister to refer to that in his reply.

I will keep my comments brief, because I sense that members are looking forward to decision time. I congratulate Tavish Scott, who will go down in history as the promoter of the first member's bill to go on the statute book in the first Scottish Parliament for 300 years. Members' bills are an essential part of the democratic process in our new Parliament. The bill may not be controversial, but it is very worth while and has travelled through  the system smoothly. Let us hope that the Parliament treats all members' bills in an even and fair manner. Thankfully, in this Parliament there are few tricks or underhand tactics that can be used to stop members' bills. That is more than can be said for that clapped-out, draconian place in London. It is pathetic that an uncontroversial bill such as this, which can help remote communities in northern Scotland, was stopped in Westminster on more than one occasion by an MP standing up and shouting "Object." If that happened here, our Presiding Officer would step in and tell the member to sit down and shut up. The bill is also an illustration of how good the Parliament has been for fishing, although the Government's record has been rather more disappointing. At Westminster there has been no time to discuss fishing priorities in Scotland or members' bills. I do not want to go over the detail of the bill, because Tavish Scott has done that adequately. I welcome the fact that there was widespread support for the uncontroversial bill. Indeed, the Rural Affairs Committee spent less than 20 minutes discussing the bill at stage 2. Any measure that reduces conflict between our fishing organisations must be welcomed. I ask Parliament to support the bill.

After some careful thought, the SNP has decided not to support Jamie McGrigor's amendment. In a few moments, Tavish Scott will outline the reasons for opposing the amendment and we concur with him. The Rural Affairs Committee was contacted by 16 organisations regarding the bill and not one raised the point made in the amendment. Jamie McGrigor lodged similar amendments at stage 2, which were withdrawn. I recognise that those amendments were not identical to the amendment that we are discussing today, but they referred to the same point of argument. The amendment would not make a material difference to the bill, but it introduces some ambiguity, which might lead to legal challenges. Given that the whole purpose of the bill is to avoid legal challenge and unnecessary conflict, we intend to oppose the amendment.

I appreciated the value of the creative industries to Scotland when I saw the front page of the first edition of business a.m. , and read that Chris van der Kuyl, who founded VIS entertainment, which Nicol Stephen mentioned, is about to float the company for £80 million. What was appalling about that was that he is the same age as I am. I now wish that I had not stopped playing Space Invaders on my ZX81 computer back in the 1980s to go and deliver SNP leaflets. Perhaps I am taking a less profitable route. I support any strategy to promote the creative industries in Scotland. They have been responsible for the creation of many indigenous companies, which can only be good for Scotland. They provide many people with the personal satisfaction of being able to express themselves creatively while making a living from doing what they love. The creative industries will lead to more inward investment in Scotland. People will set up companies in this country if there is creative talent here. Perhaps more important, a successful creative industry in Scotland could stop the brain drain—we could move from brain drain to brain retain. We have heard of software companies in Scotland that are going overseas to poach the best talent. That is very good. The enterprise network and our venture capitalists must do their utmost to co-ordinate an approach to ensure that our small companies can get off the ground and our talented people can go self-employed. I intended to mention Tayside and I am doing  that not just because Kate MacLean attacked the SNP for not mentioning local examples. Dundee is in my parliamentary region. One has only to consider what is happening in Dundee to see the benefits of the creative industries. Last year I read an article stating that the software sector alone is growing by 15 per cent a year and will create an extra 30,000 jobs in the next 10 years. Tayside is certainly tapping into the benefits. We have projects such as interactive Tayside, as mentioned by Nicol Stephen in his opening speech. We have the international centre for computers and virtual entertainment, based at the University of Abertay in Dundee, which works with the games and electronics industries and which is extremely valuable. The University of Abertay is also piloting the creative industries entrepreneur programme, which promotes self-employment for young people with tremendous creative talents who are leaving university and which introduces them to the business world. Those are the sort of things that we need more of throughout the country, not just in Dundee; we want them in Aberdeen and in other cities. I can see the benefits of such projects on my own doorstep. We must look to the future, and education is the key. We are talking not only about high-level education, for example the software course at the University of Abertay which is very successful; we are talking about the primary school level. We are talking not only about software and games design; we are talking about arts and music, as other speakers have mentioned. It is imperative that we encourage talented people so that Scotland can get an economic and cultural contribution from them. However, as Irene McGugan mentioned, there have been massive cuts in specialist provision in schools in Aberdeenshire. In the primary school sector in Aberdeenshire in 1998, we had 52 full-time equivalent specialists; now we have only 29. That is because of the Government's policy decision to cut local government funding—a decision that is hitting the country's ability to develop the creative industry sector. Music, art and drama teaching are all suffering. I was at a wedding recently at which a tremendous fiddler played in the band. She said that if she had not had the tuition when she was at primary school in Aberdeenshire, she would not be going to the Royal Academy of Music in London, as she is just about to do. She is a talented person who was encouraged while at primary school, but other people will lose out because of the Government's policy. There is a lack of co-ordination in the television and film sectors. We must get all our enterprise companies and local authorities to develop that. Glasgow, Edinburgh and the Highlands and  Islands have strategies, but other areas do not. Let us not promote the creative industries in Scotland at the expense of our more traditional industries. The whisky industry, the food industry and the offshore sector are creative industries too. Let us not put all our eggs in one basket by putting all our cash into some creative industries while forgetting about our more traditional industries.

I welcome the minister's announcement that extra money will be given to police forces in Scotland. However, as he will be aware, there is a running sore in the north-east of Scotland due to the fact that, down the years, Grampian police have received the second-lowest level of funding per capita in Scotland, despite the fact that Aberdeen is the house-breaking capital of Scotland and other crime figures are rising, and that the police force has additional responsibilities in policing Balmoral and the North sea. Can he assure us that, following the distribution of the extra cash that has been announced today, Grampian police will not have the second-lowest level of funding in Scotland?

Will the minister give way?

In Grampian there is a perception that the poverty indicators that underpin the funding distribution formula in the Arbuthnott report discriminate against the region because it is perceived to be wealthy. However, there are as many pockets of poverty in Grampian as there are elsewhere and the demands on the NHS are just as great. Does the minister accept that the indicators discriminate against Grampian and that it will not get its fair share under the new formula?

This is a speech.

Will the member give way?

Dr Murray is talking about moving debt away from low-income households to higher-income households. Given that the water bill will introduce measures to ensure that services are affordable, does she agree that assistance should be introduced for low-income households as part of that programme, to help them to pay their astronomical water bills?

On Monday evening, I met 20 local government shop stewards from City of Aberdeen Council. The message that they wanted me to bring to the minister is that morale in the council is at rock bottom. There are two main reasons for that: deteriorating wages over the years and the fact that, because of Government policies, vital services for the elderly and other groups are having to be cut. One lady had moved from nursing into local government in 1993. If she had stayed in her old job, she would now be earning £2,500 more. Does the minister think that that is acceptable? If not, what will he do about it?

I appreciate that the issue of GM crop trials is difficult for Ross Finnie. After all, Charles Kennedy, his UK leader, is against the trials and Ross Finnie here in Edinburgh is for the trials. John Farquhar Munro in the Highlands is taking on board local concerns, while Nora Radcliffe in the north-east of Scotland is ignoring local concerns. Can the minister tell us exactly what Liberal Democrat policy is on consultation with local communities? Will he undertake to come to Daviot in Gordon in the north-east of Scotland, and to the Highlands, to appear in person at a public meeting and hear local concerns for the first time?

I want to say a few words indicating the SNP's support of amendment 40, in the name of Tavish Scott. In the chamber—of all places—we should know that ignoring proper consultation with the fishing industry will always come back to haunt us, when it comes to legislation that might impinge on fishermen's livelihoods. There is a perception that marine national parks were bolted on to the bill and that not much thought was given to consequences or implications. Indeed, the minister and SNH admitted as much when they came before the Rural Affairs Committee. However, the SNP recognises that there is a case for referring to marine national parks in the bill, and the fishing industry has worked with environmental interests to agree the wording of Tavish Scott's amendment. I am sure that all members will welcome such a development. That said, the initial e-mail that the Scottish Fishermen's Federation sent to the Rural Affairs Committee stated: "If measures were planned for the near shore, they should have been granted specific and separate time for discussion and legislation. It is conceivable that if that had been done, the bill before the parliament would have been significantly different and may have gone further in addressing the needs of Scotland's fragile coastal communities." Those comments highlight fishing communities' concern about the bill. However, things have moved on. We now have Tavish Scott's amendment, which is supported by  both environmental and fisheries interests. It offers a degree of comfort and assurance to the fishing communities, and I urge Parliament to support it.

Did Mr Rumbles not move Tavish Scott's amendments when he was absent from the Rural Affairs Committee?

I appreciate that Des McNulty has some questions on local representation, but he lodged amendments of his own, which he withdrew in time for today's debate, just as he did at the Rural Affairs Committee. Why did he withdraw his own amendments?

I welcome the minister's statement, given the importance of the Competition Act 1998 to the future of the water industry in Scotland. However, I was thoroughly disappointed to read some of the details of the minister's statement in yesterday's press. Perhaps, in future, ministerial statements could be kept for the chamber. I am also extremely disappointed by the delay in the minister's announcement—we were promised it months ago. The announcement should not have come four months after the 1998 act came into force—it should have come four months before that happened, so that we would not have to play catch-up. I trust that the minister agrees that the best way forward for the water industry is for the three authorities to become efficient and competitive publicly owned enterprises. That would enable them to fight off competition and to keep down water bills in Scotland. None of us wants any part of Scotland's water industry to fall into private hands. While the minister says that competition might offer the opportunity to ensure that the public authorities deliver the best possible services to customers in Scotland, we know that there are serious threats to that opportunity. The overwhelming view in Scotland is that our water industry must remain firmly in the public sector, yet competition places a big question mark over the industry's future under the new Labour Government. I trust that the minister agrees that it would be bad news if privatised water companies were to cherry-pick the biggest industrial customers, leaving the rest of us to pay higher water charges to fill the gap. I would like straight answers to the following questions. First, does the minister agree that water bills have rocketed because the new Labour-Liberal coalition that runs the Government has refused to contribute one penny towards the massive investment programme that is currently under way in the industry? We face the danger  that private companies will feel able to compete against the water authorities in Scotland, enforce the act and poach the big commercial customers. That would leave us with a smaller customer base, from which authorities would have to raise their income. Secondly, in order to avoid such undermining of our publicly held authorities, will the Scottish Executive dip into its pocket—or Gordon Brown's pockets—to finance the measures that the authorities will need to implement to see off the competition? Even better, will the Executive reduce next year's water bills to make the water authorities more competitive? Finally, it would be appalling if—just as the water companies in England are turning their back on privatisation and becoming publicly owned—ministers here were prepared to stand back and allow our industry to be privatised via the back door.

On a point of order. The details of the statement appeared in five newspapers yesterday. Presiding Officer, can you clarify whether that is in order for ministerial statements?

Elaine Thomson's motion rightly refers to the fact that, in Aberdeen, which has the widest pay differential, women get only 64.2 per cent of men's earnings. I suspect that one of the reasons for that is the fact that the offshore industry and the oil and gas industry in general is reliant on engineering and high-tech qualifications. Those courses tend to be male dominated at universities and in further and higher education. Does the Executive have any plans to encourage more women to study those courses to help to bridge the gap in sectors such as the oil and gas industry?

I, too, very much welcome the report. At election time, we all speak to various business organisations, such as the Federation of Small Businesses, or at business breakfasts organised by local chambers of commerce. The No 1 item on the agenda is always the local economic development networks and the changes that the business organisations want to see. I congratulate the Enterprise and Lifelong Learning Committee on this report, which we can hold up as something that the Scottish Parliament is doing for business in Scotland.  As someone who, before I was elected to Parliament, spent a year and a half working in local economic development for one of Scotland's local authorities, I can tell members that I am not surprised by the findings of this committee report. I have come across every problem that it has identified and many of the tensions that exist between the various agencies that are at work in Scotland. Indeed, it was about a year before I understood what each of those agencies does. If I found it confusing, heaven knows how people outside the system find it. I worked at the inward investment department, which used to host lunches for potential investors in the area, perhaps from overseas. I like lunches as much as the next man, but there were quite a number of them. At the lunches, there might be one person who was visiting the area from overseas, two representatives from Locate in Scotland who had come through with them, two people from the local enterprise company, people from the inward investment section of the local authority, and other people from local initiatives. That was quite confusing, not only for people at the table like me, but for the inward investor. He or she did not know what people were doing there and where the joined-up strategy was. That duplication is wasteful—we must bear in mind the fact that such events may be taking place every week, in every area of the country. The report identifies many of those problems. One of the recommendations that I welcome is for the establishment of a national business service. I am glad that the report refers to the possibility of delivering that service at a sub-LEC level. In my constituency, Enterprise North East and the Gordon Enterprise Trust provide a very good service and have a good relationship with local businesses. I am pleased that such organisations will be able to continue to deliver that service. When I worked at Dundee City Council, we had a small scheme to encourage exports from the city whereby financial assistance was offered for companies to exhibit at overseas trade exhibitions. That was a worthwhile service. I understand that it will be transferred from local authorities to the new business service. On the face of it, that sounds good, but we must remember that local authorities introduced those services to fill a gap, rather than to keep themselves busy. If we are to transfer the services to a bigger national authority, we must fill the gap at local level, where there is a clear need for such schemes. I am glad that local authorities are at the centre of many of the recommendations made by the committee, particularly those concerning the local economic development forums. Local authorities can always make small local economic development budgets go a long way, unlike some of the local enterprise companies. Those  companies are very good at turning up at photo calls when a successful project has been announced, taking centre stage and taking much of the credit, but many of them are top heavy. In some LECs, 80 or 90 per cent of the staff have the title of manager. They are all very well paid, but I am not sure whether we are getting value for money from them. That is why I am delighted that the committee's report refers to the need for independent monitoring. What we find is that Locate in Scotland, local enterprise companies and, often, local authorities are all taking credit for the same jobs, although perhaps only one of the agencies has paid a key role in delivering them. It is imperative that we have a clear-cut system. We must end confusion and simplify matters. If people want a policeman, they can go to a police station. If they want to buy groceries, they can go to the supermarket. However, people in many parts of the country who want to start a business do not know where to go. Parliament can be proud of this report and hold it up as a shining example of the way forward for the delivery of local economic development in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is aware of any new proposals by the European Commission to reduce the size of the fishing fleet. (S1O-1758)

I welcome the minister's comments. As he will be aware, the fishing industry in Scotland is working on technical conservation measures, so when the idea was mooted that officials in the European Commission might be making proposals to reduce further the size of the Scottish fishing fleet, it was met with absolute fury. Will the minister confirm that it is his policy to oppose cuts in the Scottish fishing fleet not just at the Fisheries Council in June, but at any future Fisheries Council?

rose—

This has been an interesting debate, with many useful contributions from around the chamber. The debate has been much more useful than the document that we are debating, which is as empty as the speech that Mike Rumbles delivered. Expectations of our new Scots Parliament in our rural communities are quite rightly high. Many people already feel that Edinburgh is a million miles closer than London ever was; they feel that our Parliament is much more accessible. However, it is fair to say that many of us are suffering from glossy document fatigue. When I  read this latest one, images are conjured up of Ross Finnie playing "Supermarket Sweep", racing around St Andrews House, grabbing off the shelves any product that could be remotely linked to rural Scotland, and shoving it into his rural affairs shopping basket, which he then brings to the chamber to show us the goodies that he has collected—or should I say nicked, given that the Scottish Executive is not paying a penny towards many of the initiatives that the document mentions? I will refer briefly to our traditional industries, which must be at the heart of the strategy for developing rural Scotland. It is vital that we consider rural affairs as much more than farming and fishing—a genuinely new approach is required. However, we must not forget the traditional industries, which contribute enormously to the economy and which are more than just job providers, because they are woven into the fabric of so many of our rural communities. We must help them to innovate, diversify and manage change, but at all costs we must ensure their survival. I now refer to the concept of joined-up government and the joint ministerial committee on rural development, which we have heard much about from the minister. Rural affairs is more than fishing and farming—that is where joined-up government must come into play. That is much more than a cliché; it is an important concept. The difficulty is that we do not really know what the joint ministerial committee has been doing, what it has been up to and what it has delivered since it started to meet. It is enigmatic and mysterious. I suggest that the next time it meets, the joint ministerial committee should invite ministers such as Wendy Alexander to attend; her right-to-buy policies, extended to rural housing associations, have caused fury throughout Scotland. Our rural housing associations had to go to war to try to get her to realise the damage that her policies would cause to the availability of affordable housing in rural communities. Most of all, the next time that it meets, will the committee please also invite Jack McConnell, the Minister for Finance? Does Jack McConnell have any idea how his local government settlement is affecting rural Scotland? Other members, such as Alex Johnstone, mentioned that point during the debate. There have, for example, been cuts of £13 million in Aberdeenshire Council's budget. That hampers its ability to help rural communities to develop. Aberdeenshire Council is even cutting two thirds of the number of public toilets. What sort of message does that send out at the beginning of the 21 st century?  The truth is that, under this Administration's financial settlement, our rural communities are being rolled back; they are being returned to the dark ages. That is appalling. Many local authorities are being forced to close their local council offices. They cannot provide young people with proper facilities. Perhaps if the minister listens, he will be able to respond to those points later. As many others have mentioned, retaining young people in our rural communities is imperative if those communities are to prosper and survive. However, young people are dying to leave their communities because of a lack of facilities. That issue must be addressed—it is inadequately addressed by "Rural Scotland: A New Approach". The document also talks about the importance of education, but local authorities are having to cut back on their educational provision. Cathy Peattie mentioned the importance of voluntary groups and the role that they play in rural communities, yet most of their funding comes from local authorities, and that is being cut as well. The budgets of drug agencies, which play a crucial role in rural Scotland, are being cut as well. Some of them, in rural areas of Aberdeenshire, faced closure recently because of those cuts. There is much in the document about transport, yet we hear that some local authorities are talking about cutting their two-lane highways to single track because they cannot afford to maintain them. Civilisation in rural Scotland has been rolled back under this Administration. A recent article in The Press and Journal referred to a briefing paper that was published by Robert Gordon University, which "warned pockets of rural poverty across the region have been ignored in fixing council spending limits. And it highlighted statistics on deprivation, drug-taking, and poor health." It goes on to say that the conclusions from the report "apply to rural areas across the North and North-east, in Angus, Tayside, Moray, and Highland." That is the reality. It is a pity that the document has been used as yet another delaying and stalling tactic; more shops will close, more banks will close and the heart will be ripped out of many more rural communities while we await a true and genuine response from the Executive to the many problems. How can we trust the Executive when we look, for example, at page 40 of "Rural Scotland: A New Approach"? Alasdair Morgan referred to this in his opening speech. The Executive says: "We will invest £1,800 million over the next three years to modernise water industry infrastructure."  What a cheek. How can we trust a word that the document says when the Executive is claiming that it will invest £1.8 billion in the water industry, when it is people living in the north and north-east of Scotland who must foot the bill for that £1.8 billion? The Executive is not contributing a penny from the block, yet it claims in the document that it is contributing £1.8 billion. That is nothing short of lies and we need less of that. We must be much more honest with the rural communities. If we are going to be honest with the rural communities, we must talk about the reserved powers in Westminster and the damage that they are inflicting on our rural communities in Scotland. Petrol is the biggest issue in rural Scotland right now. That is emphasised at the public meetings that the Rural Affairs Committee has held around Scotland. When committee members ask the people attending those meetings what the biggest issues facing them are, they are told: petrol, petrol, petrol. We took a straw poll at a public meeting in Dingwall a couple of weeks ago, which was attended by 70 people from around the Highlands and Islands. We asked how many of them had travelled there by public transport: not one hand went up. Every single person who went to that meeting to speak to MSPs had to travel there by private car. That is the reality and the Executive cannot bury its head in the sand. What does the minister think when people in villages, in the north of Scotland for example, look out of their windows and see the oil rigs sitting on top of the biggest oil reserves in the country, but know that their communities have no transport links and they have to pay the highest price for petrol in the whole of Europe? The strength of the pound is another issue about which the Executive cannot bury its head in the sand, given the damage to rural businesses that is being caused by cheap imports. Ministers will find it difficult to make a real difference to our rural economy while they have one hand tied behind their back. The SNP amendment is right to point out that Westminster's anti-Scottish policies will continue to undermine the Parliament's efforts to develop the rural economy, just as Jack McConnell's financial settlement undermines the efforts of our local authorities in the many areas that they fund. We want all departments to work together to take into account the needs and aspirations of our rural communities, but we do not need the same old soundbites and more glossy documents. Actions speak louder than words, so let us have more action. When we last had a rural development debate in the chamber, I said that the biggest challenge facing the Parliament was  "to make the phrase 'rural disadvantage' redundant."—[ Official Report , 4 November 1999; Vol 4, c 333.] The reality is that since the coalition was formed, matters have gone from bad to worse in rural Scotland. Scotland is a rich country and our rural communities must be allowed to have their fair share of that wealth. We need an independent Scotland, as only an independent Scotland will be good for rural Scotland.

rose—

Will John Scott give way?

Will John Scott give way?

Will the member give way?

The minister said that we should not run down rural Scotland. However, in Tuesday's Daily Mail , he is quoted as saying that it is not his job to "prop up dying communities". Why did he say that? What is his definition of a dying community?

Will the minister give way?

The minister has actually answered the question that I was going to put.

I thank the minister for his statement. The industry is worth £500 million to the Scottish economy and sustains 6,500 jobs in our rural and more remote communities, so it is imperative that we get this crisis behind us as soon as possible. I welcome the joint report from the industry and the Government and its recommendations and, crucially, the amendments to the EU directive that have been announced, which will permit the phased withdrawal of fish and will allow vaccination. However, does the minister recognise that fish farm owners and employees have been tearing their hair out over the past year because of the Executive's approach to the crisis, which has been characterised by belated about-turns and dithering? Does he accept that he should have pursued the policy that is before us today a year ago, when he was first appointed as the minister for fisheries in the Scottish Parliament, instead of waiting for jobs to disappear and millions of healthy fish to be slaughtered? Given that a last-minute addition to the EU's announcement is that any special schemes have to be approved by the EU, will the minister ensure that a fast-track procedure will be implemented as soon as possible so that there is no further delay? Will he at last inject some urgency into the handling of this crisis?

It is a pleasure to make my first speech in Glasgow. This is an unusual occasion because we have the fisheries spokespeople from all the parties and the Minister for Rural Affairs here. This is an uncontroversial fisheries matter, and we are all in agreement. I am not going to disrupt that. In the first speech in the Parliament in Glasgow, by Wendy Alexander, she mentioned the former fish market and, quite appropriately, that there was once salmon fishing in the city. I congratulate Tavish Scott on the subject of his first member's bill—one of the first such bills in the Parliament. He is lucky to be put in such an historic position. In Glasgow lucky people are described as being able to fall into the Clyde and come out with a salmon in their pocket. Tavish may want to put that theory to the test later on. If he does, we will have to let The  Shetland Times know so that someone can  take a photo. That this is one of the first members' bills highlights the importance attached to fishing by the Scottish Parliament. It has been the subject of many debates already and that is welcomed by the industry. We have had debates on amnesic shellfish poisoning, the fishing boundary, the European negotiations and infectious salmon anaemia, all in a matter of months. The Rural Affairs Committee has also spent a disproportionate amount of time on fishing. We have had three committee reports on fishing matters: on amnesic shellfish poisoning, on the boundary issue and the report on Tavish Scott's bill. That we can move so quickly on an uncontroversial issue highlights the difference between the Westminster and Scottish parliaments. The Scottish Parliament is much more positive. We recognise the merits of a case, take out the politics and will push it through because it is sensible and the right thing to do, as opposed to the archaic, draconian, undemocratic events we see at Westminster time and time again when perfectly sensible private members' bills are put through their system. That happened on two occasions with similar bills to the bill before us. The SNP unreservedly supports the bill. It is a very positive measure and we support any such measures to assist the inshore fisheries sector and shellfish farmers. At the moment they need assistance more than ever because of the difficulties facing the industry. The bill irons out anomalies in fishing legislation. There are many more anomalies that should be addressed but at least we are making a start. I think I am the only member of the Rural Affairs Committee speaking in the debate. The committee spent some time looking into the proposal and found it very sensible. As Tavish Scott said, the committee consulted 40 organisations and those that responded were unanimous in their support for the bill. We had an e-mail just a couple of days ago from Doug McLeod, chairman of the ASSG, to say that, although he would not be present today, "I shall be there in spirit! It's been many years along the road, to create this positive legislative flexibility and to reduce unnecessary friction between the fishing and aquaculture communities." He said that he hoped that the bill "passes with the all-party support it deserves", which it will do. I do not want to repeat too much of what has been said before. People have referred to the benefits that the bill will bring to creel fishermen, particularly on the west coast inshore fisheries, and to shellfish growers. As the minister said, it is  a win-win situation. It will even save fishermen money, which I guess will be welcomed by the industry, as fewer public inquiries will arise as a result of conflicts. The Rural Affairs Committee's report raised two issues to which Tavish Scott and the minister both referred. Members of the committee ask them to take those views on board. I am sure that, like the SNP, members of the Rural Affairs Committee will welcome the minister's statement that he will look into the idea of retrospective application of the bill. The bill is a welcome boost for the sea fisheries sector in Scotland and I am glad that ministers support this positive measure, which offers an opportunity to the industry. However, with Tavish Scott's permission, I take this opportunity to mention a threat to the fishing industry—the multi-annual guidance programme mid-term review proposed by the European Commission. Tavish's bill may provide an opportunity, but that review is a threat on the horizon. I hope that ministers will take a positive attitude towards the review. The cuts in the Scottish fleet proposed by the Commission must not see the light of day, as they would be devastating for the industry. I see that the minister would like to intervene.

I welcome the minister's comments. I close by saying that the SNP supports Tavish Scott and congratulates him on his bill, which is a positive measure for the industry. I hope that we will continue to deliver positive measures for the fishing industry in Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive what steps it has taken to address the concerns expressed by livestock producers in relation to the new promotion body Quality Meat Scotland. (S1O-1712)

I thank the minister for his answer. Given the difficulties experienced by the meat sector in recent years, it is obvious that the new promotional body has to get off to the best possible start. The Scottish Beef Council, the National Sheep Association and the Scottish Crofters Union have expressed many genuine concerns about the new body, in particular about the lack of representation of their sectors on that body. Those concerns must be addressed. Will the minister give an undertaking to use the time resulting from the delay of the launch of the new body to personally intervene in order to iron out those concerns? Will he use this opportunity to clarify what influence the Milton Keynes-based Meat and Livestock Commission will have over the new body?

To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Executive's policy is in relation to private ownership of Scotland's mountains. (S1F-321)

As the acting First Minister is aware, the sale of Ben Nevis and the placing on the open market of the Cuillins have put land ownership back under the spotlight. Given that the people of Scotland deserve to know what type of Scotland the Scottish Executive wishes to create, will the acting First Minister inform the chamber this afternoon of his view—and the view of the Scottish Executive—on the ownership of Scotland's mountains? Does he believe that it is right or wrong that Scotland's mountains can be traded on the open market by private interests, be they private individuals or companies? Can he give us an unequivocal, clear-cut statement—yes or no?

I will try to make my question a little more challenging than the one asked by Mike Rumbles. I, too, welcome the minister's statement and some of the proposals therein. My question relates  to the input of tenant farmers to the consultation process. As the minister will be aware, tenant farmers are often reluctant to express their views, because they are concerned that their landowners might not take too kindly to them speaking out. The 1998 document of the land reform policy group at the then Scottish Office—"Identifying the Solutions"—says on page 6 that "a notable proportion of tenant farmers asked for their views to remain confidential". To what extent did the minister take that reluctance into account during the consultation process, to ensure that tenant farmers had full input? What mechanisms will he introduce to ensure that tenant farmers play a full role in the debate on the future of Scottish agriculture and rural Scotland?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

I promise to be very brief. I have three very quick points. This is the second time in a few months that we have discussed transport links in the north-east of Scotland. That should tell the minister how big an issue transport is in the north-east of Scotland. People want the Scottish Parliament to deliver on improved transport links, as Westminster did not. The UK's fishing industry is based in the north-east of Scotland. The minister will be aware that fishermen have to get their produce to market while it is fresh. They have to get it to the processors and down south and, in many cases, to the continent while it is fresh. Therefore they need improved transport links. Finally, will the minister acknowledge that there is reason for people in the north-east of Scotland to have a sense of injustice? The north-east is a corner of the Scotland and the UK that generates so much wealth for the Exchequer through the food and agriculture industry, the offshore industry and the fishing industry, yet all it gets in return is a single carriageway in the Aberdeenshire area and logjams in the city of Aberdeen.

Will the member give way?

The member referred to Scotland's interests being ambushed at Westminster. Does he accept that Westminster once more acted against Scotland's interests by ambushing the attempt by a member of his party to return 6,000 square miles of Scottish water to Scottish jurisdiction? Does he accept that was a prime example of Westminster acting against the interests of Scotland?

To ask the First Minister, further to the answer to question S1W-4291 by Sarah Boyack on 26 April 2000, what assistance the Scottish Executive is considering making available to pensioners and low-income households to assist them in paying their water bills. (S1F-289)

Is the First Minister aware that pensioner and low-income households—indeed all households—were appalled last month to receive through their letterboxes water bills showing rises ranging from 18 per cent in some parts of the country to a massive 43 per cent in the north and north-east, and that, since Labour came to power, some people's water bills have increased by 300 per cent? Can the First Minister tell us why the Scottish Executive has abandoned Scotland's water industry and its water consumers, who have been left to foot the whole £1.6 billion bill, which the First Minister referred to, for upgrading the infrastructure? All that comes on top of rising council tax and people in Scotland being asked to pay the highest price in the whole of Europe for petrol. Does the First Minister accept that his responsibility is to help the people of Scotland out of poverty and to live affordable lives, as opposed to plunging them into further poverty and bleeding them dry?

Can the First Minister  confirm that the Scottish Executive is not giving one penny of the Scottish block towards assisting pensioners and low-income households with their water bills, which have risen by up to 43 per cent?

Will the minister give way?

I would like to talk about disruptive behaviour in the classroom, and also the increase in stress-related absence among teachers throughout Scotland. The minister painted a rosy picture, and Nicola Sturgeon was right to say that he was complacent. Since I have been elected I have spoken to many classroom teachers and head teachers throughout the north-east of Scotland, and I can tell the minister that morale in many schools—not every school—is at rock bottom. Members would not believe some of the  horror stories that teachers tell. It is clear that disruptive behaviour is one of the factors behind the increase in stress-related absence, which is a topic that I have mentioned before in Parliament. I was interested to find out some statistics recently from Aberdeenshire Council. Because of local government cuts, the council was looking for teachers to apply for voluntary severance. I thought that I would find out how many teachers applied for it, because it would give an indication of teachers' morale in the area. Aberdeenshire Council's director of education wrote to me on 25 April. I can tell the minister that 275 teachers called the council to inquire about voluntary severance, which means that 12 per cent of teachers want out of their jobs. The director of education also told me that at that time, 210 staff were off ill. That is between 10 per cent and 11 per cent of the work force. The minister should not paint too rosy a picture. He should find out the national figures for Scotland, because they would indicate the morale of teachers. Dundee City Council is another of the few councils that keeps statistics on stress-related absence among teachers. The council wrote to me and said that between 1 August and the end of December last year 2,093 days were lost through stress in the city of Dundee. If that figure is extrapolated, 5,000 days per year are lost in the city due to stress—nearly five days per teacher. Those are appalling statistics. Violence in the classroom is one of the reasons why morale is low, and why so many teachers are taking time off due to stress, but it is not the only factor. Having heard some of the stories, which I shall tell the minister, of what is happening in the north-east of Scotland, I find it no wonder that morale is low. We are talking about exclusion. I know of a couple of cases in Aberdeenshire. In one, a child assaulted his fellow classmates. An auxiliary teacher was brought in to help the classroom teacher to cope, and the child assaulted the auxiliary teacher. That teacher was transferred to another primary school because the parents refused to acknowledge that there was a problem, and they refused to let their child see a psychologist. There was nothing that the school could do about that, apart from transferring the child to another school. The child went to another school and assaulted his fellow pupils there. The classroom teacher in that school had to take early retirement through stress because of that situation. There are many such examples from north-east Scotland. Another child is at his third primary school because his parents refused to acknowledge that their child has a problem. They  blame the schools for all the hassle in the classroom. Once again, the teachers can do nothing because their hands are tied. I hope that the minister will look into those examples following today's debate. We all know that education suffers as a result of destructive behaviour in the classroom. The five to 14 curriculum suffers and teachers cannot meet their targets because they are spending so much time dealing with destructive behaviour in the classroom. A child can assault staff, be a menace in the playground and disrupt the education of the other kids in their class, but the options that are available to staff to deal with such problems are extremely limited. A child might also assault the teacher. I know of one case in which the child was excluded for five days. The child is back at school and the teacher is now terrified. There is nothing that the school can do in the situation. We need more resources to provide alternatives-to-exclusion units on site at schools. It is fair enough not to want to exclude children, but there must be resources for alternatives. In Aberdeenshire, local government cuts mean that the council has to get rid of teachers and there is a lack of units that provide alternatives to exclusion. Many factors other than destructive behaviour cause stress-related absence among teachers. I ask the minister to respond positively to the points that are being made in the debate. I also suggest that he visits north-east Scotland. He should get in touch with teachers and head teachers and hear what they have to say.

To follow on from Lewis Macdonald's points, with which I am happy to associate myself, is the minister aware that worrying statistics, released yesterday, show that Aberdeen has the highest level of recorded crime in the country and double the national average for house-breakings? Does the minister accept that we cannot divorce those statistics from the fact that Grampian's police force has the second lowest funding in the country, and that recent funding announcements for the police have been wholly inadequate? Furthermore, Grampian police have special responsibilities for policing Balmoral and North sea  installations. Will the minister respond positively to those worrying statistics by announcing adequate resources, so that we can put more bobbies on the beat in Aberdeen and prevent the crimes to which Lewis Macdonald referred?

Given that the Liberal Democrat party in this Parliament supports the scrapping of the new fishing boundary, does the member agree that it would be useful for the Scottish Executive to convey to the Westminster Government that a majority of members of Scotland's Parliament support the scrapping of the boundary?

Will the member give way?

Following the member's ridiculous comments, I would like to ask her to confirm that the concerns of the fishing industry are similar to those of the Opposition parties—we all want the boundary to be changed. Is Dr Murray attacking the fishing industry, saying that it is objecting to the boundary for party political reasons in order to attack the UK Government? Does she admit that people in the Scottish fishing industry have genuine and substantive concerns about their ability to do their jobs and earn their livelihood?

Given that the member has spent the first two minutes of his speech talking about parliamentary procedure, would he care to address the Rural Affairs Committee's report?

Lewis Macdonald says that the Rural Affairs Committee reached its conclusions without consultation, but he was present when the committee took evidence from the fishing organisations and the Scottish Executive. Was that not consultation? Were the committee's findings and recommendations not in line with the wishes of the fishing industry in Scotland? If they were not, can Lewis Macdonald provide evidence that the industry's view is different?

Will Mr Rumbles clarify one point? Is the Liberal Democrat group in the Scottish Parliament saying that it supports the fishing industry's request for the Scottish Executive to open up negotiations with Westminster for a change to the boundary?

Will Mr Rumbles clarify whether it is the position of the Liberal Democrat group that the Scottish Executive should play a role in trying to implement the recommendations of the Rural Affairs Committee report?

Will the member give way?

Given the participation of the Royal National Mission to Deep Sea Fishermen in time for reflection, I welcome today's fishing theme, even though it is only a coincidence. I am sure that we all recognise the mission's good work in our fishing communities. I am delighted that we are debating fishing again in Scotland's national Parliament. We have debated fishing more times in our first 10 or 11 months than would happen in several years in the Westminster Parliament, which shows that the establishment of this Parliament is a step forward for our fishing communities. As Alex Johnstone, the convener of the Rural Affairs Committee, said, we are one year on from the first debate on the boundary dispute. I know that the minister and his colleagues had hoped that the matter was dead and buried a year ago, but it is alive and kicking and remains a burning issue throughout Scotland. I congratulate the fishing industry on keeping the issue in the limelight and on continuing the campaign. The Deputy Minister for Rural Affairs said that the boundary dispute is a non-issue, but it is one of the most significant issues to have faced this Parliament. He said that it was not an issue for our fishing communities, yet one has only to look at the time and expense that fishermen's representatives have put into campaigning for the boundary to be changed to see that it is. They have issued leaflets and given briefings; they have attended party conferences to put their case. The minister and I attended the Scottish Fishermen's Federation annual dinner recently, where the boundary dispute was the No 1 priority in the president's speech. So that the minister is aware of the strength of feeling around the country, I will send him a copy of the SNP's petition on the boundary dispute, which has been signed by thousands of people in the hope that they can get the boundary changed. Since we first debated this subject in Parliament, a number of developments have moved the debate on and have demonstrated why it remains a burning issue. The main development is the report from the Rural Affairs Committee—a cross-party committee that recognised that the issue deserved detailed and considered investigation and that took evidence from fishermen's representatives and the fisheries minister. The result was that the committee came down on the  side of the fishermen.

If the member wants me to confirm that one of the unfortunate developments in the parliamentary committee system is that some people will not depart from the party line, I am happy to do so. Three out of the four parties represented on the committee supported the recommendations.

I want to move on. I want to sum up where we stand today and to ask each member of this Parliament to search their conscience and to take on board the following information. We know now that the new boundary was created by an obscure committee in Westminster that could not be bothered to wait to consult the Scottish Parliament, which was just about to be established. We know now that ministers accept that there was a lack of consultation by the Westminster Parliament—they have described that lack of consultation as deplorable. Ministers have admitted that the information on which to base a valid decision was not available and that there was no attempt to find it. Ross Finnie said in the debate last June that the order related only to fisheries, yet, as the Rural Affairs Committee discovered, it has implications for many other matters, such as the Food Safety Act 1990 and the Food and Environment Protection Act 1985, as Alex Johnstone said in his opening remarks on behalf of the committee. We know from the Westminster debate on the boundary that some of the members who agreed to the legislation did not understand it. One member of the committee, Russell Brown, said that he was totally confused by what he was discussing and another, Alan Beith, said: "I retain a certain nervousness." He wanted to be assured that the principles that Henry McLeish described "have been applied correctly and that, if they prove to have been in error, it is recognised that we shall have to return to the issue, if necessary with a modified order."—[ Official Report , House of Commons, Third Standing Committee on Delegated Legislation, 23 March 1999; c11.] The people at Westminster seem to have a better grasp of reality than our fisheries minister in Scotland does. We know now that the Scottish fishing industry is united against the new boundary and is supported by local authorities—such as  Aberdeenshire Council—that have voted on the matter, and by other bodies, such as the North East Scotland Fisheries Partnership. We also know now that we have the absurd position that Scotland has two sea boundaries with England. We have a Liberal Democrat MP at Westminster who is trying to reverse the legislation. Also important is that we have the report from the Rural Affairs Committee. Those are some of the developments since we last debated this issue in the chamber. It is deplorable that the fisheries minister still maintains that this is a non-issue in Scotland.

I shall come to that in a few moments. The Government's last line of defence of Westminster's decision to change the Scottish fishing boundary is to say that we should not worry, because the line is based on international conventions; the Government knows what it is doing because it gave a lot of thought to the location of the line and took advice on the international conventions. I want to demolish that last line of defence. I am not a legal expert, nor, I suspect, are the minister or his colleagues. Therefore, I listen to those who have such expertise. The minister will know that the SNP commissioned an independent legal opinion on the boundary from Dr Iain Scobbie of Glasgow University, who is internationally renowned on these matters. He concluded: "It is clear that the position set out by the Government in relation to the Scottish Adjacent Waters Order is not in accordance with . . . international law and practice. The claim that the delimitation employed in this Order reflects 'the normal international convention' simply cannot be sustained."

I am happy to clarify that 60 per cent of cases do not use the line that the Westminster Government used. However, members should not take the SNP's  word for it. If they are not happy about the fact that Dr Scobbie's assessment was commissioned by the SNP, we should consider the international legal authorities that entered the debate of their own volition. They were not invited to enter the debate by the SNP or by any other political party, but did so because they read about it in the press and felt strongly about it. The internationally renowned lawyer, Alan Perry, of D J Freeman—in London, of all places—published his views on the Anglo-Scottish maritime boundary in the "Litigation Review". He gave his opinion because he felt so strongly about the matter. He called the Government's ruling on the boundary a "dreadful blunder" and labelled its claim to be following international law as "disingenuous in the extreme". One could not find a better authority on these matters than Professor James Crawford of Cambridge University, who referred to the fishing boundary in a lecture on international law that he gave at Edinburgh University. He said that the boundary that was established by the Westminster Government was "untenable". Just as the minister cannot name a fisherman in Scotland who supports the new boundary, he cannot name any UK or international authority—outwith the civil service—that supports the Government's fishing boundary. The SFF's letter to the Minister for Rural Affairs, which was quoted in the Rural Affairs Committee report, said that "the Federation remains baffled as to how any member of the Scottish Parliament, can acquiesce in an arrangement which conveys jurisdiction and sovereignty over 6000 square miles of Scottish sea area out of the control of the Scottish Parliament." That is the crux of the matter, which every member has to take on board. It would be scandalous if our fisheries minister got away with constraining the Parliament's ability to fight for Scotland's fishing community. His behaviour since this saga began has been bizarre. He should hang his head in shame for zealously defending a decision that was taken not by the Administration to which he belongs but by another Parliament, 500 miles away in London. He should stand up for the industry that he is supposed to represent—Scotland's fishing industry. The minister says, of course, that there is no real problem, because his policies will never differ from those of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in London. We therefore have to ask: what is the point of the existence of this Parliament, and what is the point of devolution for Scotland, if we have a fisheries minister who says that his policies are never going to differ from those of MAFF in London?  What if the Scottish Executive wanted to implement conservation measures to protect stocks in the disputed area? That is possible, because different mesh sizes are used in different areas of the North sea and off the west coast, as the minister knows. What happens if the Executive chooses to implement conservation measures in area IVb that are different from those implemented by the Government in London? In effect, the minister is saying that, unless London agrees, he would not be willing to implement special conservation measures to help the stocks that are fished by our fleet. That is not a credible stance. This Parliament has to achieve the best deal for Scotland. We should feel no shame in saying that; our job is to stand up for Scotland, our communities and our industries. That is why we were elected; that is why we are here. We should not have a fisheries minister who is devoting his time and energy to defending the positions of Parliaments elsewhere. If we do not argue for the best deal for Scotland and her fishermen, people will wonder what the point is of having a Scottish Parliament. The SNP calls on the Executive to take on board the findings and conclusions of the Rural Affairs Committee's detailed report. Most of all, we call on the Executive and the fisheries minister to get behind Scotland's fishermen and our fishing communities. We call on the minister to do what he can to persuade Her Majesty's Government in London to implement the recommendations in the report. I shall stop there, and let the debate proceed.

The minister responsible for fisheries seems to be rather isolated in the chamber. Is it not the case that he is indeed isolated because the whole fishing industry wants the boundary to be changed? Is the minister saying that this is not an issue for Scotland's fishermen?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

I am delighted to hear that, at long last, there is movement, as I have been asking those bodies to do that for months. I welcome the launch on Tuesday of "Film Location: Scotland", which I understand the minister will be attending. That document is very worth while and will be read by film producers around the country. It will contain a list of regional film offices throughout Scotland, but the north-east of Scotland will be absent from that list because there is no film initiative in the area. The north-east of Scotland contains an array of attractions, so will the minister write to local agencies to ask them to introduce such an initiative as soon as possible?

Mr Adam.

To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Executive is aware of any plans to set up a national fisheries institute with a UK-wide remit and, if so, where it will be located. (S1F-254)

I ask the First Minister to deliver for the Scottish fishing industry on that. Does he agree that it would be a scandal if the fisheries minister for England and Wales usurped Scotland by establishing a fisheries institute in Grimsby? Surely any fisheries institute should be located in Scotland, the home of 70 per cent of the UK fishing industry. We can build on the excellence developed at the North Atlantic Fisheries College in the Shetland isles and Banff and Buchan College of Further Education in the north-east of Scotland. Will the minister fight tooth and nail to ensure that any such institute is established in Scotland?

Will the member give way?

rose—

Will the member accept that the strength of the pound is a major factor in the detrimental impact on the dairy sector in Scotland and that that is a policy that is decided by the Government at Westminster?

Will the member give way?

I, too, welcome this debate, as I am a member for North-East Scotland, which is being hit particularly badly by the crisis. Today The Press and Journal charts the downturn in the dairy sector in the north-east of Scotland. Referring to the sale at Thainstone, it says: "The North-east lost another four dairy herds yesterday as the crisis in the milk sector bites at farm level." It continues: "the Thainstone sale is just the tip of the iceberg. A Kincardineshire herd is tomorrow to be sold in Carlisle and another two Aberdeenshire producers are expected to  leave within the month." In the north-east of Scotland, dairy farmers are giving up their businesses after 30 years, or even longer—farms have perhaps been in their families for a century—so their decision is painful. The number of dairy farms in the north-east has halved in the past 20 years, and is still declining rapidly. One farmer says that for every penny reduction in the farm-gate price of milk, his business loses £13,000. We have heard that, four years ago, the net income of dairy farmers was £30,000, but according to the Executive's figures it has fallen to £4,000. Some farmers can concentrate on arable or beef when the dairy sector is in trouble, but smaller farmers are experiencing extremely difficult times. For many, their dairy herds are their only capital asset—but they have lost value because of the BSE crisis. Now, the produce on which they relied is also declining in value. The Executive should be doing its utmost to identify the areas of Scotland that have small farms and need priority assistance.

That is not a bad idea. I read about it in the press. A few months ago, I wrote to the Minister for Rural Affairs to ask that response teams be set up for rural crises in Scotland, as happens when there are urban crises. That is one element of the strategy that we should have to help rural economies. In the north-east, the situation is already bad because of what happened to the pig industry. The last thing we want is for the dairy sector to go down the same road and to encounter the same dither and delay from the Scottish Executive. The dairy farming sector is fragile in the north-east—it is slightly stronger in the south-west—and hanging on by its fingertips. There is a danger of knock-on effects: processors, particularly in Aberdeen and Laurencekirk, are threatened with closure; farm workers will have to go on the dole; ancillary services are threatened. This is another threat to the essential building blocks of the rural economy in the north-east. The Minister for Rural Affairs should tell us what he is doing. Is he speaking to the Chancellor of the Exchequer about the impact on the dairy sector of the strength of the pound? What is he doing to promote innovative products? Will he stop waiting for the green light from Downing Street and act to help our dairy sector? This illustrates the argument  for independence. We need to go directly to Brussels and use our own resources to help the dairy sector, rather than go down to Downing Street with the begging bowl. Let us start fighting for agriculture.

I will try to keep my comments as brief as possible. I, too, welcome the debate, which is long overdue. It is imperative that we break down the barriers between the public and the many quangos in Scotland. There is a perception that quangos are stuffed with a combination of the untouchables and the usual suspects, to borrow titles from the Hollywood movies. That must change. As the minister knows, I have an interest in the water industry. The water industry highlights the desperate need for change in public appointments. I want to take the example of the North of Scotland Water Authority and, in particular, of its chairman, Colin Rennie, whom I have mentioned before in the chamber. Colin Rennie is chairman of NOSWA by virtue of the fact that he was once a Labour party councillor in Dundee. However, shortly after his appointment, the Labour party in Dundee decided that he was not good enough to be a councillor and he was deselected. He is therefore no longer a councillor, yet has kept his position as chairman of NOSWA. This is a man who is contracted to work one and a half days a week, yet who last year cost NOSWA £36,000. He gets a salary of £26,000, taxable benefits of £7,000 and £3,000 towards his pension—all for one and a half days a week. That is an appalling state of affairs, yet the consumers in that water authority, when faced with 45 per cent increases in water charges, must put up with statements from the chairman that they should not worry, because the increase is only the same as the cost of a packet of crisps. The chairman is untouchable—there is nothing that consumers can do to remove him. They are not happy with his statements nor with the 45 per cent increase in their water charges, yet there is no facility to remove him from his position as chairman of the water authority, a position that he got by virtue of his position in the Labour party, although he no longer holds his post there due to lack of confidence in him. People must be given the means to remove such people from their  posts. Staying with the water industry, I want to turn to the position of the water commissioner. The recently appointed water commissioner was appointed to be the customers' champion, yet the customers had no role whatever in his appointment—he was appointed by ministers. Again, from what I am told, customers are not happy with his performance, but there is no means whereby they can do anything about it. They did not even have a say in his appointment. That also must change. I do not want to continue because others wish to speak, but I want to ask the minister to acknowledge when he winds up that those two examples illustrate why we desperately need to change the system.

I, too, welcome the fact that we have finally managed to secure time for a debate in the Scottish Parliament on this important subject. GM is a fast-moving science and we must not allow it get ahead of us. The SNP does not want the Executive to storm ahead with GM food without giving the Parliament adequate opportunity to examine the implications of such a move. It is quite clear that the Executive is outpacing public opinion and we must have time to address the many concerns expressed by the public and by many organisations. It has taken 10 months since the Scottish Parliament was set up to get this debate. The Food Standards Agency, which will have a remit over GM foods, is not yet up and running, but the Executive is storming ahead with crop trials. The biotechnology industry set up a group on GM technology only last month, and we have not yet had a chance to hear its side of the argument. We are told that the Government is taking advice from such bodies as the Advisory Committee on Releases to the Environment and the Advisory Committee on Novel Foods and Processes. How many people in Scotland know who is on those committees? How many people in Scotland have spoken to the people on those  committees or had a chance to ask them questions? No one. No one in this Parliament has had a chance to ask questions or speak to them, or even find out who is on those committees. Why are we not meeting those people? Why is Scotland's national Parliament getting to hear everything at third or fourth hand? That is completely unacceptable. The Rural Affairs Committee, as Alex Johnstone said, recently got a note giving the background to those committees. It is quite clear from reading that note that the people who put it together—officials of this Parliament—had to call the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in London to get all the information about the committees. In spite of that, our ministers feel qualified to proceed and make important decisions. It is time that the Executive got a grip on the issue of GM foods. We have had many empty assurances. A press release on the much-talked-about Government website says: "The Government makes the location of trial sites public as an exercise in openness and transparency." Yet what do we hear at Daviot, the site of the first crop trial announced by the Minister for Rural Affairs? People living adjacent to the chosen site are quoted in the press as saying: "We were not even asked or consulted about this. I don't really know anything about genetically modified crops so I don't know if I should be concerned or not but I think someone should have explained to us what it all means." So much for transparency and openness. The fact that only one site has been identified in Scotland surely tells us that Scotland's farmers do not want to touch GM crop trials with a bargepole. They are busy developing the organic sector, which has a lot more to offer Scotland. It is not only the agricultural sector that is expressing concern. Even the salmon farmers do not want to touch the issue with a bargepole. In The Press and Journal last week, under the headline "GM salmon rejected by Scots farmers", it said: "Scottish salmon farmers have made it clear that they are totally opposed to genetically-modified salmon". A spokesman for Scottish Quality Salmon was quoted as saying: "None of our members want to get involved in importing GM salmon eggs." According to the Minister for Rural Affairs, however, everything is hunky-dory and everyone is on side for the development of GM foods in Scotland. It is the duty of this newly established Parliament  to lead the public debate on GM foods, not to be led by the debate south of the border and to do as we are told. Surely the minister realises that, now that we have our Scottish Parliament, when London says "Jump," we no longer have to jump. Ross Finnie announced the crop trials before this Parliament had even had its first opportunity to debate the issue. GM foods is one of the biggest issues facing this Parliament, and we need time to address the many important matters associated with it. We have to maximise our influence over the decisions that are made. We cannot ride roughshod over public opinion; to do so would be letting down the people of Scotland. Even the remotest suggestion that the trials might have any adverse consequences would be highly damaging to Scotland's reputation for the best quality food produce. We call on the Scottish Executive to scrap its plans for those crop trials and to give this Parliament its due place in investigating the issue. We must find out all we need to know and inform the people of Scotland. Let us make today the beginning of the debate on GM foods, not the end.

Nora Radcliffe's party leader, Charles Kennedy, said that Ross Finnie's recent announcement of the crop trial in the Gordon constituency flies in the face of public opinion. Does Nora Radcliffe agree with that statement, or does she think that Charles Kennedy is wrong?

I welcome this debate and the contributions that have been made so far. I especially congratulate Alex Salmond on securing the debate. He has been a tremendous champion for Peterhead and Boddam down the years and for the Banff and Buchan constituency. He has many successful constituency campaigns behind him. Let us hope that the town of Peterhead will hear an assurance this evening that means that it will not have to go to Alex for his campaigning skills on this issue. I am especially delighted to contribute to this debate because, as a regional MSP, I represent Peterhead as well. Indeed, I lived in Peterhead town for a number of years, so I know just how important Peterhead prison is to the local community. The community accepts the presence of the prison, not just because of its economic value, but because of the special role that it plays in the Prison Service and in society, and because of the fact that the prison has been there since 1888. The community recognises the special role of the STOP programme, a programme that has been covered adequately by other speakers. It would be appalling and unforgivable if this unfortunate speculation were allowed to develop into a threat to the prison's future. If it does, I can assure the authorities that they will have one almighty battle on their hands, with support from all the parties in the north-east of Scotland. We all know about the threat to RAF Buchan and about the recent closures of Crosse and Blackwell and other local companies. The last thing that the community wants to hear about is a question mark over the future of Peterhead prison. I would like to hear two assurances this evening. First, I would like the minister to remove the question mark over the future of Peterhead prison. Secondly, I would like him to dismiss the extremely dangerous and worrying comments that were made by the Minister for Justice, Jim  Wallace, in the recent debate in this chamber on law and order. In a reference to the closure of Penninghame prison in his winding-up speech, his first comment was: "Penninghame is geographically remote from the central belt".— [ Official Report , 25 November 1999; Vol 3, c 918.]  That is an incredibly worrying and dangerous statement from our Minister for Justice. I would like Mr MacKay to dismiss that statement this evening. What is Jim Wallace saying? Is he saying that the whole of Peterhead should be shut down because it is remote from the central belt? In this Parliament, he represents the Orkney constituency. Is he saying that every single job outwith the private sector in Orkney should disappear as well? His comment was dangerous and it sent out completely the wrong message from the Executive. I would like the minister to give us assurances on those two points.

Does the minister accept that, under this Government, stress-related illnesses are increasing among teachers in Scotland? Violence is one reason behind that trend, but there are others, such as increased paperwork and the amount of work teachers are expected to cram into each working day. Will the minister produce a report on stress-related illness and absence among teachers, and on their causes?

Will the member give way?

I was delighted to see in the glossy document "Created in Scotland" mention of NCR in Dundee, in my own constituency. That highlights the importance of manufacturing to the city of Dundee, because it is the biggest employer in that city. However, I would like to say a few words about the importance of the manufacturing sector to rural Scotland, and in particular its importance to the rural areas of my constituency, because it is important that this chamber, ministers and the Executive set their sights beyond the former industrial heartlands in the central belt, and remember the importance of the sector to rural Scotland. In the north-east, many small towns rely heavily on manufacturing companies for employment. In Turriff, the biggest employer manufactures printer ribbons and cartridges. One of the biggest employers in Fraserburgh makes refrigerated trailers. There are fish processors and processors of other foods, and there are small manufacturing industries throughout the north-east—indeed, throughout Scotland—that make shortbread and whisky. There are textile companies in the north-east. All those companies face special challenges, and this Parliament can have an influence on them, especially in the area of transport, which is referred to in "Created in Scotland" several times. An issue of relevance is the campaign for a western peripheral route in Aberdeen, which has an impact on all manufacturing businesses in the north-east, because of the logjams that hold up the transport of goods. There is a ridiculous situation between Ellon and Peterhead, where the A90 is a single-carriageway road. That would not happen anywhere else in the UK, but in the north-east there is a single carriageway, although Peterhead has the UK's newest state-of-the-art power station, Europe's biggest white fish port, and Europe's biggest gas terminal. The road is a scandal. Many local manufacturing businesses work closely with those large businesses.  The Scottish National party's amendment is about the importance of macro-economic policy to the manufacturing sector in Scotland. Macro-economic policy is vital for rural manufacturing businesses. The whisky industry, for example, relies on the right policy coming from Westminster on whisky duty—if it is not right, it can be devastating for the whisky industry in rural Scotland. Fuel duty is also crucial. Many hauliers are going out of business, yet they serve the manufacturing sector in rural Scotland—a lack of haulage businesses hits the manufacturing sector hard. The strength of sterling is another policy decided in Westminster. Manufacturing in the north-east is heavily weighted towards exports, so the strength of sterling has had a major impact on manufacturing companies' ability to make profits and keep going. On the oil and gas sector in Aberdeen, macro-economic policy on oil and gas taxation is also decided in London. The big question mark that hung over oil and gas taxation a year or two ago had a huge impact on the north-east of Scotland and on the fabrication yards of the Highlands and Islands. That question mark has led to investment drying up. It is time that the Executive put the utmost pressure on the Chancellor of the Exchequer down in London to help the oil and gas industry, so that we can spur manufacturing in that sector back into action. The oil and gas industry gives the best illustration of the missed opportunity for Scotland's manufacturing sector. We have somehow got into the position where much of the infrastructure is built abroad—the floating production vessels are built in Korea, Norway and so on. I understand that Norway is giving assistance towards the building of some of those production vessels in Norway. I hope that the Executive will investigate what assistance is being given in building those vessels. Why can it not assist companies in this country to build the infrastructure for our oil and gas sector? There is also tension between the majors and the smaller companies in the oil and gas sector. Cannot the Executive intervene? If the majors allow the smaller companies in the oil and gas sectors to develop the reservoirs, that will spur more manufacturing activity in Scotland. On the potential of renewable energy, we should learn from past mistakes and exploit our resources for the manufacturing sector. Renewable energy is a prime opportunity. I read a fantastic article in The Press and Journal recently, by Jeremy Cresswell, on the opportunities in the renewable energy sector. It states: "Scottish companies are conspicuous in their failure to  capture business in the alternative energy sector." It goes on to state that, in relation to renewable energy, "the UK offshore component represented a £4 billion opportunity." Let us ensure that Scottish manufacturing benefits from that £4 billion opportunity, because we missed out when it came to the traditional oil and gas sector. We should go for that opportunity. I want to hear today what the Executive will do to ensure that we exploit that opportunity.

Will Sarah Boyack give way?

The water bills that the member's constituents will receive through the  post after 1 April will be 42 per cent higher than they were last year. Does she think that it is proper that the Scottish Executive is not putting a penny into the water industry to keep those bills down?

Will the member give way?

The member needs a glass of water.  Given that the member has spent the first four minutes of his speech attacking the SNP, how does he propose to keep water charges down, the high level of which he has also attacked?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

Earlier this week, John Reid—that increasingly irrelevant politician—issued a statement that called on Labour party members to stop fighting one another and to start talking about what Labour is delivering in Scotland. The SNP has no control over the internal problems of the Labour party, but we think that it is a good idea to talk about what Labour is delivering in Scotland. In a couple of weeks, Labour will deliver astronomical water bills and council tax bills to households in Scotland—the SNP is delighted to be talking about that. I welcome the opportunity to debate in Parliament the water industry. Parliament has been up and running for nearly 10 months, yet this is the first time that the water industry has been on the agenda for proper debate. That says a lot about the Executive's priorities.

I do not find that comment particularly helpful—we have had ministerial statements and many parliamentary questions, but this is the first time that we have had a proper debate. The water industry is of enormous significance to the people of Scotland. The industry has a turnover of £600 million per year, it employs 6,000 people and it is worth between £12 billion and £16 billion. The industry is responsible for delivering clean, safe drinking water and for the efficient, environmentally friendly removal of waste throughout the country. However, because of decades of mismanagement and neglect under successive Tory and Labour Administrations—at both national and local level—the industry faces huge challenges. There is a desperate need for the renewal of the industry's infrastructure if it is to continue to deliver a proper service throughout the century. The Executive has failed to rise to the challenge; it has passed the buck to the consumers in the form of a tap tax. Scotland is turning into a nation of ironies. Scotland has lots of oil and gas, but we  charge the highest prices for petrol at the petrol pump. Scotland is the home of whisky, yet one can buy whisky more cheaply abroad. Scotland has an abundance of water resources, yet we are subject to water charges such as those that have been announced today. In East of Scotland, there will be a 22 per cent increase in water charges and in the west the increase will be 18 per cent. In North of Scotland, there will be a 42 per cent increase across the board and in Tayside the increase will be a staggering 46 per cent. Since Labour came to power, charges in the area that is covered by the North of Scotland Water Authority will have increased by 114 per cent. Charges have risen by 85 per cent in the East of Scotland Water area and by 88 per cent in the West of Scotland Water area. In the Forth valley, charges have increased by 181 per cent. Those increases are before next year's announced increases come into play. The message from the Scottish Executive—particularly to people in the NOSWA area—is "Tough luck." Apart from the matter of water bills, there is the potential 10 per cent increase in council tax that was announced this week, and the high fuel tax throughout the north-east and north of Scotland. The SNP could not agree more with the Executive's statement that the twin challenges are to meet the aspirations of the Scottish people for high environmental standards and drinking water quality, and to do so at the minimum cost to the customer. The Executive, however, does not want to do that at the minimum cost to the customer, but at the minimum cost to the Government. The policy is like taking out a mortgage for capital works over 30 years, but making consumers pay the bulk of the repayments over the next two years. That is not what we would do with our own houses, and it is not what the Executive should be doing with Scotland's water industry. The purpose of government is to deliver essential public services, but who would have thought that new Labour, which used to call itself the people's party, would leave consumers struggling to pay for an essential service—the supply of water? The Government seems to be more interested in supporting the millennium dome than the water industry in Scotland. The Scottish Executive is not spending one penny of its own money on Scotland's infrastructure and no measures are in place to ease the burden on consumers—since the end of transitional relief, there has been nothing. The Executive is making a mess of Scotland's water industry. Under Labour, water consumers have been taken for a ride, and all sorts of folk are  making money out of Scotland's water. Private companies are making a packet through the private finance initiative. In one project, £6 million was spent on procurement costs and preparations—that is ridiculous. Cash is being transferred from the pockets of consumers directly to the pockets of the shareholders in private companies that have been brought in to run Scotland's water industry. The PFI policy for the water industry is in tatters. In September 1999 I asked the Minister for Transport and the Environment a written question. I asked whether she would examine the "implications of PFI on the water industry and the implications . . . for charges for water and sewerage customers." The minister responded that she would "reply to the member as soon as possible." Five or six months later, I am still waiting for a reply, because the minister is terrified of the answer. This week, I learned from the water authorities that they do not want any more PFI—they have been through that experience and do not want to go through it again. They are examining ideas such as the Dutch water bank to raise cheap finance and to avoid the involvement of the private sector. Members know that the water authorities asked to have their own bond issued a few years ago, but were turned down flatly by the previous Administration. The water industry is ideal for low-cost investment that can be secured against a definite income stream of water rates. That is why PFI is so inappropriate for the water industry. It is not just PFI providers who benefit—it is also the fat cats at the top of the tree in the water authorities. The posts of chief executive are being readvertised. The salary for those posts has been increased by about 30 per cent—to about £120,000 per year—and there is a 10 per cent bonus. Is that really where consumers want their bill payments to go? Consumers' bills are being used to feed the quango culture in Scotland. There is another broken promise: new Labour forgot to throw the water boards on the bonfire of the quangos. Now, people such as Colin Rennie, chairman of NOSWA, is getting £36,000 of consumers' money for a one-and-a-half-day-a-week job. He had the cheek to tell water consumers that the increase in the north of Scotland is equivalent merely to the price of a packet of crisps a day. It is, I suppose, possible for him to say that comfortably, earning—as he does—a salary of £25,000 plus lots of bonuses. The Minister for Transport and the Environment could be doing a lot to keep water bills down. She  could write off debt. Will the minister accept that we are in the current mess because of the Tory Government's failure to write off debt at the time of reorganisation of the water authorities in 1996? That Government wrote off only 40 per cent of the debt. Will she also accept that the mess is a result of Labour's decision not to increase the percentage of debt that was written off when it reviewed the water industry in 1997?

If Mr Tosh would like to listen closely to my speech, he will find that I will cover that subject in a few seconds. In 1989, the English water industry had 90 per cent of its debt written off by the Treasury; the Scottish water industry had only 40 per cent of its debt written off. A £1.1 billion green dowry was also injected into the English water industry.

I now come to the external financing limits. External finance has fallen as a proportion of investment, and a greater burden is now being passed on to consumers, with less borrowing to finance new investment.

It would not be a debate without an intervention from Richard Simpson, so what can I do but accept one?

The member should listen; I was about to address that point when he interrupted. Over the next two years, borrowing has been limited to £435 million, which will mean that capital investment will come out of revenues. Customers are being forced to cough up the shortfall of £1.8 billion in the next two years. Why does not the Executive increase the external financing limits and allow the costs of the new infrastructure to be spread across its lifetime, rather than putting the full burden on customers for the next couple of years? The Executive, and its colleagues in London, should come up with a cash injection for the Scottish water industry. Is not it ironic that today's  headlines in the media are about oil prices never having been higher, and how tax revenues will now flow to the London Exchequer? Why cannot Scotland get some of its own cash back, so that we can upgrade Scotland's water industry? Perhaps the minister should speak to the Chancellor of the Exchequer. What is the Government doing to help people pay their water bills? What will it do to help pensioners, whose miserly 75p increase in pension per week has been wiped out by the rise in water charges? Massive charges have been announced today, yet the minister tells us that consultation will take place during the summer on how to help low-income families. The damage is being done now; summer will be too late. Why did not the minister think of that before? The Parliament has been up and running for 10 months—why is the minister closing the stable door after the horse has bolted? Another threat that the minister has failed to address adequately is that posed by the Competition Act 1998. A consultation paper will be published in April, but that act has been in force since the beginning of this month and we have known about it for years. Is the minister aware that Anglian Water, Northumbrian Water, Southern Water, Thames Water and Yorkshire Water Services have opened offices in Scotland and are working here? They are here not for a picnic, but to make money out of Scotland's water industry. Labour has abandoned water consumers in Scotland and it has abandoned the water industry. The message from the consumers is, "Stop milking us dry and go back to the drawing board. Stop hitting the people of Scotland with bill after bill to keep the Treasury in London happy." It is unreasonable and unfair to expect that customers should in the next two years pick up the whole bill for the neglect of our water industry by successive Labour and Tory Administrations. The water industry is not safe in new Labour's hands and I ask Parliament to support the SNP motion today. I move, That the Parliament believes that the impending rise in water charges which have been approved by the Scottish Executive is as unacceptable and damaging as the rises in the local authority council tax forced on local authorities by the Executive's inadequate local government financial settlement; notes that the Executive is failing to make any financial contribution to the maintenance of adequate standards in the water industry just as it is failing to adequately support essential local government services; calls for the increases in water charges to be kept to a minimum and for measures to be taken to avoid consumers being forced to pay the cost of past neglect of the industry including a review of external finance limits, the scrapping of the Private Finance Initiative and the cancelling of debt in the industry to avoid unnecessary and unfair increases in water bills, and condemns the apparent indifference of the Executive to the rise in water bills, the increase in council  tax and the cutting of local government services particularly with regard to their impact on the most vulnerable in society.

I am delighted that the minister shares many of the concerns that have echoed around the chamber in this evening's debate. Does he agree that it would be fitting for the Executive of Scotland's national Parliament to communicate those concerns directly to the Scottish Media Group and the Independent Television Commission?

I begin by thanking all the MSPs who have stayed behind for the debate and everyone who has signed the motion, which attracted the support of nearly a quarter of MSPs—that shows the strength of feeling on the subject matter. One of Scotland's key strengths is its cultural diversity. Thankfully, down the years, the media in Scotland have recognised that. Regional identity is particularly important in north and north-east Scotland. Again, that is reflected in the local media, the local commercial radio stations—of which there are many—in the very successful regional press and, of course, in television. Just up the road from where I live in Aberdeen are the city's BBC studios, while just up the road and round the corner are the Grampian Television studios. In my case, regional broadcasting is a subject that is close to home. I therefore had no hesitation in lodging the motion once it was clear that, since the merger in 1997, the Scottish Media Group has been allowing Grampian Television to wither on the vine. There are 1.1 million people in the Grampian region—that includes the cities of Aberdeen and Dundee and a rural area the size of many European countries. Until the merger in 1997, Grampian Television played its role in reflecting local concerns and culture in the area. However, since the merger, the management in Glasgow simply refers to Grampian Television as "the Aberdeen office". Members may have noticed a glossy advertising campaign earlier this week by the Scottish Media Group, which confidently proclaimed:  "You will just love the changes at Grampian." Perhaps we can bring the management at the Scottish Media Group back down to earth this evening. Many people are unhappy with the changes that are taking place at Grampian Television. What was regarded as an excellent and loyal work force has been undermined by a management in Glasgow that is obsessed with cutting costs to maximise profits. The last straw happened recently, when two out of three of the producer-directors—the core programme makers in Aberdeen—were issued with redundancy notices. On top of that, there is a threat to pay levels throughout SMG, both at Scottish Television and at Grampian Television. We are now at the stage where both stations are on the brink of industrial action. Other changes that we do not like include the massive decline in regional programming. That is illustrated by comparing this week's television schedules in Grampian with pre-merger schedules. If we look down this week's list of scheduled programmes, we find "Grampian Headlines"; the excellent news magazine programme, "North Tonight"; and the weather. There are two co-production programmes in this week's list, both of which are made in Glasgow, and "Walking Back To Happiness", a repeat of a programme made before the merger. If we compare that to a week in, say, November 1996—a few months before the merger—we find not only some of the programmes I have already mentioned, but "The Birthday Spot"; "The River"; a documentary on the A9 mystery; "North Tonight Special"; "Walking Back To Happiness", which was not a repeat back then; "Crossfire"; a Gaelic magazine programme; "The Art Sutter Show"; and so on. All those programmes cover a wide range of topics, from light entertainment to politics and current affairs. That massive decline in regional programming is a change we do not like. Another change we do not like is the tricks of the trade that the Scottish Media Group is using to massage the figures, so that it can say to the Independent Television Commission that it is achieving its targets. Those tricks of the trade include catch-all programming, when it produces a magazine programme such as "Grampian Weekend". It is not a bad programme in itself, but slotting five minutes of arts, five minutes of politics, five minutes of light entertainment and so on into that programme—rather than producing in-depth programmes on those issues—helps SMG to achieve its targets. Another trick of the trade we do not like is the captions of convenience. What is happening is incredible. To help the Scottish Media Group  achieve its targets, captions are swapped between Grampian Television and Scottish Television, sometimes halfway through a series. "The Week in Politics" is captioned by Grampian, but produced and directed from Glasgow. How on earth is it a Grampian regional programme? "High Road" is called a co-production. It, too counts towards the targets. It carries both the STV and Grampian logo, but it is made in STV's area using STV staff. How on earth is that a Grampian programme? SMG, of course, says that it sends a cheque to help pay for the programme, but I do not think that the ITC will swallow that one. The truth is that SMG has an atrocious record at Grampian. Many of the promises on the original licence application have been broken. I will give just one of many examples. Under "Scottish Celebrations" the application said: "Grampian will mark with music, arts and entertainment programmes such special Scottish occasions as Hogmanay when it mounts a major outside broadcast to welcome the New Year at a location in the transmission area." That has not happened since SMG took over. We have had the ridiculous situation in which there was not one camera out and about in Grampian's area during the millennium celebrations. That was not the case elsewhere in the SMG area. The agreement was also broken because SMG was not meant to reduce the number of production staff in Aberdeen, but redundancy notices are on the desks of some core staff. SMG is happy to boast that it made a £50 million profit last year, but at the same time there are job cuts and cuts in pay. SMG is clearly turning its back on the sector that helped to build the group in the first place and which helped to make the profit that makes many people in SMG very rich. SMG argues that it wants to move with the times—that is fair. If, however, Grampian Television does not make local programmes in that area, nobody will. Parliament must send messages to three places. The first must go to the SMG boardroom. If the board is losing interest in television, it must let someone else take over independent television broadcasting in Scotland. If it wants to keep television broadcasting, it must drop its planned redundancies and pay cuts and restore programming to its pre-merger levels. The second message must go to the ITC. The Scottish National party welcomes the commission's investigation of SMG, but if it finds SMG guilty, the ITC must use its full powers against the group—it must not give the group any more chances. Let us bring this sorry episode to an end. Finally, we must send a message to the Scottish Executive. It is, to say the least, regrettable that  Parliament does not have the power to make laws on broadcasting. This and many other issues highlight why that must change—broadcasting must come within the remit of the Scottish Parliament. I welcome the First Minister's warm words regarding the ITC and SMG's obligations at a recent question time, but warm words are not enough. I hope, however, that when the minister closes the debate he will come with warm words, but also with a commitment that the Executive will do what it can to save jobs at Grampian Television, to improve pay at STV and at Grampian and to protect regional broadcasting in Scotland. We need commitment to action, not just warm words.

Is the minister confident that his policy of not compensating salmon producers who have lost their stocks because of the Government's slaughtering policy is compatible with human rights legislation? When did the Government decide on its policy of not compensating for losses incurred because of naturally occurring fish diseases?

The subject of the question is a scheme that appears to have gone wrong. The agricultural business improvement scheme has also gone wrong. Given the various agricultural crises around Scotland with which the minister has been unable to cope, he and his officials are clearly cracking under the strain—

What additional resources has the minister sought so that he and his  department can start to deliver a decent service to industries in rural communities around Scotland?

Will the minister give way?

Many of the points that I was going to make have been covered. I congratulate Jamie McGrigor on securing a debate on the issue. We must remember the importance of the shellfish industry, especially scallops, to Scotland; in the area affected by the ban, I understand that, in 1997, it generated an income of £8 million for that economy. There is a disproportionate impact when that industry is affected. End-product testing has to be a way forward. However, I commend Rhoda Grant on her comments that it is not the only regime that we need; we must bear in mind the importance of the live export sector as well. To be fair to Jamie McGrigor, his motion does not say that end-product testing has to be the only testing regime. We have not got to the bottom of the Scottish Executive's policy on compensation for the industry. We were told that compensation is not payable for losses that are the consequence of natural events—such as ASP—because that was the policy of the previous Government. This is a new Government; it does not have to copy the policies of previous Governments. John Home Robertson's one-line response on 25 January, to a parliamentary question that I asked on a separate matter, stated: "The Scottish Executive cannot comment on the actions of a previous administration."— [ Official Report, Written Answers, 25 January 2000; Vol 4, p 161.]  The Executive cherry-picks; when it wants to follow the previous Administration, it does so. Whose policy on compensation is it? When was it decided and who decided it? Ministers come to the chamber and rightly take great joy in announcing hundreds of millions of pounds for farmers, or £9 million for salmon farmers; they even announced £2 million for Scottish Opera when it was in trouble. However, ministers have never come to the chamber to announce a penny of assistance for the fishing industry, particularly the catchers. We must bear in mind the contribution that that sector makes to the Scottish economy. Scallop fishermen pay income tax, corporation tax and VAT just like people in other sectors. They also have to pay the increased fuel taxes to the Treasury. In its time of need, the industry is as deserving as every other industry. I urge the ministers to announce today that they are willing to reconsider the matter of compensation and to take advantage of the European regulation, which has been on the table since 1 January, to help this beleaguered industry.

To ask the First Minister whether he or any  member of the Scottish Executive has met the Scottish Media Group to discuss the implications of its current plans for regional identity in Scotland. (S1F-98)

Does the First Minister accept the view that proposals by the Scottish Media Group to downgrade its regional television division will erode regional identity in Scotland? Pay levels and jobs are under threat at SMG—all four producer-director posts at Grampian Television could go. If they do, that will be devastating for the station. Since its takeover of Grampian, SMG has disregarded its obligation under its franchise and is doing its best to take the Grampian out of Grampian Television. Will the First Minister and the Executive join the campaign to remove the threat to regional identity in the north and north-east of Scotland—and throughout the country—express his concerns to the Independent Television Commission and demand action to promote regional broadcasting in Scotland?

I, too, welcome the minister's statement. However, he may be aware that the current chairman of the North of Scotland Water Authority, Colin Rennie, was appointed to the board by virtue of his position as a Labour representative on Dundee City Council. He was deselected by his local party in Dundee but continues to hold his position, earning more than £26,000 a year, plus expenses, for a two-day week. What measures does the minister plan to introduce to ensure that water consumers in NoSWA's area are able to remove the chairman of the board, if they so wish, and to follow the example set by the Labour party in Dundee?

I am delighted to contribute to this important debate, which I hope—unlike many debates on subjects such as sustainable development and other environmental matters—will not just have warm words, but will lead to lots of practical action to back up those words. I also hope that we can make a difference in this Parliament. When elected eight or nine months ago, I knew that this job would involve a lot of paperwork. I lodged a parliamentary question asking when recycling facilities would be made available to MSPs. We got the recycling bins only this week. It took eight months for that particular measure to be delivered. I hope that we can improve on that.

Thank you for that intervention. It says quite a lot about the Government's policy. This country has an abundance of natural resources, and hundreds of thousands of jobs depend on them. No country has a greater interest in sustainability than Scotland. Yet, down the decades, Westminster has had to be dragged kicking and screaming to put the environment on  the agenda. Measures that are now in place have usually come from the United Nations or from Europe. Westminster has shown little initiative. The Scottish Parliament has to show initiative and to show that we can make a difference. Let us hope that we can offer the vision and determination that has been lacking in the past. The Scottish National party will, of course, support genuine effort from the Executive in connection with sustainability.

Well, both. I am sure that the minister will not be surprised to know that I am about to come on to the difficulty with Westminster. Although the SNP will support genuine efforts to achieve a sustainable Scotland, we are very concerned about the constraints on the Parliament's ability to meet that aim. The fifth point in the 10 action points outlined in "Scotland the sustainable?" mentions being part of the international dimension of sustainable development. It is a pity that, because Scotland is not independent, we cannot play a global role, not only to achieve a sustainable Scotland, UK or Europe, but to contribute to the wider world.

No, I have already taken two interventions. Surely it would be much more productive and valuable for Scotland to have a seat at the United Nations and to play a full role in UN organisations and in the European Union, which is far more concerned about environmental policy than the UK Government. The seventh of the 10 action points in the document concerns energy. The opening line in the section on energy states: "Energy policy is a UK matter. On the face of it therefore, there is little for the Scottish Parliament to do." This Parliament needs control over energy policy to deliver a sustainable Scotland. Westminster's record on oil and gas shows that it has no interest in sustainable energy resources. For decades, the Westminster policy has been, "Get the oil out as quickly as possible." The theme of the Government's documents is that, to deliver sustainability, we need to change attitudes in Scotland and Scottish society. However, how can we eradicate poverty when expenditure decisions and fiscal policy are decided in London? How can we tackle fuel poverty when energy policy and social security  policy are also decided in London? We do not even have our own representation in Europe to create a sustainable fishing policy. We would have much more influence than we do at present if we had our own member status in the EU. Of course, Westminster keeps its grubby hands on Scotland's financial resources. Local government is expected to deliver local sustainability through Agenda 21 and other measures. However, local government is busy dealing with financial crisis after financial crisis. How on earth is it supposed to find the time for long-term thinking about and planning for sustainability? I am sure that the well-used phrase "Think globally, act locally" has been mentioned several times. I can assure the Executive that the SNP wants Scotland to act globally, but that can happen only with independence. Furthermore, we want control of our own resources so that Scotland can act locally as well.

Will the minister tell us what help the Executive has given to Scotland's fish processors so that they can meet their obligations under the urban waste water directive? What more help does it plan to give before jobs are shed due to the exorbitant costs involved in meeting those obligations?

It was a question about the processing industry.

rose—

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

To ask the Scottish Executive how many meetings it has had with European agriculture commissioner Franz Fischler to discuss the problems in the pig industry in Scotland. (S1O-995)

I will take that as a no. Farmers have been pulling their hair out about the lack of response from the Scottish Executive to their plight. Will the minister tell us whether he is willing to jump on a plane to Brussels, have a face-to-face meeting with Franz Fischler and come back with some clear, straight answers—no ifs, buts or maybes—about the availability of state aid  for the pig industry? If the minister is not willing to do that, our farmers will begin to wonder what point there is in having a Minister for Rural Affairs who is too shy to speak to the commissioner and too weak to stand up to the Treasury in London.

Given that state aid has not been ruled out, will the minister answer the industry's appeal with the positive response that he will have a face-to-face meeting with the European Union commissioner?

I welcome the minister's statement. She has said that the proposal for massive hikes in water charges will be unwelcome. I assure her that that is a huge understatement. There will be outrage throughout Scotland at the charges, particularly in places like Forth valley, where, in two years' time, there will have been a 300 per cent increase in water bills since Labour came to power. In the Highlands and Islands, in two years' time, bills will have broken the £300 barrier. Private finance initiative schemes are conspicuous by their absence from the minister's statement. Will she come clean and admit that the reason for the increases is to force the current generation of customers to pay what can only be described as a tap tax? That tax is designed to provide profits for the private companies in whose hands the minister is placing Scotland's water industry. Will the minister confirm that NoSWA proposed issuing a bond as an alternative to PFI, but was turned down? Will she also confirm that she has pursued the writing off of debt in the water industry to keep bills down? What action has she taken to keep bills down for the hard-pressed consumers in Scotland, whose bills have shot up since Labour came to power?

Will the minister give way?

The minister mentions availability and treatment. Does he agree that Grampian Health Board's current policy of sending patients to rehabilitation and detox facilities in England is not appropriate and illustrates the lack of facilities in that region? Is he willing to speak to Grampian Health Board about its policy?

I will talk about the implications of the minister's proposals for rural communities around Scotland and appreciate that my remarks will echo many of the fine points that have been made earlier today. Alarm bells are ringing in rural housing associations around Scotland due to the extension of the right to buy. Rural communities have far  fewer choices. If houses are sold off, people must leave the community and live elsewhere. It is not the same as in larger towns and cities, where people can simply transfer to another part of the community and take a bus to visit their friends or go to work. Rural communities are much more sensitive to ill-thought-out proposals such as this one. The only people who tend to win when properties are sold off in rural communities are incomers and estate agents. The locals lose out. We can see that there are already problems in some communities in Scotland, such as Raasay, where the local Lochalsh and Skye Housing Association is unable to find land to build the four units that it is desperate to build. The association has only four units in the area. If one or two are sold off, the problem will be exacerbated. There are also problems in smaller communities, such as Memsie in Aberdeenshire, which has only three public sector houses—despite the fact that there are 3,600 people on the waiting list in Aberdeenshire—compared with six a few years ago. The Government's proposals will lead to worse problems in that area of the world. We need much more social rented housing, not less. Members should not just take the SNP's word for it. According to "Rural Audit: a health check on rural Britain", a piece of independent research commissioned by Labour MPs and published only a few months ago: "A number of studies have found that the problems of affordability in rural areas have worsened over the last decade. One clear reason for this has been the substantial shortfall of provision of social housing." The Government's rural development framework of 1998, which has a foreword from the First Minister, who was Secretary of State for Scotland at the time, says: "Rural housing problems are exacerbated by second and holiday homes, commuters, retiring incomers and the Right to Buy." Members need not take our word for it, therefore, but the Government's own word.

Yes. The member makes an excellent point and I certainly agree with what she says. The problem is that the minister is so cocooned in her Edinburgh office that she is completely out of touch with the reality on the ground in rural  Scotland. It is not easy to find land to build homes to replace those that are sold off. There are infrastructure problems, which can cost local authority housing associations a lot of money. As Shetland Islands Council has pointed out in correspondence with many members, North of Scotland Water Authority will not connect houses on distant parts of land in rural communities because of the exorbitant cost of doing so. The work of many of our associations has been undermined by the Government's proposals. Voluntary organisations and the people who work for them have put in a lot of time and effort because they believed that they were setting up something for the benefit of the whole community. Now they see that what they have done may be on the open market somewhere down the line. Their work has been undermined and to a certain extent they have been betrayed. The minister's policy aims to extend ownership in urban communities where there is a lot of rented accommodation. In rural communities, the situation is the opposite. There is plenty of ownership, but not enough affordable rented accommodation for local people, particularly young people and young families, who want to stay in their communities. The policy is ill thought out. No one to whom I have spoken—I expect that this is the same for other members—in rural communities and rural housing associations supports the proposal. The message to Wendy Alexander that I have heard from people is, "Get off your high horse and stop trying to make a name for yourself at the expense of rural Scotland." The SNP's message to Wendy Alexander is, "Don't wreck rural housing in the same way that you have wrecked housing in many urban areas of Scotland." If she does not take on board the many real, pressing concerns, the Minister for Communities will become the minister who destroyed communities.

When the First Minister next meets John Reid, will he persuade Mr Reid that he is the Secretary of State for Scotland, as opposed to the secretary of state against Scotland? He can show us that he is the Secretary of State for Scotland by implementing the recommendations in the recent report by the Rural Affairs Committee. That report calls for the restoration of 6,000 square miles of our seas to Scottish jurisdiction. Will the First Minister use this opportunity to tell Parliament whether he supports the recommendations and will he be doing his utmost to urge the Secretary of State for Scotland to ensure that we get our waters back?

Does the minister accept that, only yesterday, the chamber debated, on an Executive motion, laws that are several hundred years old?

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that Mike Rumbles should withdraw his attack on the Rural Affairs Committee, given that he was not at the meeting at which it was decided to publish the report?

I welcome the minister's statement, although it is long overdue. Why has there been such a lengthy delay in introducing flexibility into the Government's policy, which can only be described as heavy-handed and cack-handed? Why has it taken nearly half a year and the slaughter of millions of healthy fish to bring the minister to his senses and make him realise that his policy is untenable? Why has it taken so long to initiate intensive wild fish surveillance, when the incidence of ISA in wild fish has fundamental ramifications for the Government's policy? Does it remain the Government's policy to slaughter healthy fish, and what assistance will be given to the industry to help it to meet the costs incurred by the Government's policy?

On a point of order. This is a speech, not a question.

Will the minister give way?

Does the minister accept that it is not only the SNP's opinion that the Scottish fisheries minister should have lead  responsibility for the whole of the UK in European negotiations, but the view of the industry?

As Mr Rumbles is looking for the positive, I take it that he will be supporting the SNP amendment. If not, will he point out the bits with which he disagrees?

Will the member give way?

I welcome this debate, which is our first real opportunity to address the many concerns of the Scottish fishing industry. Unlike electronics and other modern industries, fishing is a traditional industry that has been around as long as Scotland itself. It is woven into the fabric of many of Scotland's coastal communities and supports important jobs in rural areas. Fishing communities have high expectations of this Parliament, having been let down time and time again by successive London Administrations. Too often, their interests were used as a bargaining chip in the European Union so that Westminster Governments could achieve their wider European aims. That must end with devolution and the establishment of this Parliament. The minister must prove that things have changed. His success in achieving his objectives for the Scottish fishing industry will depend on two factors. First, beneficial change must be sought by member states in the negotiations—in this case, the member state is the UK. Secondly, pursuing that change must be a top priority for the Government, which has not been the case in the past. If we are to believe the minister, there is absolutely no need to worry, because he and the UK fisheries minister are at one on every issue under the sun and there is never any disagreement. However, we must ask what went wrong in November at the Fisheries Council. The UK minister voted against the package that was agreed, but Scotland's fisheries minister, John Home Robertson, issued a press release on his return to Scotland that said: "There are a range of measures in the final outcome which will have a resonance with the Scottish fishing industry." The UK minister voted against a package that our  minister thought was good for Scotland. Who could blame Hamish Morrison, the eloquent chief executive of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, who is in the gallery today, for saying that the more things change, the more they stay the same? When the Deputy Minister for Rural Affairs took office, the first thing that he did was to defend Westminster's theft of Scotland's waters. He has a bad habit of accepting the negative things that come out of MAFF in London and rejecting some of the more positive things. I have mentioned the proposals to cut capacity in the pelagic sector, which is one of the negative proposals that the minister appears to embrace, despite its ramifications for the Scottish fishing industry. As a result of that cut, those in the Dutch fishing industry will be rubbing their hands in glee, as they will have the chance to buy up Scottish vessels that are forced to leave the industry because of those unreasonable capacity reductions. While there is healthy stock and healthy quota, I urge the minister to dispense with those demands, which will damage the Scottish industry. When a positive scheme from MAFF—the safety improvement vessel grants—was stopped last May, we did not hear a whimper of protest from the Scottish fisheries minister. We still do not know whether that is a London scandal or a Scottish scandal.

I very much welcome the minister's announcement of a new scheme, but why on earth did we have to wait six months for it? Surely the safety of our fishing fleet is a matter of the utmost importance. Does the safety of Scottish fishermen depend on the ability of MAFF to sell a fruit and vegetable site in Covent Garden? Or is it the case, as Alex Salmond made Elliot Morley admit in the London Parliament this week, that the Scottish Executive had the cash for a new scheme all along but did not access it to implement a new initiative? That is appalling. We do not know whether that is a London scandal or a Scottish scandal, but perhaps the minister can enlighten us.

I understand that the minister was appointed to his position in May. Despite the fact that this Parliament did not have legislative powers until 1 July, he was in office in May and June—six months ago. He should learn his calendar better. It seems to be a case of business as usual, here in Scotland and in Brussels. Yet Scotland has 70 per cent of the UK's fishing entitlement and there is £250 million of turnover in the Scottish fishing industry at the quayside. We are the second largest catcher of fish in the whole of the European Union. In the vital talks in Brussels in a couple of weeks' time, Scotland's fishing industry surely has more of a stake than the industry from any other part of the UK. Therefore, the Scottish minister should have lead ministerial responsibility for the whole of the UK in Europe. What matters is voting for the UK, not just talking. The minister tells us that he leads for Scotland because he speaks at those meetings. He should have the votes, because two thirds of the industry's base is in Scotland. We have more of an interest in the outcome of those talks than anyone else does. The case for lead ministerial responsibility being transferred to Scotland is unassailable. I ask the minister to put that case to the UK minister. On fisheries management, the annual merry-go-round of the quota negotiations has highlighted many problems. Our fishing representatives are forced to wait outside meeting rooms while others embark on damage limitation. That is not the way in which to work. The fishermen should be involved in setting the quotas and working with the scientists from day 1. There should be more flexibility in the quota system. There should be on-going assessment, not on-going crisis management. Multi-annual, multi-species arrangements must be considered. There is too much discarding of fish under current arrangements. If the quotas are slashed, the fishermen must land only the best fish, which means that other fish are discarded. Bad catches lead to even more fish being discarded. I welcome the minister's comments about technical measures. That is the way forward, but we should not forget that policy must conserve our fish stocks. That is not happening under the current arrangements, which could be greatly improved. I welcome the industry's call for a standing committee, with scientists and fishermen working together. I urge the minister to support that.  Franz Fischler has said that next year will be the brainstorming year on the future and reform of the common fisheries policy. Has our fisheries minister started brainstorming about what is going to happen to the CFP? He has made some welcome comments today, but that is the first that we have heard; the real brainstorming will happen in three weeks' time. We must come back and debate that, because the future of our industry is dependent on those negotiations. The SNP wants to see zonal management. Dr Allan Macartney, the SNP's late deputy leader, successfully advanced that concept in the European Parliament. The coastal states—to which fishing entitlement belongs—should bring together their scientists and fishermen so that they can build the best possible management plans. We must protect the historical rights to fishing by protecting the Hague preferences, which the minister should not be shy in forcing at the Fisheries Council in Brussels. What will our minister say if the UK minister tells him, "No, you are not using Hague preferences"? People who want to enter the fishing industry face many obstacles. Often, a quarter of the investment in a fishing enterprise is on the vessel. The rest of the investment has to go on the cost of licences and track record. That prevents new people from coming into the industry. I urge the minister to call a summit of the industry in Scotland so that we can discuss how to encourage new people to join the industry. I read in the Fishing News last week that 24 young men had embarked on a course in Banff and Buchan College of Further Education. What hope can we give them? We must tell them that fishing entitlement will be available for them and we must address the issue of costs. I welcome important initiatives by Highlands and Islands Enterprise and in Shetland to protect quota for local fishermen. The choice facing the minister is clear. He can continue to be the over-zealous policeman in Scotland of the UK minister in Europe, or he can tackle the fact that our fishermen do not have a level playing field and give them a helping hand by fighting his utmost for Scotland in Europe. The only way in which he can do that is by demanding that our minister in Scotland, with responsibility for two thirds of the industry, has lead responsibility for EU negotiations. I move amendment S1M-358.1, to insert at end: "negotiate the transfer of lead responsibility for European Union fisheries negotiations from Her Majesty's Government to the Scottish Executive, in recognition of Scotland's dominant position within the UK industry; pursue a control regime for the Scottish industry that does not place it at a competitive disadvantage in comparison to other EU fleets, and influence the forthcoming reform of the Common Fisheries Policy by bringing forward proposals to  introduce the concept of zonal management thereby involving the industry itself in the decision-making process, whilst maintaining the founding principles of the original agreement, namely relative stability, the Hague preferences and historic fishing rights, to re-affirm that the Common Fisheries Policy is not a free-for-all."

Will the minister give way?

I thank the minister. Given the health of pelagic stocks and the quota, will the minister recommend that we dispense with demands for capacity reductions for the pelagic sector in Scotland? If the sector has to reduce capacity, vessels will have to exit the Scottish industry. The Dutch will be laughing. They will buy up Scottish vessels and fish our stocks.

rose—

Will the minister give way?

I have a number of years to wait before I reach retiral age. I do not know whether I am the youngest contributor to the debate as I do not  know what age Karen Gillon is.

Is it you, Tricia? I am delighted to participate in this debate, which is a great chance for the Parliament to discuss the key concerns of older people in Scotland. My generation knows that we owe those people a tremendous debt. That is why I am determined that this Parliament should do its utmost to deliver for them. Older people's expectations of the Parliament are high. They have been disappointed time and time again by successive Westminster Governments that have failed to show any political will or determination to help older people in Scotland. Many people are familiar with an SNP slogan which says that Scotland is the only country to discover oil and get poorer. It is clear from a report in today's press that Scotland has continued to get poorer, and it is an indictment of Westminster rule of Scotland over the decades—and, in particular, of the Labour party's rule of Glasgow—that the same report says that elderly people in Scotland are dying sooner than elsewhere in the United Kingdom. One reason for that is that, not only is Scotland the only country to discover oil and get poorer, but it is the only country to discover oil and gas and still allow old people to live in conditions in which they cannot heat their homes properly. We have heard many statistics today: more than 100,000 households in Scotland headed by people over 60 are without central heating; in 18 per cent of cases, single pensioners do not heat their main living rooms on a regular basis. We are told that one in three pensioners lives in fuel poverty and spends 20 per cent of his or her income on trying to keep warm. Yet Scotland is Europe's energy capital. Here we are in 1999: production of North sea oil and gas is at record levels for the past 25 years of production. One of the cruellest ironies must be that, although revenues are up 62 per cent from the same time last year, and despite all the natural resources under Scottish waters and the wells that produce that most precious natural resource in the world, there are people living on the land adjacent to those oilfields, within sight of the oil rigs, who cannot afford to heat their homes. Surely that is a scandal, and one that successive Westminster Governments of all political shades have allowed to continue. We all know that we get the harshest of winters in Scotland, yet we hear that our old people will get £100 of winter fuel payments and a 75p increase in their pensions. They have a wholly inadequate severe weather payment scheme, run by Westminster. A payment of £100 for fuel in  winter only costs £50 million a year. Are we saying that £50 is adequate to heat the homes of the 900,000 pensioners in Scotland? Surely the fact that the excess winter mortality rate among old people in Finland is less than half that of Scotland tells us that the policies coming out of Westminster simply do not work for old folk in Scotland. As was mentioned earlier in the debate, it is the same old story from Westminster. Yes, Westminster has delivered the £100 winter payment, but what else is happening? New Labour in Scotland is cutting back on local authority budgets, which means that it is giving that £100 with one hand but taking money away with the other. There have been protests and demonstrations by old people around Scotland in recent months and years, because of increased charges for wardens, for home help and for visits to day care centres. Old folk even have to pay more in shops for their food in rural areas: that means more money taken from their budget because of the rise in fuel duty, which has a particularly bad impact in rural areas. A significant step forward needs to be taken, with proper, adequately resourced and structured severe weather payments in Scotland. The current scheme is completely unsatisfactory; it does not take into account different climatic conditions around the country. The trigger is set at an inadequate level. There has to be an ice age before our old folk are helped. In conclusion, the Executive does have a big challenge before it to deliver a better Scotland for our old people, but if it does not meet it, it should have the guts to return to this chamber in two years' time and admit that only in an independent Scotland will we have access to the resources that will deliver a better quality of life for old people in this country.

The Scottish National party joins the beef industry in welcoming the long-awaited announcement on what today's The  Press and Journal called the "beef-on-the-bone farce". It will certainly bring farmers some cheer in time for Christmas, but will the Minister for Health and Community Care detail the changes in scientific evidence and in the statistics that have persuaded the Executive to lift that unnecessary ban? The minister said that consumers should be given the opportunity to choose—why did she not believe that before today, given that the sale of beef on the bone posed no more risk to human health than many other products on sale? Does she accept that the Government's delay in lifting the ban has inflicted further damage on Scotland's beef industry and that it now deserves maximum support to enable it to get back into its former markets?

What does the member intend to do with the drug barons, once they are caught?

I welcome this debate. From the election campaign for this Parliament, we all remember the feeling expressed on doorsteps throughout the country about law and order. For instance, when I was campaigning in Aberdeen, I met an elderly lady whose house had been broken into three times in a year. That woman now lives a life of fear, and we must keep people like her at the forefront of our minds when we are debating this subject. Crime and police levels are not just an urban issue; they are a rural issue. I was surprised that Jim Wallace said, when defending the closure of Penninghame open prison, that it was remote from the central belt. Perhaps when he is in the chamber he can explain what he meant by that. There is a widespread belief throughout our rural communities that police levels are declining and crime levels are increasing. However, the Executive's amendment says that one of its objectives is "to encourage stronger links between the police and the communities in which they operate". That is commendable but, in many of our rural areas, the police stations have been closed over the past decade. As Colin Campbell quite rightly said, one reason for that is the lack of funds and the enforced sell-off of the family silver. The well-kent village bobby really is becoming a thing of the past, and we are losing all the benefits of the informal policing that the village bobby could use to defuse volatile situations. That simply does not happen any more. Rural crime is compounded by the physical and social isolation of our rural communities, and police response times are lengthy. Every time there are cuts it seems to be the rural police stations that are first to go. A couple of years ago, I was given a tour by Grampian police in a rural area in the north-east, whose name I will not mention in case any potential criminals are listening. Because there are no rural police stations these days, a couple of police officers go round the area in a panda car throughout the night. I could hardly believe the extent of the area that two police officers were expected to cover. I encourage every rural MSP in this chamber to go out with the police and tour the rural areas. They will be staggered. If the public knew, they would also be outraged.

Margaret Ewing makes an excellent point that emphasises the need for special consideration for policing in rural Scotland. New ideas are needed to support traditional policing in both rural and urban areas. I would like the Executive to address the question of air surveillance and air support. Tayside police and Grampian police are enthusiastic about that new type of policing, which is great for chasing vehicles or searching for missing persons. The police forces in England have been given several million pounds of pump priming funding to start such projects. That money has been provided by the Home Office, but the Scottish Executive has not announced that there will be similar assistance in Scotland. However, it is a valuable means of assistance for protecting life and property and we should be supporting our police forces in establishing that service. Finally, I turn to prison cuts. Many members have already outlined the serious concerns that the SNP has about those cuts. We should be boosting the morale of the people in the front line of law and order, including prison officers, rather than depleting it yet further. About a year ago, the trade union side issued a report called "Work and Health in the Scottish Prison Service", which emphasised the amount of stress that prison officers experience in their day-to-day jobs. That is due to a range of factors, including bullying in the workplace, as management seeks to enforce efficiency savings. The situation is unacceptable and is likely to worsen with fewer prison officers and prisons. As the report says, there should be more, not less, investment in the Prison Service. Diverting the cash to the drugs enforcement agency is ironic. As I understand its purpose, it is to catch drug dealers and imprison them. Surely, if it does its job, that means that the prison population will increase. The Executive has failed to take that into account. Other speakers have mentioned the mothballing of the Peterhead unit. That decision is inexplicable, with no alternative being put forward for dealing with difficult prisoners. Law and order in Scotland took a nosedive under 18 years of the Tories. If the Executive does not want to follow in their footsteps, it should give us more prisons, more prison officers and more police on the beat, and support the SNP amendment.

Does the member agree that there are not enough youth facilities in Scotland? One helpful thing that the Executive could do would be to carry  out an audit of such facilities throughout Scotland.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it is aware of what plans local authorities intend to make to provide technical support in schools to assist teachers in the light of the provision for information and communications technology for schools through the excellence fund. (S1O-575)

Teachers, like all MSPs, welcome the increased use of IT in the classroom, but there is concern that inadequate support will be available in terms of training and technical support for teachers, who are already expected to wear a variety of hats—

—and learn a variety of skills. It is essential that they are given the proper back-up—

—but there is concern among teachers that they are not going to get it. Will the minister give an assurance that he will put the teachers' concerns to the local authorities?

Will the minister give way?

Will the member give way?

This is the final pig question of the day. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it intends to write to local authorities and other public authorities highlighting the quality of pigmeat produced in Scotland and urging them to support the industry by sourcing their orders from local producers. (S1O-510)

I welcome the minister's answer. Many people will have noticed that many members are wearing badges that say, "Save the Scottish Pig Industry". In addition, I urge all members to sign the all-party motion that was lodged today. I urge the minister to use every measure possible to encourage people to buy  Scottish pigmeat.

First, I congratulate the Procedures Committee and the Presiding Officer on agreeing to allow members who move non-Executive motions to wind up their own debates. That is a very positive and welcome development. There have been some excellent speeches in this debate, and one or two reasonable contributions from the Labour party. We would have preferred more speeches from Labour MSPs, but of course they were not in the chamber to make them. One of the reasons rural affairs and concerns have been quite high on the Scottish Parliament's agenda since its inception is the fact that the Parliament has so many regional members. Indeed, seven out of the eight regions represented have rural concerns. As we have heard, rural Scotland is not homogeneous. Each area has different concerns that require different solutions. In one area, ferry prices might be the main issue; lack of amenities might be the main issue in another; and unemployment and housing, which Murray Tosh mentioned, might be the major problems in others. That is why it is important for solutions that tackle rural disadvantage to emerge from a bottom-up,  not a top-down, process. Each local community will know best how to tackle disadvantage. We need to speak to and to work in partnership with communities. In Aberdeen yesterday, many delegates at a conference on rural development were concerned about access to policy making and to the Scottish Parliament. They were concerned that the Parliament would make policy without taking their concerns on board. The Parliament must reflect the whole of Scotland, including rural Scotland. One useful signal that we could send out for starters would be for our committees to meet outside Edinburgh as often as possible. We must not allow that to be prevented by penny-pinching by the Executive. Proper resources should be made available so that our committees can take on board local concerns. The dispersal of civil service jobs would also send out an excellent signal from the Parliament and the Executive. Civil service jobs should be dispersed to our smaller communities. With advances in information technology, that should not be a problem and we look forward to it happening. When we talk about local solutions to local problems, we must recognise the role of local authorities. There is no point in denying local authorities the cash to provide the front-line services that make many smaller rural communities viable. It is important that we work in partnership with local authorities to initiate joint action to develop infrastructure—roads, telecommunications and housing. Many members have mentioned the lack of infrastructure and the threat to the existing infrastructure in rural communities. Local authorities are also responsible for the provision of services. The lack of rural policing in many areas of Scotland must be tackled, as must the issue of post offices. It is imperative that there is joint action to ensure that rural banking services are available too. The Executive and the Parliament have a role to play in working with local communities and local authorities to achieve those aims. We must ensure a good quality of life in rural Scotland. That means providing amenities. Many towns in Scotland with a population of 13,000 or 14,000 do not have cinema or a sports centre. In a rich country such as Scotland, that is unacceptable. We must not forget our young people. How on earth can our smaller communities be viable without young people living and working in them? If we do not provide amenities, is it any wonder that young people cannot wait to move to the larger towns and cities? We blame young people for hanging around street corners, but we do not  give them the facilities to allow them to go elsewhere. The Executive could, perhaps, start by initiating an audit of youth facilities in Scotland, particularly in rural communities where such facilities are a major issue. We must also have an audit of services to address issues such as the growing drugs problem. Partnership is important not only to overcome the threats to rural Scotland that have been mentioned today, but to harness the many opportunities to develop our rural economy. We must work together to develop not only the traditional industries such as farming, fishing and forestry, but the many new industries, such as renewable energy, for which Scotland has huge potential. Denmark, a country equivalent in size to Scotland, employs many thousands more people in renewable energy in rural communities than we do. Duncan Hamilton mentioned the advantages of information and communications technology and its potential for building the rural economy. We must exploit that potential to the full. New sectors are also developing in aquaculture, which offer tremendous opportunities. However, there are problems, such as the lack of a Government freshwater fisheries strategy. That is no use. The freshwater fisheries sector has tremendous potential for tourism, as well as other economic benefits. Organic farming, which Robin Harper mentioned, must also be developed for the benefit of our rural economy. I have already said that it is important that the Parliament is seen to represent the whole of Scotland. At yesterday's conference, one senior council official expressed concern that every time there is a factory closure within a few miles of Edinburgh or the central belt, the Executive seems rather more motivated to do something about it—to pull out all the stops—than when there is a closure or a threat to jobs in the periphery of Scotland. That rang a bell with me.

The member's point is well made. I certainly agree with him. There is currently a threat hanging over hundreds of jobs at RAF Buchan in Boddam outside Peterhead. The people there, the local council and others involved in the campaign, have no clue what the Executive is doing to help them. All there has been is one sentence in The Press and Journal from Jim Wallace, saying that the  Executive will make a case on their behalf. To illustrate the problem, I asked the Executive a written question: "To ask the Scottish Executive what action it has taken to make the case for the retention of RAF Buchan, to whom the case was put and when it was made." The reply from the Executive was: "The Scottish Executive is in regular contact with the Ministry of Defence on a wide range of issues including the consultation on the future of RAF Buchan." — [ Official Report, Written Answers, 26 October 1999; Vol 3, p 12.] So no one knows what is happening there.

I will give way very briefly if that is okay, Presiding Officer.

Well, what can I say? I wholeheartedly agree.

I am sorry; I have taken enough interventions and I do not have long left. The title of yesterday's conference in Aberdeen was "The Scottish Parliament and Rural Policy: What Room for Manoeuvre?" We have just heard from London that interest rates have gone up. There is plenty of room for manoeuvre by the Scottish Executive here in the Scottish Parliament. In the recent agriculture debate, Andrew Welsh asked what action the Executive was taking on the beef ban and whether any meetings were planned with the French Government. The Minister for Rural Affairs replied: "Personally, I have had no such meetings. However, I have added the Scottish Executive's needs to the memos that are currently being circulated through our UK representative and through our ambassadorial team".— [ Official Report , 7 October 1999; Vol 2, c 1194.]  Penning a name to the bottom of a memo is not exactly the representation that our rural industries are looking for from the first Minister for Rural Affairs in the first Scottish Parliament for 300 years. The Scottish Executive should be leading  European negotiations in appropriate circumstances as a matter of course—as opposed to as and when it gets permission from the UK Government in London. There are plenty of things that we should be doing. The Minister for Rural Affairs should be flying down to London and making representations about the impact of the interest rate rise and fuel duty on our rural economy. The SNP does not underestimate the task before the Scottish Parliament. It is enormous, and it will require fresh thinking. We have to take on board the concerns of local communities and of the experts in the Arkleton Centre for Rural Development Research, the Macaulay Land Use Research Institute and the rest. We need fresh thinking to take rural Scotland forwards. In the annual report of the Macaulay institute, Jeff Maxwell says: "National and local government, their agencies, voluntary bodies, land owners and local communities will all have to find new ways of interacting and finding a common purpose. This is no mean challenge and one that, in Scotland, is likely to continue for some time to exercise the minds of those who have been recently elected to the new Parliament". The SNP's choice of motion for today illustrates that those challenges are exercising the minds of SNP members. We invite the other parties in the Parliament to join us in finding the long-term solutions by supporting our motion, so that we can make the phrase "rural disadvantage" redundant.

rose—

The minister mentioned accountants. Does the recent financial statement allocate more or less money over the next three years to rural affairs in Scotland than was allocated in the last three years of the previous Tory Government?

I welcome this statement coming so soon after the Fisheries Council meeting, although I am astonished that it will not be a regular occurrence. I urge the minister to take on board the pelagic industry's concerns as these discussions are on-going. Does the minister agree that it is not just attendance at Fisheries Council meetings that matters? What matters is being able to wield authority on behalf of the Scottish fishing industry. I would like to know if he did that, how he did that, and if he had to clear his line with the minister from the fisheries department in London? Did he  have to clear his line before sticking up for the Scottish fishing industry? That is an important question for the fishermen in connection with issues such as fleet renewal and modernisation, which are referred to in the statement. If funds become available under the proposed regulations, does the minister support the industry's case to access funds for fleet renewal and modernisation which have been denied them in the past? Will he put the industry's case on that matter?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I will try to be quick. I, too, welcome the debate on Scottish agriculture, given its importance to the economy and to Scotland as a whole. The word crisis is often so over-used that it loses its meaning, but in the current context of farming, crisis is the only word that we can use. The crisis affects every farmer in every sector, the length and breadth of Scotland. Yesterday, pig farmers visited the Parliament to make a presentation to MSPs—they are in the middle of a huge crisis. Many pig farmers have to sell the family silver, even their families' insurance policies, to survive the next few months. Anyone who read last week's Sunday Post will have seen an absolutely shocking picture relating to the crisis facing sheep farmers. The words underneath the picture say that it is "a picture which should shock anyone who sees it." The picture is of a farmer shooting his own lambs, because that is the cheapest option open to him. That must be incredibly demoralising. It is an appalling state of affairs.  The difficulties facing beef farmers have been outlined by many members. We all know that beef farmers are having to jump through hoops to get their beef back into the markets. A couple of weeks ago, a farmer sold his cattle at the auction mart for £5. After commission was deducted, he received a cheque for 1p; he is framing that cheque to remind him, in future years, of the current crisis. Livestock farmers face many common challenges. We want the Scottish Executive to tackle those challenges head on. The Scottish Executive can take vital measures, which depend on no more than assertiveness, determination and political will. The farmers are not looking for handouts; they are looking for a level playing field so that they can compete in international markets. They want less red tape and costly bureaucracy, which is an enormous burden on all sectors of industry. They want our loyalty—the loyalty of consumers to put Scottish produce in their shopping baskets. We want Ross Finnie to make representations on behalf of the industry with that determination and political will. We want him to bang on Gordon Brown's door, to speak to him about the fuel duty, to demand actions and to demand answers. The increase in the price of fuel hit six times over the cost of the journey that takes cattle from field to plate. It increases the costs of taking the cattle from the hill farmer to the mart, from the finisher to the farm, from the farm to the abattoir, from the abattoir to the central distribution point and from there to the supermarket, from where the consumer takes the meat home. Because of the fuel duty, the cost increases six times over—and the cost always lands with the primary producer. That must change. I must also mention interest rates, which have led to cheap imports and increasingly difficult export conditions for the industry. One farmer from Gordon told me that the most recent 0.25 per cent increase in interest rates cost him £5,000—with a stroke of a pen, Government policy cost that farmer £5,000. We want Ross Finnie to knock on the doors of all the banks to get their co-operation, too. As many speakers have said, we also want him to fly to France to speak to the French Government and to put the case for the Scottish farmers in person. We want the minister to get the supermarkets on board as well. Let us not forget the young farmers. For agriculture to survive in Scotland, we need young men and women to take over the farms. The young farmers are being put off farming. The farmer who lost £5,000 told me that his son had decided not to go into farming. That trend will be repeated across the country unless we address the challenges that face the industry.  The Scottish National party demands that the minister do all that he can to face the challenges and to help the industry, so that Scottish agriculture can continue to make a vital contribution to the Scottish economy, to Scottish culture and to Scotland as a whole.

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has conveyed to the Secretary of State for Scotland the fishing industry's concerns relating to the Scottish Adjacent Waters Boundaries Order (SI 1999/1126) as resolved by the Parliament on 3 June 1999 under motion S1M-19 as amended and, if so, whether it intends to inform the fishing industry and the Parliament of the Secretary of State's response. (S1O-427)

Given that it has been four months since the issue was raised in Parliament and Ross Finnie was requested to make representations to the Secretary of State for Scotland on behalf of the fishing industry, and it is six weeks since I lodged a parliamentary question—which remains unanswered—asking for some feedback on how the minister got on with the secretary of state, does not John Home Robertson feel that he should take the matter a little more seriously and help the fishermen whom he is supposed to represent?

Is the minister aware that fishermen in East Lothian are united behind the rest of the industry's campaign to get Scotland's stolen waters returned to Scottish jurisdiction and  that their campaign is on-going? They are ploughing resources into their campaign to get the waters back and they are looking for action from their fisheries minister to support their case.

Can Mr Wallace reconcile the answer that he gave me on 21 September—that the Scottish Parliament would not be party to any concordats—with his words on 2 December 1997 in the House of Commons, when he sought assurance from the then minister that the concordats would indeed come before the Scottish Parliament?

I thank Lord James for giving way. In light of his comments in connection with the fishing industry, will he join me in condemning the recent comments made by the House of Commons Agriculture Committee in its report on sea fishing? The report says that concordats should be used to curb any advantage that devolution might give to Scotland's fishermen.

Will the member give way?

I will be brief as I appreciate that many local members want to make a speech. I congratulate Tavish on his motion and on bringing the subject before Parliament. The motion reminds us of the important contribution that salmon farming makes to the Scottish economy. The industry sustains more than 6,000 jobs in fragile communities around the country and in places such as Shetland in particular. Given that the income from the industry has materialised during the past 15 years or so, the industry reminds us how a relatively new industry can contribute to the Scottish economy. Pressures such as infectious salmon anaemia, which affect the industry, are causing a decline in profit margins. Salmon farming needs to be much higher up the Government's list of priorities. Many other crises similar to those being  experienced in salmon farming affect our rural communities. I feel that we need much faster Government responses to them. I would like to know whether there are any plans in the Scottish Executive rural affairs department to create fast response units. I want to get people and officials into rural communities to speak to the people concerned and to come up with solutions as soon as a crisis arises. The seven-month delay—from the announcement of the original £9 million package, with strings attached, to the most recent announcement, with the strings removed—is unacceptable. Officials and industry representatives do not want to spend their energies lobbying the Government for assistance. They have other things to do with their time, such as trying to make a living and addressing the issues that concern them. We need a long-term and comprehensive strategy from the Government in connection with salmon farming and all fisheries—aquaculture, freshwater fisheries, inshore fisheries and deep-sea fishing—so that research needs and other matters can be taken into account. I look forward to the minister's response to my comments and those of my colleagues.

Thank you, Deputy Presiding Officer, I take on board your comments, but I am disappointed that the minister took 15 minutes to make her statement and that the Opposition is allowed only one question in response. I have, therefore, to limit my question to one aspect of the issue: the new arrangements for the regulation of the water industry. I congratulate Mr Sutherland on his appointment, but is it not the case that the new role of water commissioner is that of the Executive's placeman? Given that the water commissioner will be subservient to the civil servants as opposed to the customers—the water consumers—the voice of the consumer has been silenced. Would it not be a step in the right direction for the water commissioner to report back to the Parliament, rather than to the ministers, so that we can play a role in defending the customers' interests, given that they have not been taken into account under the new arrangements? Will the minister respond to concerns expressed by the Scottish Consumer Council—which are shared by the SNP—that the proposals to make the water commissioner chair the local, so-called consultative, committees will not lead to a strong independent voice for the consumer?

If the new role is—

rose—

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has made representations to Her Majesty's Government requesting that the Scottish Executive lead European and international fisheries negotiations on behalf of the United Kingdom. (S1O-317)

I was hoping for a straight yes. Is the minister aware that the fishing industry is 10 times more important to Scotland than it is to the UK, and that 70 per cent of UK fish catches are landed at Scottish ports? The fishing industry expects the Scottish fisheries minister to go over to Europe, not to carry the UK minister's bags, but to bring back the best possible deal for Scotland's fishing industry. Has the minister made representations directly to the UK Government for the Scottish fisheries department to lead all negotiations, given their overriding importance to the Scottish economy?

Does the minister accept  that the best deal for Scotland's fishermen will not be achieved if a representative from another Government conducts the negotiations on behalf of the Scottish industry?

rose  —

I welcome today's debate on the food standards agency. As a member of Parliament for North-East Scotland, I am delighted that the north-east has been chosen as a location for the Scottish Executive's arm of the agency. In welcoming the minister's statement, however, we must not lose sight of the fact that we are talking about only 35 jobs. Yes, it will bring prestige and valuable jobs to the north-east of  Scotland, but we should have been talking about the headquarters of the food standards agency coming to Scotland. That would have meant 150 new posts and the bulk of the existing 400 posts being transferred to the north-east. There was a massive campaign to bring the headquarters to the north-east but, as usual, the Government decided to keep its grubby hands on the civil service jobs. I hope that the Scottish Executive will not give to the north-east of Scotland with one hand and take away with the other. I am referring, of course, to the situation at the laboratories that are conducting research into E coli and campylobacter. This morning, I spoke on the phone to the director of the Central Public Health Laboratory in London; the laboratory there is similar to the one in Aberdeen. I was told that the London laboratory is clamouring to get more funding for campylobacter research in England and Wales, and is expanding its sampling regime to cover the whole country because the issue is considered to be of vital importance. Here in Scotland, however, the Scottish Executive is proposing that such research stop altogether. The setting up of a food standards agency has implications for the food industry in the north-east of Scotland. The food industry generates huge income for the north-east and is a massive employer. That is one reason why the agency is to be located in the north-east. We must not allow the new regulations that the food standards agency is likely to introduce to impose a higher financial burden on food producers, particularly primary food producers. We have already seen how pig, lamb and beef producers, as well as fish processors, have taken on a huge burden of charges to meet hygiene and welfare regulations. I would like an assurance from the minister that any future regulations will not impose an even higher financial burden on the food industry and that producers will be given assistance to meet those burdens. Finally, I hope that if the Scottish arm of the food standards agency does go to the north-east—which we would welcome—the 35 jobs it involves will not be just a gesture. We want a change of attitude from the Government, in which civil service jobs are dispersed. I do not want those 35 jobs to be the last to go to north-east Scotland, but to be the beginning of many more.

Is Bristow Muldoon aware that Scotland has its own health department?

I welcome the debate on Scottish culture. It is great to see us grabbing the cultural thistle so early in the first session of the Scottish Parliament. I agree with Elaine that if there were no Scottish culture, there would be no Scottish Parliament.  I want to seek a couple of assurances and to raise some concerns. I want to be assured that "Celebrating Scotland" is not simply another glossy document full of warm words and nice phrases. Let us have a refreshing approach from  the Executive-a response to the recommendation with a plan of action that is properly resourced. That is essential. It is crucial that running through the strategy is a thread that recognises the importance of allowing Scottish culture to develop as opposed to dictating that development.  Many people outwith the Parliament are sceptical about the document. Last night, I spoke to my colleague, Sandy Stronach, who is a great champion of Doric in the north-east of Scotland and who helps to organise the Doric festival, which is coming up in a short time. He looked at the document and said that he thought that, as usual, more effort had gone into the design than into its content.  It is no wonder that people such as Sandy Stronach are so sceptical when they see the membership of the focus group. "Representative" was not the word that Sandy used to describe it. That is no wonder when we consider the diverse cultural traditions throughout Scotland and then consider the focus group.  At the centre of any approach to Scottish culture must be a recognition of the unquantifiable contribution of many thousands of groups and agencies around the country. They are the people in the front line, the people who develop Scottish culture.  The document is called "Celebrating Scotland". In celebrating Scotland, we have to remember to celebrate the whole of Scotland. We need a bottom-up process, not a top-down process. That means channelling support and funding to the many groups around the country, and that is where we can help to develop Scottish culture.  In the document, I would like to have seen more recognition of the role of local authorities. Local authorities are usually left to pick up the tab to help organisations that are trying to develop Scottish culture by teaching all of us about it and by involving us in it. The local authorities are strapped for cash and, in turn, many of the groups that they help to fund are strapped for cash. We must remember that.  Local authorities and agencies create many diverse cultural initiatives. The recent opening of Dundee Contemporary Arts-a world-class and award-winning facility-is an example of the achievement of a local objective. Yet only 65 miles up the road, in the city of Aberdeen, we see the Aberdeen Arts Centre going round cap in hand to oil companies and local businesses, trying to get cash to survive. That arts centre is an important facility and venue in Aberdeen, and it is important that central Government should step in to help such organisations.  Another area where local authorities and agencies play a key role is in film production. Over  recent years we have seen a complete lack of support from successive Governments for Scotland's film-producing community. As a result, many local authorities and agencies have stepped in to fill the gap, creating, for example, film commissions. Much of Scotland now has such commissions; there are especially successful ones in Glasgow, Edinburgh and the Highlands and Islands, as well as two or three in other areas. New film initiatives are being developed in, for example, Tayside and Lanarkshire. Central Government has played absolutely no role in achieving those ends. Scottish Screen has assisted but it has been unable to give any direct financial assistance because it is strapped for cash as well. That is where central Government could come into play.  The film commissions provide training for script-writers, film-makers and so on, but they also provide an economic benefit for the local communities, which can promote themselves as film locations. In "Mission: Impossible"-and I am talking about the film starring Tom Cruise, not the Labour candidate's task in the Hamilton South by-election-the scene on top of the train was filmed in Dumfriesshire. Two weeks' shooting put £100,000 into the local economy, and that came about because of the local film initiative. That is the way in which central Government can step in and help local authorities and agencies.  It is important that the message from the new Scottish Executive is not the message that we were getting from Downing Street in previous years. Its cultural icons are things such as the millennium dome. Hundreds of millions of pounds could have gone into sustaining many of our local cultural organisations instead of London's dome. I welcome the opportunity today perhaps to hear the minister condemn the millennium dome and say that the Executive will put money into Scottish organisations from now on.

Further to Mr Neil's question, I ask for guidance as to whether you have authority to refer individual concordats to the relevant parliamentary committee for investigation.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way?

I thank the minister for allowing me to intervene. The industry is looking for more than sympathy from the new Administration. Does the Administration not have faith in its own ability to do a better job than the previous Administration on negotiating derogation in Europe?

It is his motion.

I congratulate David Davidson on securing the first item of members' business since yesterday's historic events and for choosing jobs in the fish processing industry as the subject. I am also delighted that we are again discussing fishing  matters-one of our first debates was also on a fishing matter, which shows the priority that this Parliament has given to the fishing industry.  Mr Davidson has eloquently expressed the concerns of the fish processing industry. I do not want to repeat what he has said in detail. I want to put on record the fact that, although the industry agrees with all the aims and objectives of the urban waste water directive, it is concerned that implementation will threaten many jobs in the north-east of Scotland.  The industry seeks a lasting and cost-effective solution. I can see no reason why NOSWA would oppose a delay in the implementation of the directive. There is nothing to prevent the minister from negotiating with Brussels for such a delay; it is a question of political will and determination. This is a new Parliament, the minister has a new position and she can decide to stick up for the industry by flying to Brussels to discuss with the relevant EU officials this important matter, which affects the livelihoods of many people in the north-east of Scotland.  The industry is asking for a breathing space. Even in the past few weeks there have been developments on this issue. Mr Davidson referred to a number of them. Labour-controlled Aberdeen City Council decided to proceed with its widely supported plans for the industry in that city. Today, Aberdeenshire Council is also discussing proposals to help the industry. The area's political representatives are doing what they can to support the industry's demands and industry leaders, some of whom we have with us today, are doing what they can for the employees.  It would be a great pity if Sarah Boyack did not do what she could to help. The key to arriving at an agreeable solution is in the minister's hands. If the minister does not decide today to bring a fresh approach from the Government, there could be job losses throughout the north-east of Scotland. NOSWA's bills could rise even higher. The north-east already pays the highest water bills in the country, but if the private finance initiative projects go ahead, the people of the north-east will pay money that is simply profit for the shareholders of those companies, such as Yorkshire Water, that are proposing to fund the projects. The people of the north-east will not accept that. If the minister takes no action, she will be getting off to a very poor start.  I make four requests of the minister. First, when she winds up the debate, I ask her not to use the dog-eared brief that was used by her predecessor in Westminster. We want to see a fresh approach. Secondly, I ask the minister to show determination and political willingness to negotiate with the EU representatives in Brussels at the earliest opportunity. Thirdly, I ask her to instruct NOSWA  not to sign any more contracts in connection with the PFI projects until the matter is resolved in favour of the food processing and fish processing industries in the north-east. Finally, I ask her to use the opportunity of her visit to Aberdeen, where she will be next week on another matter, to meet representatives from NOSWA, the local authorities and the industry to discuss how the Government can help the industry to overcome the impending crisis. I ask the minister to make a positive response to Mr Davidson's motion.

In her opening remarks, the minister stated that local government should take its rightful place in the new Scotland. Will she respond to my suggestion that that includes bringing Scotland's water authorities back under local government control? I draw the minister's attention to the advertisement in today's recruitment pages, through which the Executive wishes to employ directly a water industry commissioner-on a handsome wage of £65,000 a year-to give "the Scottish Executive independent advice".  I suggest to the minister that this commissioner, if employed directly by the Scottish Ministers, will be likely to let them hear what they want to hear, as they will be the paymasters. Does the minister agree that the Parliament should be responsible for employing the water industry commissioner?

To ask the Scottish Executive whether it has plans to introduce a distinct scheme to promote safety improvements in the Scottish fleet in view of the termination of the Fishing Vessel (Safety Improvements) (Grants) Scheme 1995 (S.I.1995/1609), and given the special circumstances of the Scottish fishing industry. (S1O-66)

Does the minister agree that it is ludicrous and incredibly unacceptable that the safety of our fishermen depends upon property deals in London? The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food failed to sell Covent Garden, so the deficit that was left led to the current fisheries grant scheme drying up.

I put it to the minister that, as the scheme is having a shake-up, this is an opportune time for the Scottish Executive to take responsibility both for funding the scheme and for administering it in Scotland.

Will the minister use the opportunity of her visit to Aberdeen to drive through the city and to encounter at first hand the difficulties experienced by people living in the north-east of Scotland?

Did Dr Jackson benefit from a free higher education? If she did, why does she wish to deny that same privilege to future generations?

Does the member accept that many of us who will be voting for the amendment are not wholly opposed to the Holyrood site, subject to amendments, and are in favour of a new building?

On a point of order, Madam Deputy Presiding Officer. I do not think that everyone understood which question was put. Will you repeat it?

The Liberal Democrat amendment does not give the people of Scotland and Scotland fishing communities, all of whom are watching today's events closely, what they want. They do not want the MSPs, the Scottish Parliament, to acknowledge that the fishing industry is concerned about what has happened in Westminster; they want to know our views. They want a declaration from the Scottish Parliament giving our view on what has happened in Westminster; do we want it reversed or do we not? It is a black and white issue, and it is simple. There is only one amendment that makes such a declaration and that is the one lodged by the SNP.  I should like to quote our esteemed First Minister elect, who in the introduction to a recent publication, "A Guide to the Scottish Parliament", said:  "The people of Scotland rightly have high hopes and expectations for their Parliament; they already feel a sense of ownership and of connection to it, and we must not let them down."  If we do not support the amendment, we are not just letting down the fishing communities; we are letting down the people of Scotland. I urge all members to support it.

Does Lewis Macdonald accept that much of the concern is not just about jurisdiction, but about the fact that Westminster felt it necessary to shift the boundary in the first place?

I had at the ready a few remarks with which to demolish the minister elect's case, but my colleagues have done that before I have even opened my mouth.  I welcome Mr Finnie's remarks about the importance of the fishing industry to Scotland. It is appropriate that the first one-hour political debate in this Parliament is devoted to the fishing industry, which is a perfect example of an industry that is looking to the Scottish Parliament to echo its concerns and give it the voice it has been lacking for a long time.  Only days before the first meeting of this Parliament, an obscure piece of legislation was passed by an obscure committee in what is, of course, an obscure Parliament in Westminster delivering yet another blow to the Scottish fishing industry. The industry is now campaigning for that order, which is of course the Scottish Adjacent Waters Boundaries Order 1999, to be reversed. I am delighted to see the leaders of the fishing industry in the public gallery to hear the Parliament speak out on their behalf.  The fishermen's case is simple: they want to retain the boundary that we all know. There is already a fishing boundary, which is known by every fisherman and mariner and Scotland. No one can find any reason why anyone anywhere should try to change it.  The boundary, which goes straight out east from Berwick, has been established by custom and practice. Generations of Scottish fishermen have fished those waters, the vast majority of fishing vessels to be found in those waters are from Scotland, the area is patrolled by the Scottish Fisheries Protection Agency and the area currently falls within Scottish jurisdiction.  There is also legal precedent. The latitude of 55° 50' marks the line used by the Scottish Fisheries Protection Agency and is on the map it uses. Scotland has a jurisdiction and the waters currently fall within it. The Civil Jurisdiction (Offshore Activities) Order 1987 follows a similar line and deals with offshore activities.  The Government's move at Westminster flies in the face of custom and practice. It throws up various anomalies. I, too, would like to quote the example that Hamish Morrison, the chief executive of the Scottish Fishermen's Federation, is using in favour of the fishermen's case and which Dennis Canavan brought to our attention. If a fishing vessel in these waters collides with an oil vessel, they will now come under different jurisdictions-the fishing vessel will fall under English jurisdiction and the oil vessel will fall under Scottish jurisdiction. What sense does that make? How many boundaries do we need?  The outgoing fisheries minister-old Blackbeard himself, Lord Sewel-defends the theft of Scottish waters by asking what all the panic is about. The fishing industry's response is to ask why it is necessary to change the boundary if it is not going to make any difference. The reality is that the new boundary does make a difference: it means that Scottish fishermen would have to appear in English courts if they were pulled up for an infringement in that area of the sea. That would lead to massive inconvenience and massive additional expense because the fishermen would have to hire an English barrister to defend their case in an English court.  The order reduces the territory over which this Parliament will have a remit. With regard to implementing European Union fisheries policy, what happens if the Scottish Parliament decides to introduce square mesh? Will that decision apply to fishing in those waters? The common fisheries policy is currently being renegotiated by the European Union. Zonal management is a key idea arising from the negotiations. What will happen to that zone? Will it be a Scottish zone? Probably not. If this order is approved, the Scottish Parliament will have no say over what happens in that zone and we will have lost an area in which we could have implemented our zonal management policies.  The Government's case is riddled with confusion and contradictions. Lord Sewel's pathetic defence of the Government's decision has fallen apart and, as we have seen today, the Scottish Executive's defence of Westminster's decision is also falling apart. First, Lord Sewel told us that there was no fisheries boundary. That led to an outcry in the fishing industry. Then he retreated and said that there was a boundary and that the Scottish Fisheries Protection Agency used it, but it was only an administrative boundary. His last line of defence is that the Government has relied on international conventions to draw up the new boundary. That claim has now been destroyed, because the SNP has commissioned a legal opinion, which was published this morning, from Dr Iain Scobbie, senior lecturer in international law at Glasgow University and the visiting professor at  the University of Paris II. The seven-page legal opinion demolishes the Government's case for the new boundary. It is seven pages long, so I will not read it out now.

I am not suggesting that. I have a seven-page legal opinion from an internationally renowned expert, which I would be delighted to make available to all members and to the Scottish Executive. I shall place copies in the information centre.  I shall quote from the last paragraph:  "It is clear that the position set out by the Government in relation to the Scottish Adjacent Waters Order is not in accordance with contemporary international law and practice. The claim that the delimitation employed in this Order reflects 'the normal international convention' simply cannot be sustained."  Would it not have been easier for Westminster to consult the fishing industry and this Parliament to avoid being in this enormous mess?  Lord Sewel-I hope this will not happen to the Scottish Executive-appears to be going round in circles. The Press and Journal editorial on 25 May said of the Government's arguments:  "Every one of them has a distinct whiff of someone scrabbling for straws to defend the indefensible".  It is appalling that we come here today and a member of the Scottish Executive is trying to defend the indefensible, as the Westminster spokespeople are doing.  This Parliament is seen by the people of Scotland and Scotland's industries as an opportunity to speak up for Scotland. Today, let us not take a decision to defend the indefensible-Westminster stealing 6,000 square miles of Scottish waters. I ask the Parliament to support the amendment.  I move, to leave out from "notes" where it appears first to end and add "calls upon Her Majesty's Government to amend the Scottish Adjacent Waters Boundaries Order (S.I. 1999/1126) made under the Scotland Act 1998 so that the East Coast boundary is redrawn to a line of latitude due east of the termination point of land border between England and Scotland to re-establish the custom and practice of former years."

rose-

Who exactly is paying for the Scottish Executive's special advisers if it is not taxpayers?

If Mr Henry wants us to do things differently, perhaps the parties should fulfil their manifesto commitments for once.

Will the member give way?

Thank you, Mr Presiding Officer- [Interruption.]

No, the button is pressed.  In opposing the appointment of Ross Finnie, I wish to refer to recent developments in the fishing industry that have implications for the rural affairs portfolio.  After 18 long years of Tory sell-outs in Westminster, Scotland's fishing industry has been keenly looking forward to the establishment of the Scottish Parliament, so that it has a forum where its voice is heard, and where the industry is not used merely as a bargaining chip. However, I fear that the appointment of Ross Finnie will do little to improve the fortunes of the fishing industry.  The industry continues to suffer from backroom deals, whether those deals are made 500 miles away in London or around the corner from this chamber. New Labour has picked up where the Tories left off. A few days ago, it was revealed that Westminster had moved the English boundary 60 miles into Scottish waters, and, by the passing of an order in London, 6,000 square miles of Scottish waters had been stolen. The fishing industry now faces the prospect of the English-Scottish boundary being just east of Carnoustie. Even Ross Finnie, with his skills in accountancy, will be unable to make sense of that ridiculous situation.

That was a speech, not an intervention. If Mr Robson listens to the rest of my speech, he will find out exactly why the fishing industry is concerned about the agreement between the Liberal Democrats and the Labour party. That industry is up in arms. It was not consulted by any of the authorities. The Parliament in Scotland was not consulted. Indeed, no courtesy was shown to the industry-it found out about this theft only from someone who was at an oil industry liaison meeting, when it crept up in conversation.  Another backroom deal was struck around the corner, and we find yet again that the fishing industry is the victim of a backroom deal. Thanks to this coalition, the importance of the fishing industry has been reduced to 16 words out of a 24-page manifesto. That is why the fishing industry is concerned about the coalition deal and why it wants more attention to be shown.  Fishing industry leaders are visiting Parliament today, and I ask all members of all parties to support the fishermen's cause without being distracted by or tied to any backroom deal. That is why I oppose Ross Finnie's appointment.